                The Case of
Final Report
November 2015




                UZBEKISTAN



                Social Impact Analysis of
                Water Supply and Sanitation
                Services in Central Asia
© 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views
of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.
The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this
work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status
of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the
Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax:
202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.


Cover photo/illustration: World Bank
Cover design: Jurczyk Design


This report was published with the support of the Central Asia Energy-Water Development
Program (CAEWDP). CAEWDP is a knowledge and technical assistance multi-donor trust fund
(MDTF) administered by the World Bank. CAEWDP’s mission is to build energy and water security
for the countries of Central Asia – Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, and
Uzbekistan – through enhanced regional cooperation. Since its inception in 2010, CAEWDP
has received support from bilateral and multilateral donors including the Government of
Switzerland’s State Secretariat for Economic Affairs (SECO), the European Commission (EC), the
United Kingdom’s Department for International Development (DFID), the United States Agency
for International Development (USAID), and the World Bank Group. For more information, visit
www.worldbank.org/eca/caewdp.
SOCIAL IMPACT ANALYSIS OF WATER
SUPPLY AND SANITATION SERVICES
IN CENTRAL ASIA
THE CASE OF UZBEKISTAN
Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience Global Practice
Water Global Practice
World Bank Group

Final Report
November 2015
CURRENCY UNITS
(As of June 30, 2014)
Currency Unit      Uzbek soum (UZS)
1 UZS              US$ 0.000435
US$ 1              2,296 UZS
US$ 100            229,600 UZS




ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
ADB     Asian Development Bank
ECA     Europe & Central Asia
FGD     Focus Group Discussion
GoU     Government of Uzbekistan
HWT     Household Water Treatment
IDIs    Individual Interviews
JMP     Joint Monitoring Program
MDG     Millennium Development Goals
MICS    Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
MSF     Medecins Sans Frontieres
O&M     Operation and Maintenance
OECD    Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development
PSIA    Poverty & Social Impact Assessment
PSP     Private Sector Participation
SIA     Social Impact Assessment
WASH    Water, sanitation and hygiene
WHO     World Health Organization
WSS     Water Supply & Sanitation
WTP     Willingness to Pay
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUMMARY                                                                                      5

1. INTRODUCTION                                                                              19

2. ACCESS TO DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION SERVICES                                          25

3. HOW DO HOUSEHOLDS COPE WITH POOR SERVICE CONDITIONS                                       37

4. HOUSEHOLD COSTS INCURRED FOR MEETING DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION NEEDS                  47

5. WILLINGNESS TO PAY FOR IMPROVED SERVICES                                                  61

6. SERVICES IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS                                                              67

7. BRIEF REVIEW OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION REFORM IN EASTERN EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA   71

8. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS                                                            75

REFERENCES                                                                                   79

ANNEX A. STAKEHOLDER MAP & STAKEHOLDER ROLES IN THE UZBEKISTAN’S WSS SECTOR                  84

ANNEX B. METHODOLOGY AND SAMPLING STRATEGY                                                   87

ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR QUANTITATIVE SURVEY                                               92

ANNEX D. FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSION GUIDES                                                       121

ANNEX E. REVIEW OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION REFORM IN EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA           134

ANNEX F. TARIFFS AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR TARIFF STRUCTURE CHANGES                             139

ANNEX G. ANALYTICAL APPROACH FOR CALCULATING THE ASSET INDEX USING THE QUANTITATIVE SURVEY   141
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This report draws on the contributions of many people in Uzbekistan who participated in the study. We would like to thank the
around 150 drinking water and sanitation users and the 19 government and utility firm officials who shared their experiences and
opinions with us either through focus group discussions or in-depth interviews. We are also grateful to the 300 respondents of the
formal household survey.

This report was prepared under the coordination of Rob Swinkels and Pier Mantovani of the World Bank. The final report was
written by Rob Swinkels, based on a draft report prepared by Bradley Hiller and Nils Junge. Bradley Hiller, Dikshya Thapa, Nils Junge
and Ekaterina Romanova developed the research instruments and facilitated the training of the research team in Uzbekistan. Yoon
Jung Lee produced the household asset index. Rinat Iskhakov provided support from the Uzbekistan Country Office. The report
was produced under the overall guidance of Elisabeth Huybens, Sumila Gulyani and Dina Umali-Deininger together with Saroj
Kumar Jha, Takuya Kamata and Junghun Cho. Logistical support was provided by Rumiya Garapova and Victoria Bruce-Goga. M.
Ihsan Rajwad, Sarosh Sattar, Joao Pedro de Azevedo and Eskender Trushin provided helpful inputs. Primary data collection was
conducted by Al Mar Consulting. Al Mar staff also provided input into sampling and the design of the research instruments.
Feedback on earlier drafts was received from the following reviewers: Julian Lampietti, Sarah Keener, Xavier Chauvot de Beauchene,
Kirsten Hommann, Umrbek Allakulov, and Mark Woodward.

The team is grateful to officials from Uzkommunkhizmat, Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Economy and the Ministry of Health
for their comments on a consultation summary draft of this report and for their support to the completion of this study.

This study was financed by the Central Asia Energy and Water Development Program (CAEWDP). We are grateful for the support
and also would like to thank Daryl Fields and Abena Akuffo-Akoto of the CAEWDP team.
SUMMARY
                          SUMMARY
   page 6




BACKGROUND
1. Available evidence suggests that Uzbekistan’s water supply and sanitation (WSS) systems are performing poorly.
ADB (2012) for example estimates that less than half the national population has access to improved1 drinking water and only 17
percent of urban households receive water 24 hours per day. The situation is worse in smaller cities and rural areas. Water resource
protection is weak with only basic treatment facilities in place (JMP 2006, 2013). Sanitation coverage is low even in urban areas
and according to some sources sanitation and hygiene (WASH)-related diseases or illnesses are a major concern (WHO 2012 &
Pruss-Ustun et al. 2008).

2. Reliable evidence on the quality of current WSS service conditions is scarce and consumer experience and views
and voices are not systematically collected and used for policy development. International experience suggests that
poor drinking water and sanitation services can cause households to incur high costs for dealing with this situation. However,
in Uzbekistan and other Central Asian countries, there is a lack of data on service quality and on coping costs. Together with
limited feedback from consumers to those that design WSS policies and programs this makes it difficult to design effective reform
measures and assess their ex-ante impact on households, in particular for those at the bottom of the income distribution.

3. This study assesses consumer experiences with current WSS services across a range of selected sites in Uzbekistan
and determines consumer readiness for reform. First of all, the study analyses how surveyed consumers currently meet
their drinking water and sanitation needs and what proportion of their household budget is spent on meeting their WSS needs.
Second it assesses the interaction between consumers and service providers. Third it examines stakeholder views and positions
on service modernization needs and assesses consumer willingness to pay for quality networked WSS services. Comparisons
are made across consumers in a selection of cities, small towns and rural areas, between consumers that are connected to a
networked service and those that are not, and between households in the bottom 40 percent and top 60 percent of the income
distribution (as estimated through a wealth index).

4. Data were collected through both qualitative and quantitative research methods. Qualitative data were collected
through 19 in-depth interviews with service delivery stakeholders, 17 focus group discussions (FGDs) with consumers, and
10 mini case studies of households. Quantitative data were collected through a formal survey of 300 households. These were
sampled from the capital Tashkent (30 households) and three geographically contrasting regions: one region in the west (South
Karakalpakstan), one in the south (Jizzak) and one in the east (Fergana) of the country. In each of these regions 90 households
were sampled, 30 in each of three location types: the Oblast (Region) center, the Raion (District) center and a rural area in the
same district. In each site, households were randomly selected, stratified by whether they were connected to a WSS network or
not. Connected means networked water is available inside the household property (home or yard). Unconnected means networked
water is not available within the household property (either indoors or within a private yard) although it may have been available
in the past.



ACCESS TO DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION SERVICES
5. All surveyed households in Tashkent were connected and had taps inside their home. Twenty percent here also
used bottled water. However, the situation was very different in the selected sites outside the capital where many
more households use multiple sources of water. Here, water pumps in the yard were important sources also for many
connected households (Figure S1). In the selected rural areas most connected households use taps in their yards (97 percent), but
also use pumps in the yard (27 percent) and rivers, lakes and ponds (26 percent). Key water sources for unconnected households in
the selected Oblast centers were pumps in their yards (50 percent), public standpipes (25 percent), and rivers, lakes and ponds (22
percent). In Raion centers, the most common water source was piped water in the streets. In rural areas water pumps in the yard (77
percent) are the most common source for unconnected households followed by water from rivers, lakes and ponds (64 percent).




1 State Statistlcal Committee of Uzbekistan (2006) defines improved drinking water sources to include piped water into a dwelling, yard or plot,
public tap or standpipe, a borehole or tube-well, a protected well, or a protected spring.
                                                                                                                             page 7



               Figure S1. Proportion of all sampled households using a particular drinking water source




                                        Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)
Note: households outside Tashkent often use more than one water source and totals therefore add up to more than 100 percent; connected
households for example use other water sources when no water is available from the networked piped system or the water quality is poor.

6. Among the connected households in our sample important differences existed between households that are
in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution and those in the top 60 percent. The proportion of connected
households that relies on outside taps is much higher (38 percent) among the bottom 40 percent than among the top 60 percent
in our sample (21 percent). In the selected Oblast centers 15 percent of connected households that are in the bottom 40 percent
use irrigation canals as one of their main water sources, compared to only 3 percent of connected households in the top 60 percent
of the income distribution. While slightly more than half (54 percent) of those that are unconnected to a WSS network belong to
the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution the division is not clear cut and a sizeable proportion of the unconnected
belong to the top 60% of the income distribution.
                           SUMMARY
   page 8




DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION SERVICE CONDITIONS
7. The proportion of surveyed households reporting problems with their drinking water service conditions varied
enormously among the selected regions: from 27 percent of sampled households in Tashkent to 41 percent in
Fergana, 48 percent in Jizzak and 78 percent in South Karakalpakstan. In South Karakalpakstan these problems mostly
concerned water for drinking, whereas in Tashkent (and other Oblast centers) households mostly complained about the quality of
water that they use for taking a bath or shower.

8. More than half (57 percent) of connected surveyed households using internal taps reported water quality
problems. The most widely reported problems were presence of particles / turbidity (41 percent) and high salinity levels (19
percent). Users of unconnected sources reported even more water quality problems. For households using water pumps, salinity
and turbidity were the most frequently reported water quality issues2.

9. Surveyed connected households stated that water supply services often function only intermittently. This was
said to be made worse by the unpredictability of interruptions. Of all households in our survey sample that received piped
water on their property, the proportion that receives a 24 hour service ranged from 90 percent in Tashkent to just 3 percent in
rural areas. Three-quarters of connected household in our survey sample of 300 claimed they were never or only sometimes
notified of major modifications to water supply schedules. Interviewed officials reported that some infrastructure is so old and
degraded that isolating sections of conveyance or distribution infrastructure for maintenance and repair works is impossible. It
should be noted that the Government of Uzbekistan - jointly with international donors - is undertaking a series of investments to
rehabilitate and extend the water supply and sewerage system in the country.

ACCESS TO SANITATION SERVICES
10. Only one quarter of all households in our survey had access to a centralized sewerage system. None of the
households in our sample in Raion centers and rural areas had access to a sewerage network. This implies that most wastewater
does not find its way into a central sewerage system and may be disposed directly into the environment without treatment.

11. Only 20 percent of households in our sample had toilets located inside their home. The vast majority of connected
households in Raion centers had a pit latrine or bucket toilet with a concrete tank in their own yard. Most connected and
unconnected households in the sampled rural areas had a pit latrine with an earthen tank (Figure S2).




2 Note that no tests to check the quality of water were conducted for this study.
                                                                                                                               page 9



  Figure S2. Proportion of households in the survey sample using a particular type of toilet, by location, for those
                              with and without connection to a piped water system




                                        Source: Household survey conducted for this study(n=300)

12. The proportion of connected households with a flush toilet connected to a piped sewerage system was much
higher among those in the top 60 percent of the income distribution (68 percent of this group had one), than among
those in the bottom 40 percent (where 40 percent had this facility). Only 46 percent of surveyed unconnected households report
always having water available at their sanitation facility.

13. About a quarter of all surveyed respondents felt that WSS conditions had worsened over the past 5 years. Most
noted no change over that period3. Fourteen percent had witnessed improvements. Oblast centers had the greatest
proportion of connected respondents who thought that their WSS conditions had worsened (40 percent).



INSTITUTIONAL FUNCTIONING
14. Officials involved in water supply and sanitation that were interviewed for our study conveyed that Vodokanals
(water utilities) often have severe debts and cannot even afford basic operating expenses for delivering their
services. This sometimes includes electricity debts, further exacerbating the problem of unreliable supply and poor service.
They claimed that low tariffs and significant arrears of many customers, together with high operational costs, contribute to this
situation. Pipes and pumps suffer from increased wear and tear, and shorter operating life, when power cuts are frequent and
sudden. Vodokanals lack equipment to conduct even the most basic operational, maintenance and rehabilitation tasks, according
to consumers and vodokanal staff participating in our study. It should be noted that, following government decision to that
effect, water meters and modern billing systems are presently being installed to improve fee collection.

15. Water utilities tend to be slow in responding to customer complaints, according to our survey data. A quarter of
connected households had a member who had contacted the vodokanal regarding a problem with water supply and sanitation.
Of those, nearly half had received a response within a week, while one third had to wait longer than one month. Response times
were generally weakest in rural areas (two thirds had to wait longer than one month). Problems remained completely unsolved
in almost half the cases. Interviews and focus groups identified a lack of technical and human capacity in many vodokanals.
Interviews with Vodokanal staff revealed that they struggle to attract and retain quality staff:


3 It should be noted that much of the degradation in the WSS systems may have occurred outside the 5 year timeframe asked in the survey.
This may explain why the majority of respondents stated that no change had occurred during that period. Focus groups often suggested that
conditions had been poor for a considerable period.
                          SUMMARY
   page 10



“There’s a vicious circle. As residents we say ‘how wonderful it is to have cold water so cheap’. But, because of that, the water utility has no
money and cannot replace pipes.” - Tashkent connected Focus Group participant number 7



COPING MECHANISMS
16. To cope with irregular water supply and pressure and quality problems, households have at least one additional
source of water: 40 percent of all surveyed households use a secondary source on a regular basis and six percent
use a tertiary source. Survey data suggests that public taps can provide one of the few forms of ‘improved’ water sources for
unconnected households, however, their flow rate can be low and unpredictable and they are often too few in number to cater
to demand.

17. Focus group discussions with unconnected households revealed that water from water pumps is a convenient
source for many of them but often subject to quality concerns for potable use. More than half (61 percent) of unconnected
households using water pumps reported water quality problems. Focus group discussions and individual interviews revealed that
consumers are aware that using open water sources, such as irrigation channels, rives and ponds for potable and household use is
potentially unhygienic, but still use it when there are no other options.

18. A range of different water quality problems were reported for all water sources. Just under half (47 percent) of
unconnected households using public water taps reported water quality problems – mostly particles/turbidity (43 percent),
salinity (25 percent) and bad color (23 percent). Focus group participants reported that delivery of water via private companies/
vodokanals, taxi service or personal vehicle was not uncommon in Raion centers and rural areas. Survey results show that most
households subject their water supply to some form of treatment prior to drinking and cooking.

19. Poor residents have few alternatives and are often forced to use unhygienic sources of water such as irrigation
canals and rivers or ponds, which can take more than half a day to collect in some areas (including walking and carrying)
and which typically have poor quality water according to participants in focus group discussions. In contrast, wealthier households
may be able to afford relatively expensive alternative sources, such as bottled water and tanker delivered water. Fifteen percent
of all networked households use bottled water, which may cost up to UZS 300 (0.13 US$) per liter, about 1,000 times more than
vodokanal water.



HOUSEHOLD EXPENDITURES ON DRINKING WATER AND
SANITATION
20. The median, unconnected household in our sample in Oblast Centers and rural areas spent UZS 12,500 – UZS
13,500 (USD 5.20-5.60) per month on recurrent water expenditure. This is 60 percent more than the median connected
household in Tashkent who spends UZS 8,000 (USD 3.30) per month. According to our data, household water expenses are
lowest in Tashkent even if service there appears to better than elsewhere. Unlike the other sampled areas, drinking water bills in
Tashkent also include sanitation services.

21. The share of recurrent monthly water expenditures as a proportion of total monthly household expenditure4
was much lower among our sampled households in Tashkent (0.5 percent at the median) than in the selected Oblast
center, Raion centers and rural areas (1.3 - 1.5 percent at the median). Budget shares of recurrent drinking water and
sanitation expenditure were higher for those in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution (median of 1.5 percent) than
the top 60 percent (1.1 percent). Focus groups in rural areas suggested that some households, due to the seasonal and sometimes
in-kind nature of their incomes, have lower capacities to pay monthly utility bills.

22. Focus group participants claimed that both connected and unconnected households incur one-off investment
and recurrent costs in addition to costs for piped water/ bottled water to meet their WSS needs. One-off costs were said
to include, among others: (i) installation of water pumps at UZS 400,000-750,000 (USD 167- 312), depending on depth of the pump;

4 Estimated through household recall
                                                                                                                                page 11



(ii) installing a concrete septic tank for about UZS 300,000 (USD 125) (iii), buying plastic containers for collecting, transporting and
storing water, reported to be UZS 30,000-40,000 (USD 12.50 to 16.70) and (iv) purchasing filters and paying for pipe repairs. Some
households also reported high costs for operating their own WSS facilities. According to focus group respondents, such recurrent
expenditures can include: annual cleaning of septic tanks at UZS 150,000 (USD 62); and payment for household delivery of water
via tanker, taxi, etc. for up to UZS 15,000 (USD 6.20) for 500L in some areas.

23. According to our survey data about half (49 percent) of unconnected households spent money installing their
own sanitation systems, compared to 16 percent of connected households. Furthermore, unconnected households also
had much higher annual sanitation system operating costs (on average UZS 72,500 or USD 30.2) than the connected households
paying tariffs for their sanitation service (UZS 18,900 or USD 7.9 per year).

24. When we take into account all costs that surveyed households incur for meeting their WSS needs, households not
connected to a piped drinking water supply system tend to incur much higher costs than those that are connected
(Figure S3). Data collected through our focus group discussions and the household survey show that households in Tashkent
incur only about one third (UZS 8000/ month) of the costs that unconnected households in Oblast centers or rural areas sustain
(UZS 24,300-26,200). Median payments of surveyed households for piped water (private and public) varied between UZS 8,000
(Tashkent) and UZS 13,500 (unconnected households in Oblast centers). Connected households outside Tashkent incur additional
costs for installation and operation of water pumps, water containers and installation and emptying of sewage tanks (only a
minority of sampled households outside Tashkent are connected to sewage system). Unconnected households reported higher
costs for installing and emptying sewage tanks than connected households.

  Figure S3. Estimated total monthly costs of meeting drinki§ng water and sanitation needs (in Soum) per location
              and for households connected and unconnected to a piped water system to their dwelling




                                        Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)
Notes: Estimates are based on data from the household survey. Where survey data were incomplete, data collected through focus group
discussions were used. Figures should be regarded as approximate. Tap water costs are based on survey medians. Water storage tanks: based
on survey median (UZS 24,000); assumed to last for two years = UZS 1000 per month. Water pumps: installation cost UZS 500,000 UZS (based
on focus group discussions) to install (costs vary based on depth of well and local soil conditions between 400,000 – 750,000UZS). Lifetime
assumed to be 10 years. Operation cost assumed to be UZS 10,000 UZS/yr (for valves, piping, etc.). (500,000/(5*12)) +(10,000/12) = UZS 5000
per month. Sewage tank : installation cost is UZS 300,000 (based on data from focus group discussions). Assumed to last 15 years. 300,000/
(15*12) = UZS 1,670 per month. Cleaning costs: based on survey median per subgroup (varying between 5000 and 250 per month). Assumes all
unconnected household have a concrete sewage pit in fact 95% of unconnected households have one. In rural areas and raion centers, almost
                           SUMMARY
   page 12



all of connected households have a sewage tank. Of all connected households, about half have a concrete sewerage pit, for this group we use
the median survey data on ‘sanitation costs’. Costs incurred for repairs of pipes and for building a toilet are excluded.

25. The proportion of household budgets that is spent on meeting their drinking water and sanitation needs when
all costs are included can be twice as high for unconnected households than for those that are connected. The additional cost
of water pumps and expenses for cleaning septic tanks can weigh heavily on household budgets for unconnected households
in particular in Raion Centers and Oblast Centers where household expenditure on WSS needs are above the internationally
suggested threshold of 3.5 percent (Figure S4). These data ignore the non-monetary costs households also incur such as time lost
due to illness, taking care if sick children, or queuing for water.

Figure S4. Median proportion of household expenditure spent on meeting drinking water and sanitation needs (in
percentage) per location and for households connected and unconnected to a piped water system to their dwelling




                                              Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)
Note: Data are approximate. Included are tap water costs, cost of buying water containers, costs of water pumps, and costs of cleaning septic tanks
Estimates are based on data from the household survey. Where survey data were incomplete, data collected through focus group discussions
were used. Figures should be regarded as approximate. Tap water costs are based on survey medians. Water containers costs are taken from the
household survey. Water pumps: installation costs are UZS 500,000 UZS (based on focus group discussions) (costs vary based on depth of well and
local soil conditions between 400,000 – 750,000UZS). Lifetime assumed to be 10 years. Operation cost assumed to be UZS 10,000 UZS/yr (for valves,
piping, etc.). (500,000/(5*12)) + (10,000/12) = UZS 5000 per month. Sanitation costs are taken from the household survey.



METERING
26. Connected households that have a water meter pay less (UZS 6000 at the median) than households that pay their
bill based on normative pricing (UZS 10,000) according to our survey data. Sixty-one percent of households state their bills
are calculated on a normative basis (based on the number of people in the household) and only 39 percent say their consumption
is measured through a water meter. Even in Tashkent only 40 percent of households in our sample had a meter. Focus groups
suggest that many households believe meters constitute a fairer billing system. Given the inconsistent and unpredictable supply
of water, many said they are happier with meters because they only pay for water when it is available and being consumed5.

5 It should be noted that the government of Uzbekistan has raised the coefficient used for determining the fees of non-metered connections to
promote the installation of water meters by customers. Cabinet of Ministers Resolution of the Republic of Uzbekistan, №300 dated November 6,
2013, and №337 dated November 6, 2012.
                                                                                                                           page 13




27. Focus group discussions with consumers revealed there is some confusion about the potential cost-savings
associated with metering methods. The majority (almost two thirds) of surveyed households with normative water
billing did not want to change to a metered system. Focus groups and interviews suggest that connected consumers with
non-volumetric billing attempt to get all the water they can from the distribution system as there is no additional cost associated
with extra consumption. This was said in turn to lead to utilities rationing water and providing fewer hours of service. Additionally,
consumers are not always clear about how the billing works and suspect over-charging. Normative billing provides little incentive
for vodokanals to improve their service, as consumers are charged the same bill even if no water is supplied.

28. Despite low tariffs, vodokanals, neighborhood (mahalla) committees report an increasing trend in non-payment
and arrears. Failure to pay is linked to the inability or unwillingness by utility companies to levy penalties or cut
off water to households or agencies that do not pay. Sixteen percent of networked survey respondents had not paid for
water in the last 12 months for either ‘no specific reason’ (11 percent) or because they could not afford it (5 percent). A mahalla
committee chairwoman in Fergana Oblast center, estimates that 40 percent of households in her mahalla are in arrears for water
utility payments. Perceptions from multiple focus group participants were that lower income residents generally paid bills on
time, while higher income residents tend to be more reluctant to pay and, if they do, they often delay.

29. Focus group participants and interviewees report disagreements between residents and the vodokanal in cases
where residents are required to pay for access to public taps. For example, in the selected Raion center in Jizzak, consumers
are charged 1,000 UZS per person per month by the water utility, even though households have no connection to the water
network and the only source is a public water tap four streets away. Often focus group participants claimed they are not aware
what rate they should be paying to the vodokanal for access to the public water taps. Furthermore, focus group participants
reported that despite paying the fees for accessing public water taps, residents often take on the maintenance and repair of such
systems in the absence of vodokanal efforts.



NON-MONETARY COSTS
30. Focus group participants conveyed that water collection and treatment at home can impose a significant burden
of time and effort for both connected and unconnected households. According to our survey data households that rely on
natural water bodies (about a quarter of all household and 70% of the bottom 40 percent in rural areas) and public water taps
(half of households in Raion centers) generally transport water over the greatest distances. Almost one fifth of those for whom
water from ponds and rivers is an important source travel 500-1,000m each way. And more than half of users of public taps live
50-1,000m away from them (Figure S5).

           Figure S5 Distance to ponds, rivers and lakes and to public taps for those that rely on this source
                                             for at last part of their needs.




                           n=43                                                               n=32
                                       Source: Household survey conducted for this study n=300.
                           SUMMARY
   page 14



In some areas, time spent on water collection can impose significant opportunity costs on household members. In Jizzak, focus
group participants for example stated that, on average, they spent 6 hours per day walking 2 km to the public tap outlet, waiting
in line, and then walking back with full containers.

31. 16 percent of surveyed unconnected households and 9 percent of surveyed connected households claimed to
have suffered negative health impacts because of poor WSS conditions. Among these, more than half mentioned
gastrointestinal diseases, almost a quarter urinogenital - kidney stone diseases. Group discussions held in Nukus, South
Karakalpakstan, in particular mentioned kidney stones and salt deposits in the joints purportedly due to drinking poor quality
water. Medical bills for illnesses and diseases attributed to WSS conditions can be significant. Incomes are lost due to illness or
caring for ill household members, which especially affects women. Adult females overwhelmingly bear the burden of household
chores connected with water use. Many women in focus groups report lower back pain from repetitive lifting and moving heavy
containers.

32. Poor wastewater management including leaking sewage pipes, consitute a serious health risks, according to
focus group participants. Unattended sewage leaks were said to lead to sewage pooling on the surface, as well as infiltration of
sewage into local groundwater systems that are used for drinking water. Particularly during summer, it was reported that there are
many insects around pit latrines, which can breed and spread infection.

33. A fifth of surveyed women feel unsafe using the sanitation facilities available to them. Focus groups suggest that
in cases where toilet facilities are located in public areas (some households in our survey sample in raion centers in Jizzak and
Fergana use such facilities), there are increased safety / security concerns relative to private toilets. On average, public toilets are
located at a distance of 30-60 meters from the house, but there are also some households for which the toilets are located at a
distance of 500 meters.

34. Nearly a quarter (23 percent) of connected households surveyed had witnessed local conflicts regarding WSS
issues. Most disputes concerned problems with WSS service delivery (77 percent), quality of service from vodokanal (71 percent)
and poor infrastructure / facilities (62 percent). Disputes over payments were insignificant (3 percent). Consumers also reported
that queuing for water at public sources can be a source of tension, particularly when queues can reach up to 150 people.
Some focus groups attribute reductions in water pressure in some networked systems to illegal connections. Vodokanal staff
reported conducting random inspections to monitor appropriate use of networked water (especially related to garden watering)
and levying fines. Public buildings often face water supply and sewerage challenges similar to households. In some areas, water
sources are located outside public buildings and toilet facilities are often without running water6.

35. A number of focus groups provide evidence of communities getting together to address the poor WSS service
conditions by vodokanals sometimes in conjunction with private persons or entrepreneurs. In some cases communities
initiated and constructed local infrastructure in conjunction with private sector parties. One entrepreneur had paid for the laying
of 500 meters of pipework to improve water supply conditions. Some small-scale entrepreneurs are selling purified water that
is of better quality than what comes from the tap or pumps. These entrepreneurs sell water in public areas. In one Raion center
residents are trying to restore water sources (wells) to provide public tap access. Focus groups report that in the Fergana Raion
center, 87 household residents – without permission from the vodokanal – extended the network from the public taps to connect
water to their premises.



WILLINGNESS TO PAY FOR IMPROVED SERVICES
36. Nearly all unconnected households (86 percent) in our sample reported they were willing to pay for a connection
to a high quality water supply and sanitation system that provides good quality piped water in sufficient amounts
for 24 hours per day. Surveyed consumers are already demonstrating their willingness to improve their WSS situation via various
independently initiated improvements, as revealed in the focus group discussions. The median amount they were willing to pay
is UZS 200,000 (USD 83) (Figure S6). The median among those in bottom 40 percent of the income distribution was UZS 100,000
compared to UZS 200,000 for the top 60 percent. On average, households were willing to pay 2.7 percent of their total annual
household expenditure to connect to a well-functioning WSS service.

6 ADB (2014) found that public buildings, such as clinics and schools, often rely on public standpipes that suffer frequent service interruptions.
                                                                                                                                  page 15



 Figure S6. Demand curve for connection to a well-functioning WSS system, showing the proportion of households
              that are willing to pay a particular amount as a one-off investment for being connected.




                                            Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=147)
Note: households were asked: ‘suppose that it would be possible to supply good quality piped water 24 hours per day in sufficient amounts to
meet all your drinking, service and sanitation needs, so that you would not have to use any other water sources, how much would you be willing
to pay to be connected to such a system’. Answers were obtained from 147 respondents.

37. Consumers surveyed for this study were asked how much they were willing to pay as a recurrent fee per month
for a high quality drinking water and sanitation service. Nearly half (42%) indicated they would be prepared to pay
UZS 15,000 per month, and about a quarter said they are ready to pay UZS 20,000 (Table S1). This is somewhat higher
than the amounts most households are currently paying for piped water and sanitation, but lower than the actual costs they are
incurring now to meet their WSS needs (such as water pumps, costs for emptying septic tanks, etc (Table S1).

Table S1. Willingness to pay for a recurrent monthly fee for a high quality WSS service in UZ soum per month,
connected and unconnected households combined.
             Amount (UZS)                                Percentage of respondents willing to pay amount per month (%)
              per month
                  2,000                                                                   100
                  5,000                                                                    86
                  10,000                                                                   67
                  15,000                                                                   42
                  20,000                                                                   24
                  25,000                                                                   12
                  30,000                                                                    5
                  40,000                                                                    2
Source : household survey conducted for this study (n=147).

38. Willingness to pay was highest among unconnected households in rural areas (UZS 14,000 per month) and
lowest in Tashkent (UZS 3,500) (Figure S7). As our data suggest, unconnected households in rural areas currently rely for
a large part on poor quality river and pond water. They may therefore be keenest to obtain “Tashkent” quality of WSS services.
Currently, according to our data, unconnected households are incurring more than UZS 20,000 per month for meeting their WSS
service needs.
                        SUMMARY
   page 16



    Figure S7. Median willingness to pay for high quality WSS services in UZ soum per month per location and for
                                      connected and unconnected households




                                      Source : household survey conducted for this study (n=147)

39. Focus group participants in some areas agreed that tariffs are low but they are unhappy with rising tariffs and
are not willing to pay more when the quality of service from the vodokanal is so poor. Other focus group participants
acknowledged that there is a vicious cycle of low tariffs leading to insufficient means for water utilities to maintain and upgrade
WSS networks which in turn leads to poor service.


RECOMMENDATIONS
40. Installing water meters for consumers is a priority as it is likely to reduce wasteful consumption and thus help avert
problems with low pressure, especially in summer. It will also provide incentives for vodokanals to improve their service, as
consumers will only pay for the water they actually receive and consume. Our findings suggest that in many cases it will also
reduce household water bills. At the same time it is important to improve communications on the benefits of metering and
also to simplify bills to make it clearer for consumers what they pay for. Equal treatment of all households in the enforcement of
payment of bills should receive more attention. The study findings also indicate that rules around payment for public taps should
be clarified to make sure that only households that are likely to make use of these taps are charged.

41. Better informing consumers in time about interruptions. To address the unpredictability of supply through piped
drinking water systems, there is a need for drinking water utilities to inform consumers in time about the water supply schedule
and when interruptions can be expected. This is especially important for public taps as many households not connected to a
supply system reply on this source, especially those in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution.

42. Utilities should become more responsive to consumer complaints. It is important that the drinking water and
sanitation utilities firms become more responsive to consumer complaints about broken WSS infrastructure. Resources including
staff should be made available for this. Alternatively, consumers and Mahalla’s – sometimes together with private entrepreneurs
- currently conducting their own repairs on WSS systems, should be provided with technical supervision by the utilities firms.
Basic equipment should be provided. Regulations that facilitate the engagement of private parties in repairs of WSS infrastructure
should be prepared.

43. Investigate and address serious drinking water quality problems where these are reported. Information gathered
from many consumers for this study suggest that there are severe water quality problems from piped systems and from
pumped groundwater outside Tashkent. This suggests that mechanisms for consumers to complain about water quality should
be improved and that more regular and widespread quality tests of piped water and ground water should be conducted to
                                                                                                                             page 17



investigate causes of contamination. Findings also suggest that regulations for preventing contamination of ground water by pit
latrines should be strengthened and enforced.

44. Improve functioning of public taps and make their billing systems more transparent. Public taps are an important source
of drinking water for those that are not connected to a properly functioning water supply system and cannot afford bottled water.
Many of them rely on rivers and lakes if public taps break down or are absent. Therefore, priority should be given to improving the
functioning of public taps and ensure its water meets quality standards and its supply is reliable.

45. Reconsider the currently frozen tariff structure. The study finds that those households who receive the best WSS services
(e.g. Tashkent residents) currently incur WSS costs that are much lower than those that receive the worst conditions. Respondents
of our study indicated a willingness to pay higher monthly fees than they currently do, on the condition that services improve.
There is also a strong willingness to pay by many households - that currently incur high coping costs for meeting their WSS needs
- to connect to a well-functioning WSS system. Our findings suggest that there are opportunities to reconsider the currently
frozen tariff structure. A mechanism should be considered that raises fees for those that currently receive high quality water and
re-allocates these resources to provide services to those areas where households currently incur high private costs for meeting
their WSS needs.

46. Protect those that cannot afford higher fees. While there are strong indications that households are willing to pay higher
WSS fees provided WSS service conditions improve, our findings also suggest that some households may not be able to pay
higher fees. Any effort to raise fees for high quality WSS services should therefore go hand in hand with well-targeted social
transfers to those that may not be able to afford those.

47. Strengthen feedback from WSS consumers to national and sub-national WSS decision makers and program providers. In
order to design programs and policies that are based on the reality of conditions in the field, it is important to put in place a high
quality feedback mechanism that collects information from consumers on their experiences and WSS service quality conditions.
To re-design WSS tariff policies it is also essential to put in place regular high quality household expenditure surveys. This would
help establish a database of household consumption expenditures as well as expenditures on meeting WSS service needs (and
possibly other utility costs). This is also essential for assessing the impacts of any change in WSS tariffs on different wealth groups.
Such nationwide household surveys would also help confirm the findings from this study.
INTRODUCTION

1.
                           1. INTRODUCTION
   page 20




BACKGROUND
48. Available evidence suggests that Uzbekistan’s water supply and sanitation (WSS) systems are performing poorly.
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) (2012) estimates that less than half the national population has access to improved7 drinking
water and only 17 percent of urban households receive water 24 hours per day. The situation is worse in smaller cities and rural
areas (ibid.). Water resource protection is weak with only basic treatment facilities in place (WHO/UNICEF 2006, 2013). Sanitation
coverage is low even in urban areas and the World Health Organization (WHO) states that the percentage of deaths attributable
to water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH)-related disease or illness is greater than 15 percent (WHO 2012 & Pruss-Ustun et al. 2008).
Like other Central Asian countries, Uzbekistan today is not on track to meet the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) related to
drinking water and sanitation (OECD 2011).

49. The situation on the ground is however poorly understood as reliable evidence on current WSS service conditions
is scarce and consumer experience and views are not systematically collected and used for policy development. Less
than half the population is connected to a piped water system (Table 1) and there are serious concerns regarding continuity and
quality of networked water supply services. International experience suggests that poor WSS services can cause households to
incur high coping costs for meeting their drinking water and sanitation needs. This particularly affects vulnerable households. The
lack of data on service quality and household coping costs together with limited feedback from consumers to service providers is
problematic. It makes it difficult to develop WSS programs based on reliable evidence from the field. It also makes it hard for those
in charge of WSS policy development to design effective reform measures and assess their ex-ante impact on different groups of
households such as those at the bottom of the income distribution.

Table 1. Access to piped water supply in three Central Asian countries in 2012
                                  GDP $/per           Urban pop.                           Access to Piped Water Supply
                                   capita                 %                      Urban                    Rural                   Total
 Tajikistan                          780                   27                      87                       34                      48
 Kyrgyz Republic                     900                   35                      87                       36                      54
 Uzbekistan                          1,500                 51                      85                       26                      47
Source: UNICEF/WHO. Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water. JMP Report 2013

50. Highly degraded infrastructure and high operating costs, together with low tariffs, inefficient fee collection
and only partial decentralization of WSS utilities, have led to poor cost recovery and low quality of service delivery.
WSS infrastructure is largely inherited from the Soviet era and has subsequently deteriorated over time. Some infrastructure
components are approximately half a century old. The sector has been unable to face existing and looming challenges associated
with aging assets, economic and demographic growth, climate change and social expectations. Since independence in 1991,
municipal services have been largely decentralized to local governments. WSS policies, such as issues related to water tariffs,
however, have remained the mandate of the central government. At the municipal level the water utility company (vodokanal) is
responsible for the supply of drinking water to the public, and may also manage sewage systems. Typically, vodokanals interact
with consumers via the mahalla committees and Home Owner Associations. See Annex A for a map of stakeholders and their
roles in the WSS sector in Uzbekistan and Box E1 in Annex E for a description of the soviet legacy.

51. In response to this problematic situation, the Government of Uzbekistan (GoU) and its development partners
have committed to improving living standards and enhancing WSS services. The GoU endorsed the 2000 ‘Almaty Guiding
Principles for Reform of WSS in New Independent States’ to reverse the deterioration of WSS services (OECD 2011) and aims to
increase coverage of centralized services to consumers via a National Welfare Improvement Strategy (2012-2015) and a National
Water Supply and Wastewater System Development and Modernization Plan (2009-2020) (ADB 2014). Likewise, a Presidential
decree on infrastructure construction for 2011–2015 includes an objective to supply all urban and rural water consumers with
meters (GoU 2010). The World Bank and other development organizations have provided substantial assistance to rehabilitate and
expand WSS networks in Uzbekistan since the early 1990’s. However, efforts and investments to date have not been sufficient to
comprehensively reverse the chronic degradation of the sector. At the same time, there have been signs of a renewed readiness


7 SSCUZ (2006) defines ‘improved drinking water sources’ to include piped water into a dwelling, yard or plot, public tap or standpipe, a borehole
or tube-well, a protected well, or a protected spring.
                                                                                                                           page 21



from the GoU to prepare a new WSS sector strategy for a more sustainable improvement of the WSS situation, in partnership with
international financial institutes and other donors. This report was prepared in order to inform such a new strategy and underpin
it with evidence regarding the situation ‘on the ground’.


OBJECTIVES
52. The objective of this technical assistance is to promote the engagement of consumers and the use of evidence in
developing policies and plans for equitable access to WSS services in Uzbekistan8. The objective is to be achieved by: (1)
conducting, with relevant stakeholders, an assessment of consumer perceptions and social impacts of current WSS service access
and quality; and (2) strengthening the capacity of country counterparts in applying Social Impact Analysis (SIA) for policy and
program design. Findings will be discussed with GoU counterparts and where possible discussion workshops will be held with
stakeholders and those involved in preparing the country’s WSS strategy.

53. The assessment aims to help identify areas for reform, building a strong consumer evidence base, with the
following working hypotheses: i) significant economic and social costs are being incurred due to poor WSS services and ii)
customers are dissatisfied with current service quality levels and are ready and willing to pay significantly higher fees for better
networked service.


METHODOLOGY
54. The (P)SIA applied in this study is an approach for an ex-ante- assessment of the social impact of social service
conditions and policy reform on households with a particularly emphasis on the most vulnerable ones. It takes the
perspective of household consumers and promotes greater use of evidence from the field in policy making. The evidence is
gathered through the collection of quantitative and qualitative data from customers of these social services as well as from service
providers and utility firms. These data are then used to assess how the impact of service conditions or service reform is distributed
across households in different social and geographic groups. The identification of mitigation measures for protecting the most
vulnerable from negative social impacts of reform is often part of the assessment.

55. International experience with the (P)SIA approach has demonstrated it can be useful for bringing evidence from
the field into discussions around the design and implementation of reforms in a range of sectors. For more than a
decade, (P)SIAs have been used to assess utility reform impacts in the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region and elsewhere. In
situations where data are scarce or unreliable, the approach can be instrumental in bringing fresh evidence to bear on policy
making.

56. The PSIA approach can be applied through a number of different quantitative and qualitative research tools. This
includes distributional analysis to assess what population groups benefit from delivering social services below the costs that utility
providers incur to deliver them, and how this will change when such (implicit) subsidies are reduced. Qualitative data collection
such as through focus group discussions to assess consumer experiences with service conditions and gather their views on policy
reform options are also frequently used. By engaging stakeholders in the analysis, a (P)SIA can help to establish a platform for the
engagement of utility consumers in evidence-based discussions around developing equitable policies that enable the provision
of affordable quality utility services to all population groups across the country.

57. This study assesses consumer experiences with current drinking water and sanitation WSS services across a
range of selected sites in Uzbekistan and determines consumer readiness for reform. First of all, the study analyses how
surveyed consumers currently meet their drinking water and sanitation needs and what proportion of their household budget is
spent on meeting those needs. Second, it assesses the interaction between consumers and service providers. Finally, it examines
stakeholder views and positions on service modernization needs and assesses consumer willingness to pay for quality networked
WSS services.




8 This work is part of a larger regional initiative and is expected to also cover Tajikistan and the Kyrgyz Republic.
                         1. INTRODUCTION
   page 22



58. Comparisons are made across consumers in a selection of cities, small towns and rural areas (see Figure 1), between
consumers that are connected to a networked service and those that are not, and between households in the bottom 40 percent
and top 60 percent of the income distribution (as estimated through a household asset wealth index – See Annex G).

                   Figure 1. Study sample sites in Tashkent, South Karakalpakstan, Jizzak and Fergana




59. Data were collected through both qualitative and quantitative research methods from a range of contrasting
sites. Qualitative data were collected through 19 in-depth interviews with service delivery stakeholders, 17 focus group
discussions (FGDs) with consumers, and 10 household case studies. Quantitative data were collected through a formal survey
of 300 households. Because of resource constraints, the sample is relatively small and the survey is not probabilistic. Data are not
statistically representative for Uzbekistan as a whole. Instead, the sampling methodology was ‘purposive’9, and included ten sites
that represent a range of geographical areas and types of locations in Uzbekistan.

60. Households were sampled from the capital Tashkent (30 households) and three geographically contrasting
regions: one region in the west (South Karakalpakstan), one in the south (Jizzak) and one in the east (Fergana) of
the country (see Figure 1). In each of these regions 90 households were sampled, with 30 of them randomly selected in each of
three location types: the Oblast (Province or Region) center, the Raion (District) center and a rural area in the same district. In each
site, households were randomly selected, stratified by whether they were connected10 to a WSS network or not. For the purposes
of our analysis, connected implies networked water is available inside the household property (either indoors or within a private


9 Purposive selection of primary sampling units but random household selection within those primary sampling units. Effort was made to
include a diverse cross-section of Uzbekistan households.
10 Stratification by connected and unconnected households was used in all geographical regions, except Tashkent where only connected
households were surveyed.
                                                                                                                        page 23



yard), whereas ‘unconnected’ means networked water is not available within the household property although it may have been
available in the past. Connected households can also use other water sources than water from the WSS network. The stratification
into connected and unconnected households approximates proportional sampling on average in these areas given that about
half of households in Uzbekistan are connected to a piped water system (WHO/UNICEF 2006). Field work took place between
April and June 2014. For a more comprehensive outline of the study methodology, see Annex B.

                     Photo 1. Example of a focus group discussion, Beruni district, Karakalpakstan




61. The rest of the report is structured as follows. Chapter 2 presents the study findings regarding household access to
drinking and sanitation services and also discusses the functioning of current institutional arrangements, based on the field data.
Chapter 3 then provides an overview of household mechanisms for dealing with poor service conditions. Household monetary
and non-monetary expenditures for meeting their WSS needs are presented in Chapter 4, followed by a brief discussion of
household willingness to pay for improved networked service conditions in chapter 5. Chapter 6 then discusses WSS conditions in
public buildings. This is followed by Chapter 7 which concludes and provides recommendations.
ACCESS TO DRINKING
WATER AND
SANITATION SERVICES

2.
                        2. ACCESS TO DRINKING WATER
   page 26              AND SANITATION SERVICES

62. In this chapter we present the study findings regarding the sources of drinking water that different groups of households use,
as well as the conditions of these sources. This is followed by a presentation of the types of sanitation services used by surveyed
households and a brief discussion of the findings regarding the functioning of the institutional arrangements for delivering
drinking water and sanitation services in our sampled sites.


SOURCES OF DRINKING WATER
63. All surveyed households in Tashkent were connected and had internal taps as their main water source. However,
these figures were much lower for surveyed connected households outside the capital. Here many households used
multiple sources of water. Outside taps in the yard and water pumps in the yard (usually hand pumps) were important sources for
many connected households outside the capital (Figure 1). In the selected rural areas most connected households rely on outside
taps (97 percent reported using these), but many also use water pumps in the yard (27 percent) and rivers, lakes and ponds (26
percent).

64. Key water sources for unconnected households in Oblast centers were water pumps (mostly hand pumps) in their yards (50
percent of this group stated they use this source), public standpipes (25 percent), and rivers, lakes and ponds (22 percent). In
Raion centers, the most common water source for unconnected households was piped water in the streets. In unconnected rural
areas water pumps in the yard (77 percent) are the most common source, followed by water from rivers, lakes and ponds (64
percent). See Figure 1. As mentioned totals add up to more than 100 percent as many households have more than one source of
drinking water.


               Photo 2. Fergana city was one of the best networked supplies surveyed outside Tashkent.
                                                                                                                            page 27



                Figure 1. Proportion of all sampled households using a particular drinking water source




                                        Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)
Note: households outside Tashkent often use more than one water source and totals therefore add up to more than 100 percent; connected
households for example use other water sources when no water is available from the networked piped system or the water quality is poor.

65. Among the connected households in our sample important differences existed between households that are
in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution and those in the top 60 percent. The proportion of connected
households that relies on outside taps is much higher (38 percent) among the bottom 40 percent than among the top 60 percent
in our sample (21 percent). In the selected Oblast centers 15 percent of connected households that are in the bottom 40 percent
use irrigation canals as one of their main water sources, compared to only 3 percent of connected households in the top 60 percent
of the income distribution. While slightly more than half (54 percent) of those that are unconnected to a WSS network belong to
the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution the division is not clear cut and a sizeable proportion of the unconnected
belong to the top 60% of the income distribution.

66. Among surveyed unconnected households, those in the top 60 percent of the income distribution of our sample
mainly make use of hand pumps, while the most common primary source for those in the bottom 40 percent is
natural water bodies. Unconnected households in the bottom 40 percent use primarily water from natural water bodies (37
percent) and hand pumps (33 percent). Piped water on the street is also used by 20 percent of unconnected households in the
top 60 percent and 24 percent of unconnected households in the bottom 40 percent.
                         2. ACCESS TO DRINKING WATER
   page 28               AND SANITATION SERVICES

DRINKING WATER SERVICE CONDITIONS
67. Households were asked to provide a score for overall quality of WSS services using a scale of 1 (very poor service) to 5
(excellent service) (Figure 2). The highest scores were given in Tashkent (4.3) and the lowest ones were given in Oblast centers (3.4). It
should be noted that responses may be relative to levels of expectation forWSS service, which may vary by type of location, e.g. consumers
in 'Oblast Centers' may expect 24 hour WSS service, whereas consumers in rural areas may be satisfied with fewer hours of service.

Figure 2. Mean score for quality of WSS utility services by the utility company (1 = very poor and 5 = excellent]




                                        Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)

68. The proportion of surveyed households reporting problems with their drinking water service conditions varied
among the selected regions. It ranged from 27 percent in Tashkent to 41 percent in Fergana, 48 percent in Jizzak and 78 percent
in South Karakalpakstan. Overall, the proportion of households reporting problems with water was similar for both connected and
unconnected households (somewhat less than 50 percent) and for both households in the top and in the bottom of the income
distribution (also here slightly below half of the households in each of these groups reported problems).

69. Surveyed connected households stated that water supply services often function only intermittently. This was
said to be made worse by the unpredictability of interruptions and lack of notification of these interruptions from
utilities. Nearly three quarters of survey respondents who reported WSS problems stated that irregular water supply is their main
supply issue (more so than quality and price). Of all households in our survey sample that received piped water on their property,
the proportion that receives a 24 hour service ranged from 90 percent in Tashkent to just 3 percent in rural areas Look-up other
numbers. Interviews with vodokanal officials and focus groups with consumers suggested that the intermittency of supply was
caused by interrupted electricity supply which stops pumps, vodokanal redirection of flow to industrial / commercial customers
for certain periods of the day, lack of water availability or intentional rationing of supply to customers. Three-quarters of connected
households in our survey sample claimed they were never or only sometimes notified of major modifications to water supply
schedules. Of the connected surveyed areas, notifications from utilities are most likely in Tashkent (47 percent of respondents
reported they were always notified) and not provided in rural areas (all survey respondents reported they were never notified).

“We have networked water in the yard. But it flows one day and then not for ten days.” - Beruni rural connected Focus Group participant
number 1

“Especially on a Saturdays and Sundays there is no flow - when people need to wash, clean, cook...” - Ahangaran connected raion center
Focus Group Participant number 1
                                                                                                                                    page 29



It should be noted that the Government of Uzbekistan - jointly with donors - is currently undertaking a series of investments to
rehabilitate and extend the water supply and sewerage system in the country.

70. Insufficient water pressure for consumers in the survey areas was said to often result from the poor state of WSS
networks. Low water pressure was a common complaint in focus groups, interviews and the survey – particularly for households
located at the end of a network trunk main11, and for those living in upper level apartments, who often reported needing to
get water from their lower floor neighbors. During summer, greater levels of domestic consumption, coupled with significant
demand for garden irrigation12, greatly reduces pressure in the system (55 percent of surveyed connected households reported
weak pressure in summer). Focus groups reported internal tap flow rates less than 1 liter per minute in some cases.

71. Low pressure problems were reported to be compounded by limited flow durations, as residents overload the
system trying to access water when it becomes available13, leaving their taps open. Vodokanal supply management
practices and expansion of the customer base into new urban areas were two other possible reasons reported for low pressure in
WSS networks14. Interviews with vodokanal officials and other supply-side stakeholders suggest that some network losses could
be as high as 60-70 percent percent in systems15 with pipelines of up to 70 years old. Some infrastructure is so old and degraded
that isolating sections of conveyance or distribution infrastructure for maintenance and repair works is impossible.

“We live in a high level apartment and have water only at night, when all the neighbors are asleep. And then to us a small trickle of water
becomes available, and for those 1-2 hours we collect all the water we can in containers.” - Fergana connected oblast center, Participant
number 3

“The conveyance pipe was installed in 1964. The system is now deteriorated. The vodokanal does not put normal pressure on the system
for fear that pipes may burst.” - Fergana connected oblast Center, Participant number 11

72. More than half (57 percent) of connected surveyed households using internal taps reported water quality
problems. The most widely reported problems were presence of particles / turbidity (41 percent) and high salinity levels (19
percent). Users of unconnected sources reported even more water quality problems. For households using hand pumps, salinity
and turbidity were the most frequently reported water quality problems. For households accessing natural water bodies (rivers,
lakes, ponds, natural reservoirs), the most frequently reported quality problems were salinity, bad odor, bad taste and turbidity /
particles16.

73. Some focus groups reported cases of community members organizing independent laboratory testing of water
samples and results not meeting drinking water standards for some indicators. Interviews and focus groups suggested
that such water quality problems could be caused by either inadequate water treatment17 or a deterioration of the conveyance
and distribution systems, or both. In rare cases, households reported not using their networked supply for drinking purposes and
instead using other sources (Figure 3).

“We tested the quality of our tap water at a laboratory. Its composition in many ways does not meet drinking water standards.” - Fergana
connected oblast center Participant number 11




11 Low pressure and limited water schedules during peak times experienced by customers at the tail end of distribution systems is also reported
by ISR (2011).
12 Also reported by ADB (2013).
13 Also reported by ADB (2013).
14 Some interviewees suggested that some vodokanals may be reluctant to operate WSS networks at normal pressure for fear of pipe bursts.
Other interviewees suggested that due to urban expansion in some housing areas, the number of connected customers has grown but without
any corresponding increase in overall system pressure to account for those new customers, flow rates may become low for new and existing
customers.
15 The figures reported in our interviews with supply-side stakeholders are not too dissimilar to water network losses of 50-60 percent of total
volume reported by OECD (2011). The OECD reported that their quoted losses are four to five times higher than recommended best practice for
network losses.
16 Note that no tests to check the quality of water were conducted for this study.
17 For example, in South Karakalpakstan, the major municipal surface water source – the Amu Darya River – is among the most sediment laden
rivers in the world with high salinity levels (Small et al. 2003). Hence, significant treatment is needed to make such sources potable.
                          2. ACCESS TO DRINKING WATER
   page 30                AND SANITATION SERVICES

“We buy five-liter plastic bottles of filtered water. We buy them for drinking water purposes. We use water from the tap only for washing
and other domestic purposes.” - Nukus oblast city connected Participant №1

Figure 3. Proportion of households reporting problems with drinking water quality by source (%)




                                          Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)

74. Seasonal variation in water quality is experienced by users of both connected and unconnected sources. Almost
half (47 percent) of responding connected households with internal taps experienced seasonal variation in piped water quality. 69
percent of households directly using water from natural water bodies (e.g. river, lake, canal) reported that water quality18 differed
across seasons. Focus groups reported that summer is more likely to produce higher turbidity and salinity and lower pressure
(34 percent of households who water a garden using internal taps, taps in yard, or public taps reported this). 21 percent of
households using water for farming purposes also used connected water sources19. Reported winter problems included freezing
of insufficiently insulated pipes.

“Water does not come to our house in the summer due to low pressure. Instead, we have to carry water from other sources.” - Jizzak oblast
center connected Participant number 12

“Because of the cold weather during January, nine household taps froze and burst. Three months later there was still no water.” - Dustlik
rural connected Focus Group Participant number 6

75 About a quarter of all surveyed respondents felt that WSS conditions had worsened over the past 5 years. Most
noted no change over that period20. Fourteen percent had witnessed improvements. Oblast centers had the greatest
proportion of connected respondents who thought that their WSS conditions had worsened (40 percent). The greatest proportion
of unconnected households reporting worsening of WSS conditions in the past five years was among sampled households in Raion
centers (33 percent), followed by Oblast centers (24 percent) and rural areas (2 percent). Interestingly, the greatest proportion of
connected households reporting improvements in WSS conditions in the past five years was also in the Oblast centers selected
for our study (24 percent of households), followed by Raion centers (19 percent) and 10 percent in rural areas. Lastly, the greatest
proportion of unconnected households reporting improvements in WSS conditions during the past five years was those in the
selected Oblast centers (14 percent of households), followed by the Raion centers (10 percent) and only 3 percent in rural areas
sampled for our survey (Figure 4).


18 In their study in the western region of Uzbekistan, Kudat et al. (1996) found that salinity and turbidity were the most widely reported water
quality problems for households, and more severe in summer months.
19 33 percent of surveyed households use natural water bodies for garden watering and 32 percent use hand pumps forthat purpose. 36
percent of households using water for farming purposes used river, lake, pond, other natural reservoir or canal and 35 percent used hand pumps.
20 It should be noted that much of the degradation in the WSS systems may have occurred outside the 5 year timeframe asked in the survey.
This may explain why the majority of respondents stated that no change had occurred during that period. Focus groups often suggested that
conditions had been poor for a considerable period.
                                                                                                                                 page 31



Figure 4. Trends in the quality of WSS service conditions, by type of location (percentage of surveyed households
saying situation has improved, worsened or remained the same).




                                        Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)


ACCESS TO SANITATION SERVICES
76. Only one quarter of all households in our survey had access to a centralized sewerage system. None of the
households in our sample in Raion centers and rural areas had access to a sewerage network. And among surveyed households
who were connected to a networked water supply system, less than half (48 percent) were also connected to a sewerage system.
This implies that most wastewater does not find its way into a central sewerage system and may be disposed of directly into the
environment without treatment.
“We are not connected to a sewerage system. To install a concrete septic tank, you have to pay for the materials and construction. I have
no husband, so I do not have such wealth. Therefore, we, the children just dug a hole for our toilet wastewater “ - Dustlik city unconnected
FGD participant number 3

                                               Photo 3. Indoor flush toilet, Tashkent




77. Only 20 percent of households in our sample had toilets located inside their home. This figure was 41 percent
for households in our sample that are connected to a water supply system. 90 percent of Tashkent households connected
to networked water supply and 70 percent of Oblast connected households used flush toilets. The vast majority of connected
                           2. ACCESS TO DRINKING WATER
   page 32                 AND SANITATION SERVICES

households in Raion centers had a pit latrine or bucket toilet with a concrete tank in their own yard. Most connected and
unconnected households in the sampled rural areas had a pit latrine21 with an earthen tank (Figure 5).

               Photo 4. (a) Pit latrine in a household yard, (b) Sewage discharge pit, Dustlik rural household




Figure 5. Proportion of households in the survey sample using a particular type of toilet, by location, for those with
                              and those without connection to a piped water system




                                       Source: Household survey conducted for this study (10 sites, n=300)

78. The proportion of connected households with a flush toilet connected to a piped sewerage system was much
higher among those in the top 60 percent of the income distribution (68 percent of this group had one) (Figure 6). This
compares to just 40 percent of the bottom 40 percent of households by income. The majority of households in this lower wealth
category had pit latrines in their own yards despite being connected to a piped water supply system. Only 46 percent of surveyed
unconnected households report always having water available at their sanitation facility.




21 Pit latrines - typically covered with a roof and a door – are located within a private yard or in a public area to prevent odor and insects (flies
and mosquitos) infiltrating living areas. Earthen pits are often constructed by members of the household for minimal cost and are filled in and
re-dug in a nearby location when they fill up (or emptied during winter). Concrete septic tanks are significantly more expensive to construct and
usually done by contractors. They require periodic cleaning either by household members or contractors.
                                                                                                                                     page 33



 Figure 6. Proportion of households in the survey sample using a particular type of toilet, by wealth level, for those
                            with and those without connection to a piped water system




                                          Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)


INSTITUTIONAL FUNCTIONING
79. Officials involved in WSS that were interviewed for our study conveyed that water utilities often have severe
debts and cannot even afford basic operating expenses for delivering their services22. They claimed that low tariffs and
significant arrears of many customers, together with high operational costs, contribute to this situation. These payment arrears
sometimes include electricity debts, further exacerbating their problem of being unable to provide reliable drinking water supply
and poor service. Pipes and pumps of Vodokanals suffer from increased wear and tear, and shorter operating life, when power
cuts are frequent and sudden. According to consumers and vodokanal staff participating in our study, vodokanals lack equipment
to conduct even the most basic operational, maintenance and rehabilitation tasks.

“In Dustlik city, water is only provided in the morning 6-8am and in the evening 6-8pm, as the debt of the water utility to the electricity
utility causes pumps to be switched on only at this time.” - Dustlik city vodokanal chief IDI

“A week ago, a main pipe burst. For three days it flowed uncontrollably. I took a video and posted it on the Internet. The vodokanal does
not have a mini excavator. Residents had to collect money to hire an excavator. I personally gave 15,000 UZS, others contributed 7,000
UZS, or as much as they could. We asked if the vodokanal had equipment for welding – they did not. They didn’t even have their own
transport.” - Ahangaran Connected Raion Center Focus Group participant number 7

It should be noted that, following a government decision to that effect, water meters and modern billing systems are presently
being installed to improve fee collection.

80. In addition to hardware constraints, interviews and focus groups also identified a lack of technical and human
capacity in many vodokanals23. Vodokanal staff reported that they struggle to attract and retain quality staff. Some vodokanal
respondents stated that few colleges train emerging professionals appropriately and even then low salaries do not incentivize
them to work at vodokanals. Hence, they have many unskilled staff and a large staff turnover.

“The vodokanal says that they have too much work and not enough workers.” - Jizzak city connected FGD Participant number 1


22 IBNET data for Central Asia shows that utility revenue / cost ratios are the lowest in Uzbekistan (0.73). Many years of revenue / cost ratios
below 1 have led to high levels of indebtedness.
23 Uzbekistan is reported to have one of the lowest ‘staff per customer ratios’ in the EECCA region – approximately one staff per 1,000 customers
(EAP Task Force, 2011).
                         2. ACCESS TO DRINKING WATER
   page 34               AND SANITATION SERVICES


81. Vodokanals are only partially decentralized – they have broad responsibilities but no autonomy to set tariffs
or reform operational systems. Vodokanals have responsibilities for sourcing, treatment, conveyance and customer relations.
However, they do not have any input or control over water tariff setting. Water tariffs are set by the Ministry of Finance in the
central government. Currently, water tariffs are lower than tariffs for other utilities. Cost recovery for water utilities is too low.
Many interviewed vodokanal officials believe tariffs should be higher and commensurate with other utilities (gas, electricity).
Furthermore, vodokanals do not have the ability to take out loans for operations or capital investment.

82. Survey data and focus groups indicate that water utilities tend to be slow in responding to customer complaints.
A quarter of connected households had a member who had contacted the vodokanal regarding a problem with water supply
and sanitation. Of those, nearly half had received a response within a week, while one third had to wait longer than one month.
Response times were generally longest in rural areas (two thirds had to wait longer than one month). Problems remained
completely unsolved in almost half the cases. This proportion was highest in Oblast centers (53 percent). Even mahalla committees,
representing residents, struggle to get responses from vodokanals. Many consumers felt the unresponsiveness and indifference of
the vodokanal staff to be frustrating. Consumers often conveyed that in order for vodokanal officials to respond to emergencies
such as flooding of sewage or burst pipes, they sometimes demanded up-front informal payments from residents.

“The vodokanal is very difficult to deal with. Not far from our house a major pipe burst in winter and water was flowing out of that for
three months. Because of this, the roads were covered in water, which turned to ice. People could not use the sidewalk. Every day we called
the vodokanal, but nobody came to us.”- Fergana connected oblast center Participant number 1

“About three years ago we wrote a letter saying that we need water. All residents signed it. But we have not received any response. “-
Dustlik city unconnected FGD participant number 9

83. Both demand-side and supply-side stakeholders reported that sometimes there is confusion over responsibilities
for certain aspects of the WSS network, particularly in apartment buildings. Interviews suggest that part of this lack of
clarity seems to be a legacy of post-Soviet era privatization schemes which affected some state property (e.g. apartment blocks
and internal piping) but not others (e.g. conveyance infrastructure). An outline of official responsibilities of various stakeholders at
the local level is provided in Annex A.

“This year my son’s apartment had problems. So, we wrote and called the khokimyat and mahalla. The mahalla committee told us that
they have no means to help and we must address it at our own expense. Previously, our homes were government owned but now they are
privatized. The khokimyat tells us that it is our apartment and that we have to do everything ourselves, at our own expense.” Participant
number 8

84. In some locations, interviewees reported that separate water supply and sewerage utilities served them, which
tended to be problematic for both consumers and utility staff. Even in Tashkent, focus group discussion participants
claimed that they have to deal with separate utilities for water supply and sewerage, even if they pay a single fee for both services.
A vodokanal chief in Jizzak stated that combining management of the two services would help reduce personnel costs, would be
easier for consumers to understand and would promote better integration of services.

85. Interviews and focus groups reported that some vodokanals offer water tanker services to customers in rural
areas, as a cheaper, easier and more profitable alternative to rehabilitating infrastructure. This initiative represents a
temporary solution to systemic problems in rural WSS services, but reportedly satisfies some rural households who can afford the
high charges for delivery of small volumes. However, the low proportion of households reporting using such services suggests
that many continue to use alternative free sources – such as rivers, ponds and irrigation canals - even if the quality of that water is
often very poor.

86. Coordination between public electricity and drinking water utilities can be poor, worsening the reliability of
drinking water services. Focus groups and interviews reported only intermittent electricity supplies in most surveyed areas and
its subsequent impact on water delivery (‘no electricity’ means ‘no pumping’, which means ‘no water delivery’). More than half (55
percent) of connected respondents believe that their supply of water is strongly or fairly strongly dependent on electricity service.
This was regarded as a significant issue in rural areas (93 percent) and Raion centers (77 percent), but much less so in Tashkent (13
percent) where electricity supply seemed more consistent.
                                                                                                                                 page 35




“There is a coordination problem. When electricity supply is available, often there is no-one at the water tower to turn the pump on.
Electricity can be provided all day and yet no water flows. And then, when they finally turn on the water pump, the electricity goes off soon
after.” - Jizzak Oblast center connected Participant number 1

87. Local government and vodokanals stakeholders have communicated to consumers that they cannot do much to
improve services without additional funds from central government. Almost all stakeholders concede that local budgets
for WSS services will not permit comprehensive rehabilitation of the WSS infrastructure. Repairs using locally available resources
were said to only be bandaid solutions addressing the symptoms but not the causes. Vodokanal officials and local government
staff interviewed for his study consistently stated that additional resources and expertise are desperately needed. Residential
consumers partly understand the position of water utilities and that a systematic approach to rehabilitating the entire network
is required. Further, many vodokanals seem to have communicated to residents that a national program for development is
imminent and that has appeased some communities temporarily.
HOW DO HOUSEHOLDS
COPE WITH POOR
SERVICE CONDITIONS

3.
                         3. HOW DO HOUSEHOLDS COPE
   page 38               WITH POOR SERVICE CONDITIONS

88. The previous chapter presented the different sources of drinking water and the types of sanitation services that contrasting
groups of households use. We found that most households use multiple sources of drinking water and that these, as well as
the type of sanitation services used, differed among wealth groups and location. We also saw that in the sites outside Tashkent
service conditions were often poor. This chapter discusses how surveyed households deal (‘cope’) with the lack of quality drinking
water and sanitation. It also provides some evidence regarding independent action that some communities in our sample
have undertaken to improve their WSS service conditions and presents a series of case studies of households and their coping
mechanisms.

89. To cope with irregular water supply and pressure and quality problems, households have at least one additional
source of water. Forty percent of all surveyed households claimed they rely on a secondary water source on a regular
basis and six percent reports also using a tertiary source. 29 percent of connected households reported using a secondary
water source, and of those, 77 percent reported using it more than once per week. As an example, some connected focus group
participants in South Karakalpakstan Raion Center described using four different sources of water, each for different purposes: (i)
connected supply for drinking and household needs (when available), (ii) hand pumps for household use and garden watering
(water was considered less palatable (salty)), (iii) bottled water as a secondary drinking source (although this is expensive and used
less often) and (iv) irrigation canals for watering gardens (seasonally used and quality is too poor to be used for other household
purposes). Where water supply through the network is very poor, alternative sources usually become the primary source.

“From August to May we get our water from our neighbors. After the month of May, we use water from the irrigation canal.” - Dustlik city
unconnected Focus group Participant number 1

90. Wealthier households may be able to afford expensive alternative sources, such as bottled water and tanker
water delivered to their homes, while poorer households have less affordable options. Fifteen percent of all networked
households use bottled water, which may cost up to UZS 300 (0.13 US$) per liter, about 1,000 times more than vodokanal water. In
contrast, according to participants in focus group discussions, poor residents have fewer alternatives and are often forced to use
unhygienic sources of water such as irrigation canals and rivers or ponds, which can take more than half a day to collect in some
areas (including walking and carrying) and which typically have poor quality water.

“We have no one to carry water. My husband works and my sons cannot carry water so far. My husband calls the taxi driver and he
delivers canal water to our home for a fee. We pay him only for transport. But, we pay him more than if he was just transporting people.
Some other households must cart by donkey or by hand.” - Dustlik city unconnected Focus Group Participant number 9

“The canal water has a bad color but we just boil it for drinking because we cannot afford other options.” - Dustlik rural connected FGD
Participant number 7

91. Survey data suggests that public taps can provide one of the few forms of ‘improved’ water sources for
unconnected households. Water from public taps is networked water (it should be the same quality as household water
connections). However, the flow rate of public taps can be low and unpredictable and they are often too few in number to cater
to demand. Most residents are also charged non-volumetric user fees for accessing public taps.
                                                                                                                                      page 39



                                              Photo 5. Public tap near school, Jizzak city




92. Focus group discussions with unconnected households revealed that water from groundwater pumps is a
convenient source for many, but often subject to quality concerns for potable use. More than half (61 percent) of
unconnected households using water pumps reported water quality problems (Figure 3). Focus group discussions and individual
interviews revealed that consumers are aware that using open water sources, such as irrigation channels, rivers and ponds for
potable and household use is potentially unhygienic, but still use them when there are no other options.

“If a hand pump draws water from good depth, the quality can be good. If drawing from only four to eight meters, it is salty and can be
harmful to the body.” - Buruni unconnected raion center FGD Participant number 7

                              Photo 6. Hand pump in yard, Beruniy Raion, Karakalpakstan region




93. Survey results show that most households subject the water that they use to some forms of treatment prior to
drinking and cooking. 84 percent of connected households using internal taps used some form of household water treatment
to make the water suitable for use. Common forms of treatment for connected households for water from internal taps are boiling
(69 percent), settling out of particulate matter (27 percent) and filtering (13 percent). Only 16 percent of households with internal
taps reported not using any form of treatment. 63 percent of households with water pumps in their yard boil their water and 24
percent let it settle.

“We need to let the water settle, because there can be sand in it. Its quality is not very good.” - Nukus city connected Focus Group Participant 9
“For lunch, we use water that we collected in the container in the morning. We let it settle before we use it.” - Beruni connected FGD district
city Participant 4
                          3. HOW DO HOUSEHOLDS COPE
   page 40                WITH POOR SERVICE CONDITIONS

                       Photo 7. Water filtration using cotton wool in the neck of the bottle, Tashkent




94. Focus groups and surveys show that many households use storage containers to collect and store water.
Households with outside taps (or sources further away) will fill up containers to transport water back to the house. Many
households, connected and unconnected, store water in containers to allow particulate matter - the most widely reported water
quality problem reported in the household survey - to settle before decanting water for use. In some areas, households install
larger and more permanent tanks to store water outdoors.

“We have two plastic drums. We also have buckets and basins. In all these we store water. We use water in the drums for the toilet and the
water from the buckets for cooking.” - Jizzakh city connected FGD Participant number 7

“Here I have a big storage tank, and I fill it. I buy a ton of water for 20,000 UZS. And for my household this water then lasts for twenty to
twenty-five days.” - Dustlik unconnected rural area FGD Participant number 3

 Photo 8. (a) Mobile storage containers and water heating vessels, Beruni (b) Water storage tank, Dustlik rural area




95. Focus group discussions revealed that individuals and communities increasingly install their own sanitation
systems. Many households manage their own sewage disposal, installing pit latrines or other disposal options.
Some respondents claimed that in some apartments with networked water connection, but no sewerage system, residents had
extended pipes out of upper story windows to dispose of wastewater into drains down below. This allegedly led to complaints
from neighbors about the odor.
                                                                                                                         page 41



96. Box 1 to 4 present case studies of households coping with various drinking water and sanitation service conditions.

  Box 1: Household case study – One bedroom apartment, Tashkent city




  This residence was located on the tenth floor of a twelve story apartment building in Tashkent city. The apartment was built
  in 1996. It contains a centralized water and sanitation system.
  Water is available 24 hours per day, seven days per week. Water pressure is adequate for all seasons, except during summer
  when it is low. This low pressure has been a problem since 2006. There is reportedly notification prior to any planned
  severance of service. The household has one 10-liter bucket – enough for one day – for those occasions.
  The residence receives cold water supply, hot water supply, heating, gas and electricity. Hot water service is turned off for
  5 days each spring and autumn. The bathroom contains hot and cold water supply. The Home Owners Association (HOA)
  manages the pipework in the building, including in the basement. The costs of any pipe replacements incurred by the HOA is
  divided among all residents and added to the HOA fee.
  Tap water was reportedly odorless and with a satisfactory taste but was not considered very clean. It has a yellow color and
  contains particles. The household filters the water using cotton and boils the water in a kettle. The treated tap water is used
  for cooking purposes, however often the household uses bottled water for drinking. The household contains a private flush
  toilet and bathroom all within the apartment. The toilet system operates smoothly without blockages.
  The household pays on average 2-3,000 UZS per month for both cold water supply and sewerage in a combined bill, all
  calculated based on a water meter. The metered payment system is considered transparent and easy to understand. Cold
  water has the lowest cost of all the utilities the household pays. The household would be willing to pay 1-2,000 UZS more per
  month for better quality water that does not require household treatment and stable pressure throughout summer.

  Source: field work conducted for this study
                        3. HOW DO HOUSEHOLDS COPE
 page 42                WITH POOR SERVICE CONDITIONS


Box 2: Household case study– Nukus Oblast Center, Karakalpakstan




The household is located on the 4th floor of a 4-storey building and is connected to piped water supply and sewerage.
Water is supplied through the internal taps each day, but periods of service are intermittent and unpredictable. Typically,
the household receives water 12pm-3pm, 6pm-7pm and for a short period in the early morning up to 7am and late in the
evening up to 11pm. The water supply is more consistent in winter than in summer. The 4th floor apartment suffers from low
water pressure, particularly during summer time. If residents in the lower floors have taps open, then the 4th floor does not
receive flow. If residents in the lower floors are not using their taps, the 4th floor receives sufficient flow.
The household does not use a secondary source of water but copes with the intermittency of supply by storing water in
the kitchen and bathroom when it is available. Water is settled in containers during the day and either used directly or
boiled before use. Household members estimate that they spend up to an hour per day replenishing 60 liters for storage in
containers in the kitchen and bathroom / toilet. An adult female or child carries out this task.
The household uses water for drinking, cooking, washing dishes / floors, and laundry. The household has not received hot
water for almost two decades, and heats water on a gas stove for mixing with cold water for bathing and washing purposes.
Water is reported to beodorless, transparent and with a pleasant taste, but contains particles (which need to be settled out).
Cases of minor illness were attributed to water.
The household replaced all WSS pipes inside the apartment about five years ago (materials and labor costs of 200,000 UZS).
The household pays approximately 3,500 UZS per month for water, which the household members estimate is 2.5 percent of
their income. The bill is paid in cash at the vodokanal or by credit card. The bill is based on a meter reading and the household
members prefer this to a normative non-volumetric billing system. However, they do acknowledge that it is difficult to verify
the accuracy of the meter reading. The household members describe the WSS utility service bill as difficult to pay (given their
income), but is much lower than electricity and gas utility expenses.
The household contains a flush toilet within the apartment connected to a centralized sewerage system. The toilet either
flushes conventionally when piped water is available, or is manually filled from a 30 liter bucket that they keep stocked with
water for flushing when piped water is unavailable. Household members report that the toilet system operates smoothly, but
that twice a month on average they clear blockages themselves. However, for lower level residents, the household members
report more frequent and severe sewerage system blockages requiring contractors to fix.
This household is not willing to pay more for WSS services. However, they would like a more consistent supply to their residence,
particularly in terms of timing (24 hours per day) and consistent pressure. If so, the household would try to buy a washing machine.

Source: field work conducted for this study
                                                                                                                        page 43




Box 3: Household case study – Single storey house, Tashlak Raion center, Fergana




This household receives piped water in their yard. The water supply times are unpredictable and depend on two factors: (i)
the availability of electricity and (ii) the utility supplying water in the distribution system. Household members reported that
in summer electricity is unavailable up to 10 hours per day (about five outages per day lasting 2 hours), with severances in
service being unpredictable. In winter, the period of unavailability increases up to 12-15 hours per day. When electricity is
unavailable, household water supply is unavailable. The household does not pay for water via a meter. Instead, payment is
based on the number of people in the household – for their household they pay 6-8,000 UZS per month in cash directly to a
vodokanal inspector. The volume of water available to the household is sufficient if there is adequate electricity.
The water pressure for this household is good but the household members report that residents at the end of the street have
low pressure. Water quality is reported to be odorless, transparent and without visible particulates. Water is used for cooking,
drinking (usually as tea), bathing, washing dishes / house, laundry and garden in summer. The household does not boil water
specifically before using, although for drinking tea andcooking they stated that the water is heated as part of the process.
There was some attribution of minor illness to water. The current volume of water available is insufficient to grow vegetables
but less water intensive trees and flowers are grown.
When the yard water supply is unavailable, the household must go to a source in a nearby mahalla. The trip takes 20 minutes
to walk and the queue can be 30-60 minutes. Males usually undertake this task because of the heavy load of transporting 15-
20 liter containers.
Water is heated using a water heater (recently installed), gas stove (fueled by replaceable gas cylinders – the household is not
connected to a centralized gas supply) or using an electric kettle when electricity is available. For bathing, water is heated on
the gas stove and mixed with cold water. The household recently installed a 50L capacity water heater at a cost of 600,000
UZS.
The household uses a pit latrine and septic tank located away from the main dwelling. The yard tap is used for hand washing
with soap. The septic tank is cleaned annually (30,000 UZS cost) by a contractor.
The household would be willing to pay up to 25,000 UZS per month if they received uninterrupted centralized tap water 24
hours per day and connection to a sewerage system. This would require reliable electricity supply. They would also like to
connect to a centralized gas supply.

Source: field work conducted for this study
                        3. HOW DO HOUSEHOLDS COPE
 page 44                WITH POOR SERVICE CONDITIONS

Box 4. Household case study - Kahramon rural village, Jizzak




The dwelling is a single-storey house built by the State in the 1980s.The main source of water for the entire mahalla is a public
tap located at the school. The tap typically operates year-round 24 hours per day but has a low flow rate, particularly during
summer and winter months. Household members, mostly women, walk 600 meters before lining up to collect water from
the public tap. Household members can queue for up to one hour. Each day, three trips to collect water are made with two
buckets each time.
The tap water is reportedly odorless, clear, tastes pleasantly and with no particles. This water is chiefly used for drinking,
cooking and washing dishes and clothes. The household pays approximately 6,000 UZS per month (for a five-person family,
1,200 UZS per person). This is supposedly incorporated into the school fees.
Two supplementary water sources are used. For special celebratory events, the household pays (15,000 UZS) to get water
delivered by a tractor to fill their large water tank. Also, seasonally water from an irrigation ditch is collected for non-potable
purposes, such as bathing, watering the garden and cleaning the house. The household has both buckets inside the house
for storage of water and a larger water storage tank outside the house. The household spends money on plastic containers
(30-50,000 UZS per container) as needed. The household typically boils water before using it for consumption but does no
other treatment. Water can be heated on a gas stove (via a gas bottle), in an electric kettle (when electricity is available) or on
a firewood stove. The household uses firewood heating preferentially sometimes to save expenditure on gas and electricity.
Household members bathe by heating water on the firewood stove and mixing the heated water with cold water.
The household contains a separate concreted toilet area. The sewage goes into a pit and drains into the soil. The pit has had
to be cleared by a contractor once in the past two years (cost of 20,000 UZS). The pumped material was used as a soil fertilizer
on the fields. A pitcher of water is available for washing hands after using the toilet.
Compared to electricity (40,000 UZS per month) and gas bottles (20,000 UZS per month), water costs are significantly lower.
The household understands that water is a cheaper utility cost than gas or electricity,but they don’t like paying the same rate
for water as someone who has a tap on their premises, when they haveto expend great time and effort to collect water.
 The household lives in expectation of receiving a central gas supply, water supply, sewerage and stable power supply. The
household would like to be connected to a piped WSS supply because they spend a lot of time and effort on maintaining
sufficient water for household purposes. The household is willing to pay to connect and to pay ongoing tariffs according to
the vodokanal rate.

Source: field work conducted for this study
                                                                                                                                 page 45




COMMUNITY AND PRIVATE SECTOR INITIATIVES
97. The qualitative data gathered for this study suggests that there is a high level of informality in the WSS sector
with residents in the sampled sites often taking matters into their own hands. Some communities appear to have become
more independent in securing access to WSS services. They increasingly band together to repair dysfunctional WSS systems or to
install their own systems. Individual households also increasingly make their own - not necessarily well-informed - judgments on
what is acceptable water quality for consumption24.

98. Evidence from interviews and focus groups suggests that where mahalla committees function well, they can
help communities cope by facilitating them to come together to solve some WSS-related problems. For example. focus
group participants and interviewees in Fergana Oblast center reported that frequent leakages and burst pipes prompted the
mahalla committee and the residents to come together to address the problems themselves. Together they rehabilitated their
system and the shirkat permitted payment for future discounts on shirkat fees. There were other cases of communities fixing and
maintaining WSS systems (such as public taps) in the absence of vodokanal efforts.

“Last year, we decided at a meeting to change the whole building water supply system in the basement. We raised the money ourselves,
bought all the materials - pipes, valves, gate valves - hired private technicians and replaced everything. We did all this together with the
mahalla committee, and we billed each apartment. The costs were then subtracted from the rent.” – Fergana Oblast center connected
FGD Participant number 4

“We teamed up with the neighbors and made some plumbing repairs. Eight households were united.” - Beruni unconnected raion center
FGD Participant number 6

“The vodokanal would not help. They say that we are not connected to the network, and therefore can do nothing to help. I wrote
everywhere for support but we received none. We do things ourselves.” - Beruni unconnected rural FGD Participant number 1

99. One focus group reported that one united community at some stage refused to pay for the poor WSS service
and effectively forced the vodokanal to cease providing service to them. A community in an Oblast enter refused to pay
for poor service from an obsolete system that rarely functioned and the community knowingly accumulated debt. The utility
eventually ceased supplying water to the area.

“Let the authorities begin to serve well, and then people can start to pay.” – Jizzak city connected FGD Participant number 5

100. Some communities are working in conjunction with private companies or local entrepreneurs to address the
poor WSS service conditions, as was found by some focus groups. In some cases communities initiated and constructed
local infrastructure in conjunction with private sector parties. One entrepreneur had paid for the laying of 500 meters of pipework
to improve water supply conditions. Some small-scale entrepreneurs were selling purified water that is of better quality than what
comes from the tap or pumps. These entrepreneurs sell water in public areas. In one Raion center residents are trying to restore
water sources (wells) to provide public tap access. Focus groups report that in the Fergana Raion center, 87 household residents –
without permission from the vodokanal – extended the network from the public taps to connect water to their premises.

“Near our house one entrepreneur established a unit for water purification. You can go and buy water from this entrepreneur by the liter.
We buy the water and use it for tea. It is not salty and has same quality as in Tashkent.” -Buruni unconnected raion center Focus Group
Participant number 7




24 ADB (2013) reports in their Uzbekistan study areas that many consumers “have simply given up on the public water utilities. Instead, they
install their own [systems].”
Box 5 describes a case of a community partnership with a private company.

  Box 5: Community partnership with a nitrogen plant to supply water to a rural area in Fergana.
  Originally, only 15 percent of the village population had access to piped water, but about three quarters of them work in a
  nitrogen plant. Residents wrote a letter to the nitrogen plant seeking assistance for them to access its water supply. Since 2000,
  about 100-110 households use this water. While the water is free of charge from the plant, residents invested in extending
  infrastructure (pipes/taps) and maintenance. Residents carry out maintenance and repair on the system as necessary. Street
  outlets are well-spaced (100m apart) and deliver water 24 hrs per day. Interruptions are very rare (annually for 1 week). One
  focus group participant had connected a small diameter pipe from one of the public taps to his household. The community
  has no arrangement with a vodokanal, just with the nitrogen plant. The system is not without minor problems – pressure
  varies between distribution points (beginning of street versus end of street) and the water is considered hard, leading to
  calcification of kettles, etc. Residents use hand pumps for backup and irrigation canals for watering garden plots. They store
  water inside the house.

  Source: field work conducted for this study
HOUSEHOLD COSTS
INCURRED FOR
MEETING DRINKING
WATER AND
SANITATION NEEDS

4.
                           4. HOUSEHOLD COSTS INCURRED FOR MEETING
   page 48                 DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION NEEDS

The previous chapter discussed how households cope with poor WSS service conditions. In this chapter we will first review the
expenditures different groups of households incur for meeting their drinking water and sanitation needs as well as how heavy
these weigh in the total expenditure of these groups of households. This is followed by a presentation of households’ views and
experiences regarding tariffs and billing systems and the pros and cons of metering. The chapter then discusses the health impact
and other non-monetary costs of poor WSS service conditions and reviews how the current situation impacts differently on men
and women.



HOUSEHOLD EXPENDITURE ON DRINKING WATER AND
SANITATION
101. Focus group participants claimed that both connected and unconnected households incur one-off investment
and recurrent costs in addition to costs for piped water/ bottled water to meet their WSS needs. One-off costs were
said to include, among others: (i) installation of water pumps at UZS 400,000-750,000 (USD 167- 312), depending on depth of the
pump; (ii) installing a concrete septic tank for about UZS 300,000 (USD 125), buying plastic containers for collecting, transporting
and storing water, reported of UZS 30,000-40,000 (USD 12.50 to 16.70) and (iv) purchasing filters and paying for pipe repairs. Some
households also reported high costs for operating their own WSS facilities. According to focus group respondents, such recurrent
expenditures can include: annual cleaning of septic tanks at UZS 150,000 (USD 62); and (iii) payment for household delivery of
water via tanker, taxi, etc. for up to UZS 15,000 (USD 6.20) for 500L in some areas.

102. The median, unconnected household in our sample in Oblast Centers and rural areas spent UZS 12,500 – UZS
13,500 (USD 5.20-5.60) per month on recurrent water expenditure25. This is 60 percent more than the median
connected household in Tashkent who spends UZS 8,000 (USD 3.30) per month (Figure 7). According to our data,
household water expenses are lowest in Tashkent even if service there appears to be better than elsewhere. Unlike the other
sampled areas, drinking water bills in Tashkent also include sanitation services.


             Figure 7. Average reported monthly recurrent direct household expenditures* on drinking water
                                                  in the selected sites.




                                           Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)
* includes bills for private connections, for using public water pipes as well money spent on bottled water and trucking services. Does not
include one-off expenses such as purchase of filters, pumps, and storage tanks, and pipe repairs.


25 Water expenditure as used in this paragraph and Figure 8 includes bills for private connections, for using public water pipes and truck delivery
and bottled water
                                                                                                                                      page 49




103. Median water expenses for connected and unconnected households together are highest for our sampled
households in South Karakalpakstan and Fergana (both UZS 15,000 or USD 6.3) per month). This is almost double the
median spent by the sampled households in Tashkent and also higher than those in Jizzak (UZS 6500 or USD 2.7).

104. The share of recurrent monthly water expenditures as a proportion of total monthly household expenditure26
was much lower among our sampled households in Tashkent (0.5 percent at the median) than those in the selected
Oblast centers, Raion centers and Rural areas (1.3 - 1.5 percent at the median) (Figure 8). Budget shares of recurrent
drinking water and sanitation expenditure were higher for those in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution (median
of 1.5 percent) than the top 60 percent (1.1 percent). Focus groups in rural areas suggested that some households, due to the
seasonal and sometimes in-kind nature of their incomes, have lower capacities to pay monthly utility bills.

“Before we can sell our garden products, we have no money. Therefore, for two or three months, we did not pay for electricity nor water.” -
Dustlik rural connected FGD Participant number 7

  Figure 8. Median and mean proportion of recurrent direct billed household expenditure spent on drinking water
               and sanitation needs* across the four sample locations, and for the two wealth groups




                                            Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)
* includes bills for private connections, for using public water pipes as well money spent on bottled water and trucking services. Does not
include one-off expenses such as purchase of filters, pumps, and storage tanks, and pipe repairs.

105. The share of recurrent monthly water expenditure as a proportion of total monthly household expenditure in
surveyed Uzbekistan households generally lies within international norms27. Many authors refer to an affordability ratio
of 3 to 5 percent as a general guide (Saunders and Warford 1986, Damme and White 1984, McPhail 1993 in Fonseca 2014). Davis
& Whittington (nd) report that the range in OECD countries typically lies between 0.8-1.2 percent. In this report we assume a




26 Median total household expenditure is UZS 700,000 (about US$ 300) per month. The mean is somewhat higher (UZS 911,000 or about US$
390) per month. Median total per capita household expenditure is UZS 133,000 (US$ 56) per month, much lower than the official Gross National
Income (GNI) per capita which was US$ 158 per month in 2013, and somewhat lower than household final consumption expenditure per capita
which was US$ 81 per month in 2013. Tashkent has the highest median total household expenditure. Household sizes are almost 50 percent
larger for in the bottom 40 percent (average 7.4 members) than those in the top 60 percent (average 5.2 members).
27 It has been recognized by, amongst others, the World Bank, UNDP, the Asian Development Bank and DFID that setting these percentages has
been an arbitrary process but that, as an initial tool, they can provide a rule of thumb (Briscoe, 1999; Waughrey and Moran, 2003). Fonseca (2014)
reports some extreme cases of countries with low-income populations spending a high proportion of their income on water and sanitation
services include Burkina Faso (29 percent of income of poorest of the population), Poland (10.8 percent for the poorest), United Kingdom (2
percent of households spend more than 8 percent of income).
                          4. HOUSEHOLD COSTS INCURRED FOR MEETING
   page 50                DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION NEEDS

threshold of 3.5 percent (see below). Based on affordability ratios28, Uzbekistan may be classed as a country with high water
subsidies and low water prices. While most surveyed households in all settlement types expend below the recommended ratio
(Table 2), 13 percent of households in Raion centers and 3 percent of households in Oblast centers spend more than 5 percent of
their total household expenditure on billed water services.

Table 2. Billed Water Expenditures as a Percentage of Total Household Expenditure – Percentage of Respondents in
Thresholds
                               Proportion of water expenditure as a percentage of total household expenditure
                       1% or less              1-2%                           2-5%                                      >5%
                      No.      Share      No.       Share         No. HHs           Share of HHs           No. HHs           Share of HHs
                      HHs        of       HHs         of
                                HHs                  HHs
 Tashkent                 21      75%           5      18%                     2                 7%                     0                  0%
 Oblast centers           21      32%         26       39%                   17                 26%                     2                  3%
 Raion centers            16      33%         15       31%                   11                 23%                     6                 13%
 Rural areas              12      38%         13       41%                     7                22%                     0                  0%

 Total                    70      40%         59                 34%                    37                21%           8        5%
Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)

106. According to our survey data about half (49 percent) of unconnected households spent money installing their
own sanitation systems, compared to 16 percent of connected households. Furthermore, unconnected households also
had much higher annual sanitation system operating costs (on average UZS 72,500 or USD 30.2) than the connected households
paying tariffs for their sanitation service (UZS 18,900 or USD 7.9 per year).

107. When we take into account all costs that surveyed households incur for meeting their WSS needs, unconnected
households tend to incur much higher costs than those that are connected (Figure 9). Data collected through our focus
group discussions and the household survey data show that households in Tashkent incur only about one third (UZS 8,000/
month) of the costs that unconnected households in Oblast centers or rural areas sustain (UZS 24,300-26,200). Median payments
of surveyed households for piped water (private and public) varied between UZS 8,000 (Tashkent) and UZS 13,500 (unconnected
households in Oblast centers). Connected households outside Tashkent incur additional costs for installation and operation of
water pumps, water containers and installation and emptying of sewage tanks (only a minority of sampled households outside
Tashkent are connected to a sewage system). Unconnected households reported higher costs for installing and emptying sewage
tanks than connected households.




28 Smets (in Hutton 2012) finds that for eleven ‘transition’ countries in eastern Europe, the Caucasus and Central Asia, examination of the data
shows that there are probably two groups of countries: those with high water subsidies and low water prices (affordability ratio for median
households near 1 per cent) and those with reduced subsidies and higher water prices (affordability ratio of median households nearing 3.5 per
cent).
                                                                                                                                     page 51



 Figure 9. Approximate full monthly cost of meeting drinking water and sanitation needs (in UZS) per location and
 for households connected and unconnected to a piped water system to their dwelling. This includes billed costs as
                          well as costs incurred for dealing with poor service conditions.




                                          Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300).
Notes: Data are approximate. Estimates are based on data from the household survey. Where survey data were incomplete, data collected
through focus group discussions were used. Figures should be regarded as approximate. Tap water costs are based on survey medians. Water
storage tanks: based on survey median (UZS 24,000); assumed to last for five years = UZS 400 per month [adjust]. Water pumps: installation cost
UZS 500,000 UZS (based on focus group discussions) to install (costs vary based on depth of well and local soil conditions between 400,000
– 750,000UZS). Lifetime assumed to be 10 years. Operation cost assumed to be UZS 10,000 UZS/yr (for valves, piping, etc.). (500,000/(5*12))
+(10,000/12) = UZS 5000 per month. Sewage tank: installation cost is UZS 300,000 (based on data from focus group discussions). Assumed to
last 15 years. 300,000/ (15*12) = UZS 1,670 per month. Cleaning costs: based on survey median per subgroup (varying between 5000 and 250
per month). Assumes all unconnected household have a concrete sewage pit (95% of unconnected households have one). In rural areas and
raion centers, almost all connected households have a sewage tank. Of all connected households, about half have a concrete sewerage pit, for
this group we use the median survey data on ‘sanitation costs’. Costs incurred for repairs of pipes and for building a toilet are excluded due to
lack of data.

108. The proportion of household budgets spent on meeting WSS needs when all costs are included (recurrent
and one-off) can be twice as high for unconnected households than for connected households. Using data from the
household survey, supplemented with data from the focus group discussions, we find that household budget shares spent on
WSS can be twice as high for unconnected households than for those that are connected. The additional cost of water pumps
and expenses for cleaning septic tanks can weigh heavily on household budgets for unconnected households in particular in
Raion Centers and Oblast Centers (Figure 10). These data ignore the non-monetary costs households also incur.
                           4. HOUSEHOLD COSTS INCURRED FOR MEETING
   page 52                 DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION NEEDS

Figure 10. Median proportion of full household expenditure spent on meeting drinking water and sanitation needs (in
 percentage) per location and for households connected and unconnected to a piped water system to their dwelling.




                                              Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)
Note: Data are approximate. Included are tap water costs, cost of buying water containers, costs of water pumps, and costs of cleaning septic tanks
Estimates are based on data from the household survey. Where survey data were incomplete, data collected through focus group discussions
were used. Figures should be regarded as approximate. Tap water costs are based on survey medians. Water containers costs are taken from the
household survey. Water pumps: installation costs are UZS 500,000 UZS (based on focus group discussions) (costs vary based on depth of well and
local soil conditions between 400,000 – 750,000UZS). Lifetime assumed to be 10 years. Operation cost assumed to be UZS 10,000 UZS/yr (for valves,
piping, etc.). (500,000/(5*12)) + (10,000/12) = UZS 5000 per month. Sanitation costs are taken from the household survey.

109. For households connected to a piped system, water utility costs were the lowest of all public utilities such as gas
and electricity provision. Gas was the most expensive utility cost for households – winter gas bills (on average UZS 82,000) of
sampled households were four times higher than winter water utility bills (on average UZS 12,300). In summer however this is
reduced to two times higher (Figure 11).

“Compared with other utilities - gas, hot water, garbage, electricity, telephone, the cold water – is not expensive.” – Tashkent connected
FGD Participant number 2
                                                                                                                                    page 53



                    Figure 11. Average household utility billed (costs per month) in winter and summer.




                                          Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=300)


TARIFFS AND BILLING SYSTEMS
110. Tariffs for drinking water and sanitation services were not often mentioned as a problem by connected
household, despite recent regular tariff increases (from low base levels). Less than one percent of connected respondents
reported that high bills were the major problem with WSS services. Some focus group participants reported that in the past
period water tariffs have increased once or twice per year by approximately 5-10 percent. A number of focus group participants
acknowledge that water tariffs are low and provide little opportunity for water utilities to maintain and upgrade WSS networks
they are unhappy with rising tariffs when the quality of service from the vodokanal does not improve commensurately.

 “Why do water tariffs keep going up? The system has a lot of leakages and vodokanal staff do not respond to problems. Factories and
stores have water during the day, but we don’t.” - Ahangaran connected raion center Focus Group participant number 4

“There’s a vicious circle. As residents we say ‘how wonderful it is to have cold water so cheap’. But, because of that, the water utility has no
money and cannot replace pipes.” - Tashkent connected Focus Group participant number 7

111. Most water bills are reportedly paid in cash to a collector. Almost half of connected households claim they normally
pay their water utility bill in cash to such a collector, almost one quarter pay the vodokanal office in cash, one fifth pays the
vodokanal by plastic card, while 17 percent pays through a deduction of the salary of one household member, and 12 percent
transfers the money by plastic card to the bank.

112. Despite low tariffs, vodokanals and mahalla committees report an increasing trend in non-payment and arrears.
Failure to pay is linked to the inability or unwillingness by utility companies to levy penalties or cut off water to
households or agencies that do not pay. 16 percent of networked survey respondents had not paid for water in the last 12
months for either ‘no specific reason’ (11 percent) or because they could not afford it (5 percent). A mahalla committee chairwoman
in Fergana Oblast center, estimates that 40 percent of households in her mahalla are in arrears for water utility payments. There is a
perception among some focus group participants that certain residents systematically avoid paying water utility bills while others
pay diligently.

“Yes. Water fees are hard to collect hard because they do not cut off the pipe. You cannot leave someone without water. Therefore, people
somehow pay for water last. Shirkat has to go and collect payments from people. “- Fergana connected oblast center Participant number 11

113. Local government stakeholders were reported to have limited institutional / legal capacities to pursue cases of
non-payment of water bills. The legal process to recover non-payment of water bills was reported by vodokanal and local
government officials to be convoluted and largely ineffective. Vodokanals do not have the resources or the capacities to pursue
                         4. HOUSEHOLD COSTS INCURRED FOR MEETING
   page 54               DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION NEEDS

cases and hence the lack of threat of recourse does not act as a deterrent for non-payment. 83 percent of respondents stated that
there is no penalty for non-payment of water bills. Legislation improvements are called for by vodokanals to encourage customers
to pay on time and in full.

“The debt that is currently owed to us by our vodokanal customers is 500 million UZS. Bailiffs cannot recover the debts and non-paying
customers go unpunished. Because of this, water utility employees always receive administrative fines and reprimands.” - Jizzak Vodokanal
chief IDI

114. Focus group participants and interviewees report disagreements between residents and the vodokanal in cases
where residents are required to pay for access to public taps. 27 percent of unconnected households in our sample said
they were paying monthly water bills. These are mainly households that utilize public water taps. For example, in the selected
Raion center in Jizzak, consumers are charged 1,000 UZS per person per month by the water utility, even though households have
no connection to the water network and the only source is a public water tap four streets away. Often focus group participants
claimed they are not aware what rate they should be paying to the vodokanal for access to the public water taps. Furthermore,
focus group participants reported that despite paying the fees for accessing public water taps, residents often take on the
maintenance and repair of such systems in the absence of vodokanal efforts.

“They say that if we drink water from public taps, we must pay!”- Dustlik city unconnected FGD Participant number 8

“We all agree, it’s not fair to pay the same price for public taps as people who have water in their house” - Dustlik unconnected rural area
FGD participant number 8

                                Photo 9. Public tap being used for clothes washing, Jizzak city




115. Vodokanal officials stated that the public needs to be better educated on responsible water use and payment. A
major objective of vodokanals, khokimyats and mahalla committees is to raise awareness of the population about the importance
of timely payment of utility bills and efficient use of water resources. Newspaper and television campaigns were said to be
implemented for these purposes in some areas.


METERING
116. Sixty-one percent of households in our sample stated that their bills are calculated on a normative basis (based
on the number of people in the household) and only 39 percent said that their consumption is measured through
a water meter. Even in Tashkent only 40 percent of households in our sample had a meter. Connected households that have
a water meter paid less (UZS 6,000 at the median) than households that pay their bill based on normative pricing (UZS 10,000)
according to our survey data.
                                                                                                                                  page 55



117. The highest mean water meter tariffs were reported in the three Raion centers (573 UZS/m3 or US$ 0.23) and
South Karakalpakstan (634 UZS/m3 or US$ 0.25). The lowest water meter tariffs were found in the three Oblast centers
(473 UZS/m3 or US$ 0.19) and Tashkent (521 UZS/m3 or US$ 0.21). Regionally, there was significant disparity in water meter tariff
rates as these ranged from 271 UZS/m3 (or US$ 0.11) in our Fergana site to 634 UZS/m3 (or US$ 0.25) in our sample in South
Karakalpakstan.

118. Focus group discussions with consumers revealed there is some confusion about the potential cost-savings
associated with metering methods. The majority (almost two thirds) of surveyed households with normative water
billing did not want to change to a metered system. Water meters were least popular in the sampled Raion centers (only 17
percent preferred them there). Reasons for not wanting meters included: saving money (70 percent), not believing the tariff would
be fair for the level of service provided (24 percent) and ‘not needing to change’ (20 percent). Some focus group respondents in
rural areas revealed that connected rural households did not want meters as they felt that they would be charged more under a
metered system because of their garden / farming water use. For the approximately one third of respondents that wanted meters
(32 percent), almost all expected it would save them money (97 percent), and many also said it was because they did not trust the
normative tariff for the level of service provided (31 percent)29. A normative billing system may not be favourable for consumers
where service is poor, but utilities may prefer it. Normative billing provides little incentive for vodokanals to improve their service,
as consumers are charged the same bill even if no water is supplied.

“We leave the water running for 5 minutes before pouring it into the kettle. When the tap is first turned on, the water is yellow and has an
odor. After 5 minutes, the water is clear and odorless. We do not want to pay for the water that is too dirty to use.”- Fergana connected
oblast center Participant number 1

“If there is good pressure and the water flow is constant, meters will need to be installed. Otherwise people will use that water for watering
gardens and washing cars. It is necessary that users pay for those privileges.” Dustlik raion Center connected water utility worker (attended
a Focus Group)


NON-MONETARY COSTS
119. Focus group participants conveyed that water collection and treatment can impose a significant burden of time
and effort for both connected and unconnected households. According to our survey data, households that rely on natural
water bodies (about a quarter of all household and 70% of the bottom 40 percent in rural areas in our sample) and public water
taps (half of households in our three Raion centers) generally transport water over the greatest distances. Almost one fifth of those
for whom water from natural water bodies is an important source travel 500-1,000m each way. And 63 percent of users of public
taps live 50-1,000m away from them (Figure 12).

“It takes from morning until afternoon. We have to leave to collect water in the morning…. If the queue is large, we will sit there until
dinner. “- Dustlik unconnected rural area FGD Participant number 2

“During the cotton season, men and women both go to the fields to pick cotton. When they arrive home, there is no water in the house.
The women must then go in search of water.”- FGD Participant number 4




29 It should be noted that the government of Uzbekistan has raised the coefficient used for determining the fees of non-metered connections
to promote the installation of water meters by customers. Cabinet of Ministers Resolution of the Republic of Uzbekistan, №300 dated November
6, 2013, and №337 dated November 6, 2012.
                          4. HOUSEHOLD COSTS INCURRED FOR MEETING
   page 56                DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION NEEDS

 Figure 12. Distance to ponds, rivers and lakes and to public taps for those that rely on this source for at last part of
                                                     their needs.




                                n=43                                                                   n=32
                                             Source: Household survey conducted for this study

120. In some areas, time spent on water collection can impose significant opportunity costs on household members.
In Jizzak, some focus group participants stated that, on average, they could spend six hours per day walking two kilometers to the
public tap outlet, waiting in line, and then walking back with full containers. Even in networked households, the often inconsistent
and unpredictable supply of water necessitates adjustment of schedules and restricts some household members’ movements.
The whole ‘process’ (including settling and treatment) can take up to a day in some reported cases. This impacts some household
members’ opportunities for employment, education and leisure.

“I am a seamstress. And instead of stitching that is necessary to carry out the order, I spend time fetching water and I waste time. I have
even had to postpone orders and customers are dissatisfied.” - Dustlik city unconnected FGD Participant number 4

“The hours we spend collecting water we could spend working in the garden, cooking, educating the children. Instead when the children
come home from school, we go with them directly to collect water. We spend a lot of time collecting water.” - Dustlik city unconnected
FGD Participant number 5

121. 16 percent of surveyed unconnected households and 9 percent of surveyed connected households claimed to
have suffered negative health impacts because of poor WSS conditions. Among these, more than half mentioned
gastrointestinal diseases and almost a quarter reported urinogenital - kidney stone diseases. Participants in focuas group
discussions held in South Karakalpakstan in particular mentioned kidney stones and salt deposits in the joints purportedly due to
drinking poor quality water. Some residents stated that such diseases have already become prevalent in school age children these
days and that parents find it difficult to ensure children only drink water after it has been boiled.

“Doctors from the district center periodically conduct medical examinations of children in schools and kindergartens. These medical
examinations revealed many cases of goiters in children. And doctors say that this is due to the fact that the composition of the water
we use to drink does not contain enough iodine. Previously goiters in children were very rare. But over the last 5-10 years, the number has
increased dramatically.” - Tashlak unconnected rural FGD Participant number

“You just have to go to the hospital to see how many patients there are with water-related illnesses, people with kidney stones, salt deposits
in the joints.” - Nukus connected oblast center FGD Participant №7

122. Medical bills for acute and chronic illnesses attributed to WSS conditions were reported to be significant in some
cases and sometimes caused constituted ongoing costs for households. Study respondents reported the approximate
cost of treatment for some WSS-related health conditions to be: 700,000 UZS (US$ 230-280) for treatment of gall stones; 600,000-
800,000 UZS (US$ 200-320) for treatment of jaundice; 400,000-500,000 UZS (US$ 133-200) for surgery to remove kidney stones. In
addition to high medical treatment costs, focus group participants reported lost incomes due to illness or caring for ill household
members. Additionally, many households cannot afford such expenses, so instead simply endure their illness.
                                                                                                                                                   page 57



“The ongoing costs of medical care for people ill from water-related diseases must be taken into account. Often they require special diets –
fresh fruit in the winter, which is hard to get. Therefore, when a child is ill, parents are forced to buy expensive products. “- FGD Participant
number 9.

123. Poor wastewater management, including leaking sewage pipes, constitute a serious health risk, according to
focus group participants. Unattended sewage leaks were said to lead to sewage pooling on the surface, as well as infiltration
of sewage into local groundwater systems used for drinking water and deteriorated potable water pipes30. Particularly during
summer, it was reported that there are many insects around pit latrines, which can breed and spread infection. Furthermore,
household members who clean their own septic tanks or earthen pits themselves often report getting ill from it. Many cases of
chronic disease/illness are attributed to poor WSS conditions31.

“Water discharging from the toilet is clogged up in the basement. It produces a disgusting smell and there are many flies around.” - Jizzak
city connected FGD Participant number 4

“My husband and son clean our septic tank. My son always gets nausea. There were times when they get malaise and vomiting.” - Beruni
rural unconnected FGD Participant number 5

                     Photo 10. Container and bucket for washing hands after toilet use, Dustlik rural area




124. Outdoor (pit latrine) toilets reportedly present challenges to some household members. Focus groups suggested
that during summer pit latrine toilets can be odorous and attract insects that can harbor and transmit disease. Focus groups also
suggested that during winter the often harsh weather conditions, longer hours of darkness (and associated increased security
risk for users of toilets in public locations) discourage people from using outdoor toilet facilities. Many focus group participants
reported getting colds from outside toilet use and some stated that on occasions certain household members, such as the
elderly or children, would use a bucket or other receptacle inside the house rather than use the outdoor toilet facility. 82 percent
of surveyed households, where a pit latrine is the only formal toileting option, confirmed that elderly, children and disabled
household members find it difficult to venture outside to the pit latrine (particularly unaccompanied) and may be physically
unable to use a ‘squat’ toilet.

“None of us have well-maintained toilets. Although our toilets have walls and are made of concrete, there is still the smell, and during the winter they are
very cold. And in addition we still have to deal with constantly cleaning them out. It would be nice if we had a sewer.” - Dustlik raion center connected
FGD, Participant number 7

“When relatives and friends come to visit, we are very ashamed to take them to our pit toilet. It is dirty, difficult to use and away from the house.” - Tashlak
raion center unconnected FGD Participant number 9

30 Medecins Sans Frontieres (nd) reports that leaks and water loss through the conveyance and distribution systems diminish the quantity of
water available for consumption. Authors such as Whittington (2002) report waterborne diseases being caused by contaminated groundwater
leaking into piped distribution systems.
31 Other studies in Uzbekistan have found that run-down and leaking distribution pipes can indeed be a primary source of diarrheal pathogens
in water (Semenza et al 1998).
                         4. HOUSEHOLD COSTS INCURRED FOR MEETING
   page 58               DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION NEEDS

125. Nearly a quarter (23 percent) of surveyed connected households surveyed had witnessed local conflicts
regarding WSS issues. Some illegal connections were also said to exist. Most disputes concerned problems with WSS
service delivery (77 percent), quality of service from the vodokanal (71 percent) and poor infrastructure / facilities (62 percent).
Disputes over payments were insignificant (3 percent)32. Consumers also reported that queuing for water at public sources can
be a source of tension, particularly when queues can include up to 150 people. Some focus groups attribute reductions in water
pressure in some networked systems to illegal connections. Vodokanal staff reported conducting random inspections to monitor
appropriate use of networked water (especially related to garden watering) and levying fines.

“Those who live in apartments do not use water for irrigation. And those who live in detached houses sometimes illegally install water
pumps to water their gardens. Because of this, the water in the pipes stops flowing. So we have to go and take water from the hand
pump.” - Beruni connected district city FGD Participant number 5


GENDER DIFFERENCES
126. Survey data show that adult females overwhelmingly bear the burden of household chores connected with
water collection and use. 85 percent of surveyed unconnected households reported that adult females typically participate
in collecting water, compared to 57 percent of adult males, 17 percent of males under 18 years of age and 9 percent of females
under 18 years. Many women in focus groups report lower back pain from repetitive lifting and moving heavy containers. In 98
percent of the households in our survey, it is adult females who are engaged in cooking, washing dishes, and doing laundry.
Focus groups suggest that women are generally responsible for household water treatment as well.

“All the housework is done by women. They also look after the cattle. Therefore, many of their tasks create back pain. For those who do not
have equipment, they carry water in buckets by hand over long distances.” – Beruni unconnected rural FGD participant number 13

         Photo 11. Women are most often responsible for water collection, storage and use, Dustlik rural area




127. A fifth of surveyed women feel unsafe using the sanitation facilities available to them. Focus groups suggest that
in cases where toilet facilities are located in public areas (some households in our survey sample in raion centers in Jizzak and
Fergana use such facilities), there are higher safety / security concerns relative to private toilets. On average, public toilets are
located at a distance of 30-60 meters from the house, but there are also some households for which the toilets are located at a
distance of 500 meters.




32 Households were allowed to give multiple responses, thus totals add up to more then 100 percent.
                                                                                                                                page 59



“We are already accustomed to this [toilet on the street]. This has been the way since our ancestors. But, of course, we would also like to
have those same amenities as in Tashkent and other cities. But Allah can help us, and with time we will get the same facilities.” - Beruni
unconnected rural FGD Participant number 7

128. Among unconnected households, many survey respondents felt that a household connection to networked WSS
would benefit women in particular. 61 percent of respondents felt that a household water connection would improve the
lives of both males and female equally. 39 percent felt that it would improve the lives of women more33.




33 A survey reported in ADB (2013) in the Fergana Valley found that women and girls bathe less frequently when water in the household is
limited.
WILLINGNESS TO
PAY FOR IMPROVED
SERVICES

5.
                           5. WILLINGNESS TO PAY
   page 62                 FOR IMPROVED SERVICES

129. The previous chapter presented the expenditures households in our sample incur for meeting their WSS needs and
summarized their views on billing and payments systems as well as metering. The chapter also discussed health impacts of the
poor service conditions and how overall impacts differed between men and women. It was concluded that expenditure burdens
are highest for those that are not connected to a piped water supply system given their high coping costs. Health impacts
were claimed by many respondents to be considerable. This chapter will look at how much households are willing to pay to be
connected to a piped system and receive high quality drinking water supply services.

130. Surveyed consumers are already demonstrating their willingness to pay for improvement of their WSS situation
via various independently initiated improvements, as revealed in focus group discussions. Actions taken independently
by consumers to improve their WSS service have included replacement of internal pipework within dwellings and improvement
of local off-premise supply systems. Most of these pro-active measures have required direct monetary and (often) labor input
from residents themselves. Also, some households without functioning central WSS services have experienced such services
before and understand how beneficial a resumed connection would be.

131. Nearly all unconnected households (86 percent) in our sample reported they were willing to pay for connection
to a high quality water supply and sanitation system that provides good quality piped water in sufficient amounts
for 24 hours per day. The answer was positive among both low-income and middle/high-income households. The median
among those in bottom 40 percent of the income distribution was UZS 100,000 compared to UZS 200,000 for the top 60 percent.
This amounts to an average of 2.7 percent of total annual household expenditure that all unconnected households were wiling to
pay to connect to a well-functioning WSS service (Table 3 and Figure 13).

Table 3. Proportion of unconnected household willing to pay a particular amount to connect to a well-functioning
water supply and sanitation system

             Amount (UZS)                                   Percentage of respondents willing to pay amount (%)

                 50,000                                                             91
                 100,000                                                            79
                 200,000                                                            48
                 300,000                                                            29
                 500,000                                                            12
                 600,000                                                            4
Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=141)
                                                                                                                                  page 63



Figure 13. Demand curve for unconnected households willing to connect to a well-functioning WSS system, showing
           the proportion of households that are willing to pay a particular amount for being connected.




                                            Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=141)
Note: households were asked: ‘suppose that it would be possible to supply good quality piped water 24 hours per day in sufficient amounts to
meet all your drinking, service and sanitation needs, so that you would not have to use any other water sources, how much would you be willing
to pay to be connected to such a system’. Answers were obtained from 147 respondents.

132. Consumers surveyed for this study were asked how much they were willing to pay per month on a continuous
basis for a high quality drinking water and sanitation service. Nearly half (42%) indicated they would be prepared
to pay UZS 15,000 per month (close to what connected households currently pay), and about a quarter said they are
ready to pay UZS 20,000 (Table 4). This is somewhat higher than the amounts most households are currently paying for piped
water and sanitation, but lower than the actual costs they are incurring now to meet their WSS needs (such as water pumps, costs
for emptying septic tanks, etc.). Differences in willingness to pay per month between connected and unconnected households in
our sample were small (Figure 14). The mean willingness to pay was highest for unconnected households in South Karakalpakstan
(UZS 22,000 per month) but differences between the regional medians was small.

Table 4. Willingness to pay for high quality WSS service in UZ soum per month, connected and unconnected
households combined.

             Amount (UZS)                               Percentage of respondents willing to pay amount per month (%)

                  2,000                                                                   100
                  5,000                                                                    86
                  10,000                                                                   67
                  15,000                                                                   42
                  20,000                                                                   24
                  25,000                                                                   12
                  30,000                                                                   5
                  40,000                                                                   2
Source: Household survey conducted for this study (n=147)
                        5. WILLINGNESS TO PAY
   page 64              FOR IMPROVED SERVICES

Figure 14. Demand curve for a well-functioning WSS system, showing the proportion of households that are willing
to pay a particular monthly amount for a high quality service.




                                     Source : household survey conducted for this study (n=147)

133. Willingness to pay for ongoing water bills was highest among unconnected households in rural areas (UZS 14,000
per month) and lowest in Tashkent (UZS 3,500) (Figure 15). As our data suggest, unconnected households in rural areas
currently rely for a large part on poor quality river and pond water. They may therefore be most keen to obtain “Tashkent” quality
of WSS services. Currently, according to our data, unconnected households are incurring more than UZS 20,000 per month for
meeting their WSS service needs. Most surveyed connected households (82 percent) are also willing to pay for WSS improvements.
This is highest among surveyed connected households in rural areas (83 percent), Jizzak (75 percent) and Tashkent (73 percent).

   Figure 15. Median willingness to pay for high quality WSS services in UZ soum per month per location and for
                                     connected and unconnected households




                                     Source : household survey conducted for this study (n=147).
                                                                                                                                    page 65



134. The preferred method of payment (lump sum or instalments) for connection to a good quality WSS service varies
by wealth group and location type. 53 percent of households in the top 60 percent in our sample would be willing to pay for
WSS connection in a lump sum, compared to 44 percent of households in the bottom 40 percent. More than half of respondents
in South Karakalpakstan (65 percent) and Fergana (59 percent) would prefer to pay in a lump sum, while 73 percent of households
in Jizzak would prefer to pay via instalments. In Raion centers, most households would prefer to pay in a lump sum (65 percent)
but only 48 percent and 34 percent of households in Oblast centers and rural areas respectively prefer that method of payment.

135. Focus group participants in some areas agreed that tariffs are low but they are unhappy with rising tariffs and
are not willing to pay more when the quality of service from the vodokanal is so poor. Other focus group participants
acknowledged that there is a vicious cycle of low tariffs leading to insufficient means for water utilities to maintain and upgrade
WSS networks which in turn leads to poor service. However, some focus group and interview respondents want to see
improvements in vodokanal services before committing to increased tariffs.

“People will agree to a 100 UZS tariff increase. But if you raise the tariff to 250UZS, then people will start to make trouble. They will argue:
why such a sudden rise? “ – Fergana connected FGD Participant number 11
SERVICES IN PUBLIC
BUILDINGS

6.
                         6. SERVICES IN PUBLIC BUILDINGS
   page 68



136. The previous chapter looked at willingness to pay for being connected to a piped water supply system and receive a high
quality water supply service. It was found that many households in our sample outside Tashkent are willing to pay monthly fees
that are commensurate with higher water and sanitation tariffs, as these monthly costs tend to still be below the amount they
incur now for meeting their WSS needs. This chapter will look at the drinking water and sanitation conditions of public buildings
including school and clinics, using data gathered through interviews with key informants in each of the research sites. Two case
studies of WSS conditions in public building are presented, one on a clinic and one regarding a school.

137. Public buildings often face similar water supply and sewerage challenges as households. In some areas, water
sources are located outside public buildings and toilet facilities are without running water. Focus groups and household case
studies revealed that many children bring water bottles to school because of the lack of facilities on-site. ADB (2013) reports that
schools often do not have canteens because water supplies are inadequate and do not meet catering and sanitary standards.
Household case studies confirmed that school toilet facilities are often located away from the main building, and ADB (2013)
reports that (in their project areas) the average distance from school buildings to toilets is greater than 200 meters.

             Photo 12. (a) Water tap in school yard, Beruni city; (b) School toilet for teaching staff, Beruni city




138. Some public facilities, such as colleges, with large potable water demands have basic treatment systems on site.
In larger institutions where the quality of available drinking water is unreliable, specific treatment installations, such as large tanks
for boiling water, are used to provide potable water for students.

 Photo 13. (a) Tank for boiling water at a college, Jizzak city; (b) Buckets containing boiled water in a medical center




139. Poor water supply and sanitation conditions in public buildings may affect female workers and students the
most. ADB (2014) reports that it is women who often work in public institutions such as schools and clinics, where WSS facilities
tend to be poor. Focus groups (in line with ADB, 2013) reported that it is often female teachers and clinicians that are required to
take care of water deliveries for their schools. Also, IKS (2010) reports that latrines at schools are often unisex with no piped water
or hand washing facilities and such conditions may be linked to absenteeism among girls, particularly adolescents.
                                                                                                                            page 69



                                          Photo 14. Toilet facilities at a college, Jizzak city




140. Box 6 and 7 present case studies of public buildings and illustrate how public buildings (connected or unconnected) are
coping with their current WSS conditions.


  Box 6: Case study– Rural health clinic, Tashlak, Fergana Province




  The two-storey health clinic has both a hand pump (with an electric pump installed) located 50 meters from the main
  building and hence has a free water supply. The electric pump pumps water up into a water tower (capacity of 3 tons,
  supposedly sufficient for 2 days demand) which feeds water into the building. The water tower and its connections to the
  pump / medical clinic was funded by the Khokimyat. This system provides consistent pressure into the clinic tap outlets. The
  pump and water tower function well, except for approximately 2 months in winter when the water in the tank freezes. If the
  pump fails or there are electricity failures, then staff can use the hand pump.
  Water is used in the clinic to maintain sanitary standards. Handling and hand washing, tment rooms, washing floors, for
  drinking and watering the garden and flowers. Hot water supply is not available in the clinic, and when is obtained by boiling
  it in kettles / saucepans on a gas stove. Water is boiled for tea for patients to drink and there is a distillation machine on site
  to distill water for cleaning the medical equipment. Staff described the pumped water as being odorless and transparent
  but ‘hard’ and forming scum in kettles / cups. They notice saltiness and some particulates. Staff reported that digestive issues
  were common and that they attributed this to the water consumed. They thought a good quality central water supply system
  could help solve these problems.
  The water supply system is cheap to operate and maintain, with expenditure imited to buckets, hose connections, electric
  pump repairs and replacement of minor pipework. In comparison to electricity and gas, water supply is considerably
  cheaper. For all utilities, winter is the most problematic period for water supply (frozen water in water tower), electricity (more
  unpredictable cuts in service) and gas (pressure lowest in winter, meaning that the medical center uses coal as an alternative).
  A toilet located adjacent to the medical clinic building contains a septic tank. The nearest sewerage network is 4 kilometers
  away from the clinic. The toilet is treated with bleach to minimize odors and maintain hygienic conditions. A wash basin is
  located outside the toilet. Interviewed staff would like to be connected to a good quality central water supply and would
  accept the price charged by the vodokanal. They acknowledge that they are unable to resolve their problems and that they
  need to be addressed at the level of government.

  Source: field work conducted for this study
Box 7: Case study- School, Berunyi, Karakalpakstan




The school sources its water from an outdoor public tap located on a nearby street for most of the year. In winter, the
outdoor public water faucet freezes and the school instead sources its water from nearby households. For both sources, staff
(generally the school cleaners and maintenance staff ) carry buckets from the public tap / households to the school. The local
households are further away and this task takes about half an hour.
Interviewees regarded the water as odorless and generally clean, but reported a white precipitate forming at the base of
vessels after settling. It is boiled prior to use. Most children bring water from their homes to school in plastic bottles for their
own consumption.
Most water in the school is used to wash the floors of classrooms and hallways, tering plants in the school yard, and for
sanitation (filling of handbasins) and drinking purposes. The school contains a shower in the gym, but it is not used because
there is no centralized hot water system.
The building has no hot water supply, so water is heated on gas stoves in winter.
Open pits connected to septic tanks are used for toileting. The toilet is located outside the main building at a distance of
120-150 meters on the street near the main entrance of the school. Interviewees reported that in winter some girls feel
uncomfortable to go out to the toilet and all children risk getting colds. Hand washing stations outside the toilets are
manually filled by technical staff.
Annual costs for water and electricity are similar (~500-600,000 UZS) but gas is considerably more expensive (~4.5 million
UZS). The water bill is based on meters. Other water- related expenditures included containers for transport and storage.
Unpredictable electricity outages are common but gas supply is reportedly reliable.The interviewed staff would like the
school to be connected to the centralized water supply and sanitation system. The school would be prepared to pay double
the amount they currently pay for such a connection. This would enable hand basins to have flowing water, water for showers
and toilets indoors. The school cannot afford to change its system and awaits provision from the government.

Source: field work conducted for this study
BRIEF REVIEW OF
DRINKING WATER AND
SANITATION REFORM
IN EASTERN EUROPE
AND CENTRAL ASIA

7.
                          7. BRIEF REVIEW OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION
   page 72                REFORM IN EASTERN EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

This chapter provides a brief review of recent literature on lessons learned from international reform of the drinking water and
sanitation sector in Eastern Europe and Central Asia (ECA). It is presented in the form of three text boxes.The first one describes
the Soviet legacy of drinking water and sanitation systems in the region. This is followed by a second text box on the ‘low-level
equilibrium trap’ of the sector , followed by a third box that summarises approaches that have often been successfull and could be
scaled-up and replicated. This overview borrows from a OECD (2011) report. More detail is presented in Annex E.


  Box 8 – Soviet legacy of drinking water and sanitation systems

  The infrastructure built during the Soviet era was relatively reliable albeit capital intensive. This can be explained by the
  fact that, at the time, the benchmark water consumption (consumption norms) and the planning standards (including the
  spare capacity in the event that water consumption grows in the long-term) were set at an excessively high level (frugal
  water consumption was not encouraged at that time). During the Soviet period, water pricing was focused solely on the
  objective of poverty alleviation, seeing water as a human right and attempting to provide free service to everyone. Cost
  recovery objectives were ignored, meaning financial resources had to be obtained from other sectors of the economy. This
  created macroeconomic distortions as the economic system struggled to meet such unfunded liabilities. Today these bills are
  coming due in the form of run-down utilities. Also, because water was provided free it was not used efficiently by consumers.
  The water supply system was overly expensive because the public sector attempted to treat and deliver more water to
  households than they really wanted or were willing to pay for. Water utilities did not have their own revenue streams and
  could not obtain sufficient resources from higher levels of government, meaning that water distribution systems became
  unreliable.
  The end of the Soviet era led to substantial transfers of responsibilities to local governments in most countries and associated
  decentralization of water and sanitation services. This, in some cases, led to over-fragmentation of water and sanitation
  operators and created a number of challenges, such as inefficient scale of operations and difficulties to access financing –
  rural water services have particularly suffered from over-fragmentation. In many places, it was not possible to maintain access
  to water supply services, and some wastewater treatment facilities simply stopped operating. Inefficiency further increased
  because households left their taps open in the hope of collecting and storing water when it became available. So a policy
  of “free water” not only meant that the cost recovery and economic efficiency objectives were not met, but also that service
  quality itself declined.

  Source: Whittington (2003) & OECD (2011).



  Box 9. The ‘low-level equilibrium trap’ of the drinking water and sanitation sector.

  The literature describes this trap as being characterized by features such as political interference in service delivery,
  inadequate investment and reinvestment to expand and/or maintain the system, low tariffs insufficient to cover expenses
  (below the marginal cost of provision), low consumer expectations regarding service quality and low willingness to pay,
  non-payment by customers and low levels of enforcement by agencies, and deteriorating service quality linked in a vicious
  cycle This leads to systems needing to be funded out of national funds rather than user fees, or more likely not being funded
  at all, and hence becomes difficult to finance. This also effectively subsidizes households with access to water and prevents
  extension of services to unconnected households.

  Source: (Savedoff & Spiller 1999, Walker 1999, (Singh et al. 1993, Altaf et al. 1993, Spiller and Savedoff 1999 (in Davis & Whittington nd)),
  Herrera & Post 2014) (Walker 1999).
                                                                                                                                  page 73




Box 10. Approaches that have often been successfull and could be scaled-up and replicated (OECD 2011).

Improved enabling environments for private operator involvement has helped enhance the performance of water
utilities in Armenia, Kazakhstan, Russian Federation and Georgia. OECD (2011) reports that in the Russian Federation, private
operators have in many cases been ‘agents of positive change’ in the sector. However, authors such as Davis & Whittington (nd)
caution about relying too greatly on PSP to play a significant role in water sector reform and instead encourage transition economies
such as Uzbekistan to focus on creating adequate enabling environments before eliciting interest from private firms.
Drinking water and sanitation tariffs in the region are at or below 0.4 US$/m3 in seven of twelve ECA countries
– insufficient to cover O&M costs (OECD 2011). Revenues from water sales in Uzbekistan are among the lowest in the ECA
region and remain close to their 1990 levels.Uzbekistan has the lowest operating cost coverage ratio of the ECA countries – this is a
financially unstable situation.
Lessons learned show that ECA countries should support the emergence of utilities whose operations can be financed
by tariffs so that the governments can concentrate their support on capital investment and social protection. There
appears to be scope in many ECA countries to raise tariffs further, if service quality improves, and in conjunction with targeted
support for poorer sections of the population who would be adversely affected by such price increases. Analysis in Armenia showed
that a certain level of tariffs and collection rate would allow covering O&M costs of the service in urban areas after a transition period.
Additional analysis confirmed that this level of tariff was affordable for 90 percent of the population and helped design targeted
measures to support the lowest decile that could not afford paying their water bills as well as other essential goods and services.
A critical priority in ECA countries consists of maintaining, renovating and in some cases, down-sizing infrastructure
(when oversized assets are expensive to operate). OECD analysis found that in the ECA region, even if tariffs were increased up
to an average of 5 percent of household income user charges would only generate about 50 percent of cash flow needs for
the foreseeable future, going up to 95 percent by 2028. Therefore, prioritization of investments is recommended, starting with
investments to reduce water related morbidity and halt the deterioration of existing infrastructure. Prioritizing investments in service
levels and regions that generate the highest benefits at least cost (e.g. improved sanitation in rural areas) (OECD 2011) may be
preferential.
The share of households in the ECA region with water meters is relatively low. Meters are most common in Moldova and
Belarus (over 90 and 80 percent respectively) and just over 30 percent in Uzbekistan. Installing meters can be a costly and technically
challenging undertaking (Davis & Whittington nd). Armenia has taken drastic actions to increase water metering. To that end, a
water use metering strategy was designed and implemented. This helped reduce water consumption, water leaks, production
costs, and increase collection rate.
To date, much international assistance and public domestic spending has been focused on large investments in major
centers whereas many acute problems are in smaller centers and rural areas. Since the early 1990s, the situation in rural
areas has improved remarkably in countries such as Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia, but has deteriorated in Uzbekistan.
While many of the ECA governments have been slow to react to the rural water situation, some such as the Kyrgyz
Republic have developed a rural water sector policy. Also, Armenia initiated a national policy dialogue on Financing Rural
Water Supply which helped identify realistic policy objectives for minimal water supply standards for rural populations, which are
being incorporated in the legislative framework.
Decentralization has occurred in ECA countries to varying degrees and with varying levels of success. Box E2 in
Annex E outlines common challenges encountered by decentralized WSS systems in ECA countries based on an ssessment
by OECD / EAP Task Force (2009). In some countries, decentralization has led to over-fragmentation with negative
impacts, as utilities may be too small to operate, maintain and finance infrastructure needs. In response, some
countries have aggregated neighboring water utilities or created regional companies or even national companies. Several
countries have commenced this reform, but Uzbekistan is among the countries that remain tied to the decentralized
approach. In particular, Armenia, Georgia, the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, and Ukraine have moved towards some aggregation
of the municipal water sector with the objectives of simplifying tariff regulation, attracting more finance for investment
into the sector, generating economies of scale, and encouraging cross-subsidization of utilities. Regional operators are
not necessarily the optimal option. Economies of scale and scope have to be considered for a country like Uzbekistan.

Source: OECD (2011), Ten Years of Water Sector Reform in Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/9789264118430-en
CONCLUSION AND
RECOMMENDATIONS

8.
                        8. CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
   page 76



141. This final chapter summarizes key conclusions from the Social Impact Assessment of current drinking water and sanitation
service conditions in Uzbekistan. It also offers recommendations for re-orienting investment strategies in the WSS sector, sector
financing and tariff reform. These can hopefully provide an input into discussions around WSS strategy development in Uzbekistan.

142. Our findings suggest that there are serious and widespread drinking water and sanitation service inadequacies
outside Tashkent. Large inequalities in service conditions and WSS expenditure burdens were witnessed in our
sample. According to official data only about half of households in the country have access to piped water in their homes or yard.
We find that many of these households only receive water from these pipes for short periods per day, and experience pressure
and water quality problems. As a consequence many of them also rely on other water sources, like pumps in their yards, and open
water, just like households who are not connected.

143. Rural households and those with low-incomes in particular experience hardship conditions with large amounts of
them using open water sources for their drinking water needs. In Raion centers households often rely on public standpipes
which suffer from similar irregular supply and pressure and quality problems as the private pipes. The poorest 40 percent of the
income distribution in our sample experience conditions that are much worse than the top 60 percent. Women bear a higher
burden than men given that they are responsible for water collection. This can be a burden in particular for women in households
relying on public standpipes for their water supply as these often face long transport and waiting times.

144. Data gathered from the selected sites show that sanitation conditions are equally problematic if not worse,
suggesting public health is at risk. Only one fifth of households in our sample had a toilet inside their home. And none of the
households in Raion centers and rural areas had a connection to a functioning sewerage network. Surveyed households reported
elderly, children and disabled households find it difficult to venture outside to the put latrine, especially at night and in winter.
Most households rely on a pit latrine with an earthen tank risking leakages of sewerage to ground water. This constitutes a health
hazard for the many households who use drinking water from low cost shallow pumps in their yards. Serious health impacts of
poor WSS conditions were reported even if many households claim they treat or boil their water.

145. Households in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution witness larger expenditure burdens for meeting
their WSS service needs than the top 60 percent. Households who receive the best WSS services (e.g. Tashkent residents)
currently incur WSS costs that are much lower than those that receive the worst conditions Expenditure burdens are especially
high for unconnected households in raion centers and oblast centers. That is because their overall expenditures are lower and
many of them incur high coping costs for meeting their WSS needs including water pumps, water containers, water treatment
chemicals, boiling water and costs for digging and emptying pit latrines.

146. There are serious performance problems of utility firms and many were said to be unable to conduct repairs.
Water utilities in surveyed areas tend to be slow to respond to customer complaints, if at all. Vodokanal officials claim that they are
severely indebted as low tariffs and technical and commercial losses lead to low cost recovery. Many vodokanals cannot afford
even basic operating expenses. In addition, frequent power cuts are said to damage water pumps. In response, many residents
have started to come together and initiate own repairs of WSS systems – often together with the Mahalla. Given that this was said
to often be done without adequate technical supervision, WSS systems can become even more deteriorated.

147. Respondents of our study indicated a willingness to pay higher monthly fees than they currently do for a
continuous supply of quality water. More than half of the poorest 40 percent of unconnected households are willing to
pay UZS 100k to connect to a networked system. This figure is 200k for the top 60 percent. The median willingness to pay in
terms of for recurrent costs for high quality WS services is UZS 14k per month for connected households and rural unconnected
households. But households are only prepared to pay these amounts when the service improves.

148. Schools were said to often lack reliable drinking water supply and sanitation conditions. This affects in particular
female students as latrines are often unisex with no piped water or hand washing facilities which can lead to girls, in particular
adolescents, being absent from schools.

149. The quantitative findings of this report are only approximate in nature, given the fairly small sample of 300
respondants that they is based on. To obtain more robust statistics on the state of service conditions of drinking water and
sanitation conditions in Uzbekistan a more comprehensive survey based on an expanded sample of housheolds across the
country would be needed.
                                                                                                                         page 77



Recommendations

150. Installing water meters for consumers is a priority as it is likely to reduce wasteful consumption and thus help avert
problems with low pressure, especially in summer. It will also provide incentives for vodokanals to improve their service, as
consumers will only pay for the water they actually receive and consume. Our findings suggest that in many cases it will also
reduce household water bills. Promoting water metering is already a government policy. However, it is important to improve
communications on the benefits of metering and also to simplify bills to make it clearer for consumers what they pay for. Equal
treatment of all households in the enforcement of payment of bills should receive more attention. Where individual metering is
too expensive, water meters could be installed in the stairwells of apartment blocks. Metering groups of households could be an
alternative to household-level metering, requiring a much smaller investment.

151. Informing consumers in time about interruptions. To address the unpredictability of supply through piped drinking
water systems, there is a need for drinking water utilities to inform consumers in time about the water supply schedule and when
interruptions can be expected. This is especially important for public taps as many households not connected to a supply system
reply on this source, especially those in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution.

152. Utilities should become more responsive to consumer complaints. It is important that the drinking water and
sanitation Utilities become more responsive to consumer complaints about broken WSS infrastructure. Resources including staff
should be made available for this. Water utilities should provide technical supervision of consumers and mahallas – sometimes
together with private entrepreneurs – to conduct their own repairs on WSS systems. Regulations that facilitate the engagement
of private parties in repairs of WSS infrastructure should be prepared. This could encourage households with high demand for
improved water supply to organize and seek solutions to their water supply problems. Donors, perhaps in collaboration with local
NGOs, could play an important role in organizing a “demand-responsive” program, including the dissemination of information
to neighborhoods about the types of service improvements that are technically possible and the process by which households
could obtain them.

153. Investigate and address serious drinking water quality problems where these are reported. Information gathered
from many consumers for this study suggest that there are severe water quality problems from piped systems and from
pumped groundwater outside Tashkent. This suggests that mechanisms for consumers to complain about water quality should
be improved and that more regular and widespread quality tests of piped water and ground water should be conducted to
investigate causes of contamination. Findings also suggest that regulations for preventing contamination of ground water by pit
latrines should be strengthened and enforced. In areas where quality cannot be easily improved it will be important to provide
residents with access to affordable home water treatment methods and information on water water-borne diseases and hygiene.

154. Improve functioning of public taps and make their billing systems more transparent. Public taps are an important
source of drinking water for those that are not connected to a properly functioning water supply system and cannot afford
bottled water. Many of them rely on rivers and lakes if public taps break down or are absent. Therefore, priority should be given to
improving the functioning of public taps and ensure its water meets quality standards and its supply is reliable. The study findings
also indicate that rules around payment for public taps should be clarified to make sure that only households that are likely to
make use of these taps are charged.

155. Improve accountability to consumers of Vodokanals and strengthen feedback from WSS consumers to national
and sub-national WSS decision makers and program providers. In order to design programs and policies that are based on the
reality of conditions in the field, it is important to put in place a high quality feedback mechanism that collects information from
consumers on their experiences and WSS service quality conditions. Such a mechanism could include a community monitoring
system with support of local government to notify vodokanals of system repair needs and increase accountability of the vodokanal
of their services. The participation of women in such community water management activities should be ensured and their role
in water consumer groups and in positions in vodokanals and khokimyats should be strengthened. Women bear the greatest
burden for poorly functioning WSS systems and should be included in the development of solutions.

156. Reconsider the currently frozen tariff structure. The study finds that those households who receive the best WSS services
(e.g. Tashkent residents) currently incur WSS costs that are much lower than those that experience the worst WSS conditions.
Respondents of our study indicated a willingness to pay higher monthly fees than they currently do, on the condition that
services improve. There is also a strong willingness to pay by many households - that currently incur high coping costs for meeting
their WSS needs - to connect to a well- functioning WSS system. Our findings therefore suggest that there are opportunities to
reconsider the currently frozen tariff structure. A mechanism should be considered that raises fees for those that currently receive
high quality water and re-allocates these resources to provide services to those areas where households currently incur high
private costs for meeting their WSS needs. Communication campaign should be conducted and agreements should be reached
with consumer representatives on a ‘compact’ where tariffs are gradually raised while service quality is improved. Greater flexibility
in payment schedules maybe needed, especially in rural areas where incomes are irregular and sometimes in-kind.

157. Protect those that cannot afford higher fees. While there are strong indications that households are willing to pay higher
WSS fees provided WSS service conditions improve, our findings also suggest that some households may not be able to pay higher
fees. Any effort to raise fees for high quality WSS services should therefore go hand in hand with well-targeted social transfers to
those that may not be able to afford those. The introduction of block tariffs to protect low-volume consumers (assumed to be the
poorest) should also be considered in areas where advanced meters have been installed.

158. Prioritize investment in expanding networked drinking water connections to households that are currently
unconnected and incur high costs for meeting their WSS needs tariffs. This includes in particular households in Raion
centers where expenditure burdens seem particularly high, and rural areas where a large proportion of households rely on
open water sources for their drinking water and sanitation needs. There is also a need to improve service quality to connected
households and invest in upgrading existing WSS infrastructure.

159. Subsidize up-front connection costs rather than water tariffs. Connection subsidies will be important for connecting
those in that currently do not have a networked tap inside their home or yard and that are in the bottom 40 percent of the income
distribution. Many of them currently use open water sources and may not be able to afford upfront payments for a connection.
Even if poor households can only afford to use small amounts of water if tariffs are no longer subsidized, when they are connected
to a reliable supply of water they will have ready access to a convenient source.

160. Liaise with WSS sector counterparts in the region to learn from their experiences in reforming the WSS sector. As
referred to in Chapter 7 and Annex E there is considerable experience with reforming the WSS sector in some of the former Soviet
countries such as Armenia, Georgia, Kyrgyz republic and also in Russia. The Uzbekistan government and utility company could
visit their counterparts in some of these countries to learn from their reforms and build on their experiences. The World Bank in
collaboration with other international financial institutions and donors could be approached for supporting such ‘south-south’
learning.

161. Put in place regular high quality household expenditure surveys that include a utility services module that
collects detailed information on quality of utility service conditions and household expenditures on meeting
drinking water, sanitation and energy needs. As said, the quantitative findings of this report are only approximate in nature
and to obtain more robust statistics on the state of service conditions of drinking water and sanitation and other utility service
conditions in Uzbekistan a more comprehensive survey based on an expanded sample of households across the country would
be needed. Such a survey could help monitor the new sustainable development goals (SDGs) which in addition to ‘access’ to
WSS services also monitor the quality and reliability of WSS and other utility services. Such a household survey would idealy be
conducted on a regular basis by the national statistical office of Uzbekistan.
This would help establish a database of household consumption expenditures as well as expenditures on meeting WSS service
needs (and other utility costs). This is essential for conducting ex-ante assessments of the impacts of any change in utility tariffs on
different wealth groups. Micro data should be disseminated to policy researchers for advanced analysis.
REFERENCES
                          REFERENCES
   page 80



ADB (Asian Development Bank), March 2012, Developing of Strategy, Road Map and Investment Program for the WSS Sector of the
Republic of Uzbekistan till 2020, ADB-0131-UZB, Synthesis, Draft Final Report, March 2012, Egis Bceom International.

ADB, July 2013, A Story within a Story, Gender and Water in Uzbekistan, Asian Development Bank Publication Stock No. ARM135374-3
July 2013.

ADB, 2014, Uzbekistan Country Gender Assessment, Gender and Development / Central and West Asia / 2014.

Briscoe, J., 1999, The Changing Face of Water Infrastructure Financing in Developing Countries, International Journal of Water
Resources Development, 15(3), pp.301–308.

Damme, H., Hans M.G. & White, A., 1984, Technology Choices for the Decade, In Water and Sanitation. Academic Press, pp. 151–172.

Davis, J. & Whittington, D., 2004, Challenges for water sector reform in transition economies, Water Policy 6 (2004) 381-395.

EAP Task Force, June 2011, Water Utility Performance Indicator Database, In OECD 2011.

Fankhauser, S. & Tepic, S. 2005, Can poor consumers pay for energy and water? An affordability analysis for transition countries,
European Bank for Reconstruction & Development Working paper No. 92 Prepared in May 2005, London UK.

Fonseca, C., 2014, Affordability of WASH services: rules of thumb and why it’s difficult to measure, Published on: 27/06/2014, IRC, www.
ircwash.org/blog/affordability-wash-services-rules-thumb-and-why-it’s-difficult-measure.

GoU, 2010, Presidential Decree No. PP-1446 On the Acceleration of Development of Infrastructure, Transport, and Communication
Construction in the Years 2011–2015. 21 December, 2010.

Hutton, G., 2012, Monitoring “Affordability” of water and sanitation services after 2015: Review of global indicator options , A paper
submitted to the United Nations Office of the High Commission for Human Rights , 20th March 2012 , Revised Draft

IKS (Islohotkonsaltservis Group), 2010, Water Supply and Sanitation Services Investment: Tranche 2. Poverty and social assessment.
Tashkent: ADB.

Institute for Social Research (ISR), 2011, Results of Sociologic Survey. Second inception report. Tashkent (TA 7671-UZB). p. 38.
Householdswere surveyed in the Navoi, Fergana, and Kashkadarya regions.

Kudat, A., Ozbilgin, B., Zholdasov, A. & Ilkhamov, A., August 15th 1996, Salinity Taste Tolerance Assessment, Uzbekistan: Water Supply,
Sanitation and Health Project, Prepared by The Uzbek Social Science Network.

Mcphail, A.A., 1993. The “Five Percent Rule” For Improved Water Service : Can Households Afford More?, World Development, 21(6),
pp.963–973.

Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF), nd, KARAKALPAKSTAN: A POPULATION IN DANGER, The impact of the Aral Sea disaster and a
worsening economic climate on the health and wellbeing of the people of Karakalpakstan, Médecins Sans Frontières, Tashkent,
Uzbekistan

OECD (2011), Ten Years of Water Sector Reform in Eastern Europe, Caucasus and Central Asia, OECD Publishing. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/9789264118430-en

Prüss-Üstün A., Bos R., Gore F. & Bartram J., 2008, Safer water, better health: costs, benefits and sustainability of interventions to protect
and promote health. Geneva, World Health Organization. Social Center Tahlil, 2009, Research conducted by the Social Center Tahlil
in the towns of Galaasiya (Bukhara region) and Karmana (Navoi region) and in the city of Termez in 2009, in ADB 2013.

Saunders, R. J. & and Warford, J.J., 1976. Village Water Supply: Economics and Policy in the Developing World. A World Bank Research
Publication. Baltimore, MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press.

Small, I., Falzon, D., Van der Meer, J.B.W. & Ford, N., 2003, Safe water for the Aral Sea Area, Could it get any worse?, European Journal of
Public Health 2003; 13: 87–89.

Smets, H. Quantifying the affordability standard, in The Human Right to Water: Theory, Practice and Prospects. 2012. Cambridge
University Press.
                                                                                                                             page 81



SSCUZ (State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Uzbekistan), 2006, Uzbekistan Monitoring the Situation of Children and
Women, Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2006, State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Uzbekistan, UNICEF, UNFPA

Waughray, D. & Moran, D., 2003, Cost Recovery in Water and Sanitation Projects, Volume 2 : Annexes to Main Report. Available at:
http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/PDF/Outputs/R7834annexes.pdf.

Whittington, D., August 2002, Municipal Water Pricing and Tariff Design: A Reform Agenda for Cities in Developing Countries, Sustainable
Development, Issue Brief 02– 29.

Whittington & Hanemann (2006), The Economic Costs and Benefits of Investments in Municipal Water and Sanitation Infrastructure:
A Global Perspective, Department of Agricultural & Resource Economics, UCB, CUDARE Working Papers, University of California,
Berkeley, Year 2006 Paper 1027.

WHO, 2012, GLAAS 2012 Report, UN-Water Global Analysis and Assessment of Sanitation and Drinking-Water, The Challenge of
Extending and Sustaining Services.

WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme, 2013, Progress on Sanitation and Drinking Water – 2013 Update.

WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme, 2006, Meeting the MDG Drinking Water and Sanitation target, The urban and rural
challenge of the decade.
ANNEXES
                       ANNEX A. STAKEHOLDER MAP & STAKEHOLDER
   page 84             ROLES IN THE UZBEKISTAN’S WSS SECTOR

ANNEX A. STAKEHOLDER MAP & STAKEHOLDER ROLES IN THE
UZBEKISTAN’S WSS SECTOR




Government Administration
Cabinet of Ministers
The Cabinet of Ministers plays a major role and is responsible for the approval of relevant documents, for the supervision of
UCSA and the Oblast administrations. Its mandate includes the development of regional economies and the improvement of
living standards. It is the executive body of the Government of Uzbekistan and has the overall responsibility for monitoring the
effectiveness of the economy and social spheres, including communal services and it controls the activities of all ministries,
government and semi-government organizations including UCSA.

Regional Administration
Each Oblast is headed by a governor (Khokim) who represents the Government at the Oblast level. The Khokim is appointed
or dismissed by the President of Uzbekistan and confirmed by the Counsel of Peoples’ Deputies of the respective Oblast. The
executive body at the regional level is the Oblast Khokimyats comprising the Khokimyat apparatus and ministry line departments.
The Khokimyat structure includes the Khokim and four deputies: Agriculture and Water Resources; Construction, Communication
and Communal Services; Economy and Social Issues; and Women. Usually the first deputy Khokim represents the main economic
sector / activity of the Oblast.
                                                                                                                          page 85




District Administration
The district Khokimyat is headed by a Khokim who reports to the Oblast Khokimyat. The Khokimyat has a leading role in the public
administration of the country. Approval, support and participation of the district Khokimyat is important for every development
activity in the respective Raion. The Raion Khokimyat is appointed and dismissed by the Oblast Khokim and confirmed formally
by the appropriate Council of Peoples’ Deputies. The apparatus structure of each district consists of district Khokim, 3 deputy
Khokims (economic issues, spirituality and enlightenment and women’s issues); the main specialists, organizational and control
group and chancellery.

City Administration
The role of the city Khokimyat is the public administration body in the country with a role similar to the role of the Raion
Khokimyat, to which the city Khokimyat is subordinated. The head of the city Khokimyat is the Khokim who is the highest official
on the territory. City Khokimyats usually include several urban mahallas.

Local level Administration
Mahalla Committee
The mahalla committee is the lowest organ of local self-government and the one linked directly to households. They affect all
aspects of the social life of local community members and bring residents together, helping to solve their problems. Mahallas act
as intermediaries between public authorities and residents. The committee is made up of four members: the chairperson who is
elected by the mahalla households for 2.5 years, the secretary who is selected by the chairperson, the ‘posbon’ who is responsible
for security and is appointed by the district Department of the Interior, and the women’s advisor who is nominated by the District
Women’s Committee. The mahalla committee is directly accountable to the district Khokimyat. In urban-type settlements, the
mahalla committee is supported by volunteers who have been selected by the local people jointly with the mahalla committee.
In each mahalla committee, several sub-committees may be established to support the work of the mahalla committee, such as
for youth, crime prevention, municipal / land improvement etc. In practice, committees are established based on the actual needs
and priorities of the respective mahalla and usually deal with the resolution of family conflict, pension distribution, resolving
women’s issues, organizing weddings, funerals and other social events. Specific to WSS matters, they can assist vodokanals in
recovering payments for services (including those in arrears), promote efficient water use and in principle should notify residents
of any formal changes in utility (water, gas, electricity) schedules. Mahallas may also provide financial assistance to low-income
families to help them pay for utility services. In some areas (e.g. Beruni and Dustlik), mahalla committees were also reportedly
trying to help raise funds and coordinate improvements in the delivery of WSS services.

Home Owners Association (HOA)/ Shirkats
The HOA / shirkat coordinates activities for a residential building. Residents often refer issues with building conditions to the HOA
(which they sometimes call a ‘shirkat’, although this is generally a term applied to agricultural cooperatives) if they cannot solve
problem themselves. While HOAs have responsibility for building level issues, they do not have any particular capacity related to
solving WSS problems.

Water supply
Uzbekistan Communal Services Agency (UCSA) (Uzkommunxizmat)
UCSA emerged from the dismantling of the former Ministry of Communal Services and has the overall task of improving water
supply services in the country. Its main goal is to set up financially viable urban and district water supply and communal services.
The Cabinet of Ministers nominates UCSA’s Director General and the First Deputy Director General. UCSA’s main tasks include
providing regulatory advice to support reforms in the communal services sector; monitoring the compliance of local authorities
and commercial entities with sector policies, and attracting foreign investment into the water supply and sanitation sector. UCSA,
as the executing agency of the Program, is a key stakeholder and has a primary interest as a specialized Government authority
responsible for the development and implementation of the water supply policy. The role of UCSA will be a leading one in
planning, implementation and monitoring of the Program at all stages.

Oblast Vodokanal
The Vodokanals are the service provider for drinking water responsible for the construction, operation and maintenance of the
water supply to ensure an uninterrupted supply of clean water to clients in the Oblast. The Oblast Vodokanal coordinates and
monitors the activities of the district Vodokanals within the Oblast. The district Vodokanals report to the Oblast Vodokanals and
                         ANNEX A. STAKEHOLDER MAP & STAKEHOLDER
   page 86               ROLES IN THE UZBEKISTAN’S WSS SECTOR

submit periodic financial and operational reports such as income statements, cash flow, balance sheet as well as production and
consumption data. The Oblast Vodokanal consolidates these reports for submission to the Oblast Khokimyat.

District Center Vodokanal
The district center Vodokanal operates and maintains the water supply system in the district centers and the adjacent settlements.
Its activities are coordinated by the Oblast Vodokanal. The district center Vodokanal submits monthly and annual reports to the
Oblast Vodokanal. The district center Vodokanal is fully responsible for the provision of clean drinking water to all clients on its
territory. It is also responsible for addressing and responding to issues raised by clients and their representatives and has the
right to collect water fees for providing water as per contracts with its clients. Activities include the operation of the water supply
systems and the maintenance of the water pipe connections. They must also resolve situations of conflict regarding water supply
and payments.

Directorate of Interregional Trunk Mains – DITM (under UCSA)
The responsibility for construction, operation and maintenance of interregional water transmission pipelines lies with the
Directorate of Interregional Trunk Mains. These mains distribute water to urban centers, which are responsible for operating the
local distribution networks. The DITM has also established regional water supply systems, which distribute water and collect fees
from clients.

Tarrifs
Ministry of Finance and its regional representatives
OECD (2011) reports that the state adjusts the price of water services delivered by natural monopolies. The State Committee on
De-monopolisation, Competition and Business Support, jointly with the Ministry of Finance, supervise the activities conducted
by natural monopolies. The Ministry of Finance is under the supervision of the Cabinet of Ministers and delegates the right to
set utility tariffs (including water supply) and their threshold levels to financial departments of regional kkhokimyats. The water
tariffs are often raised incrementally. There are several areas of interest for the MoF in the program including facilitating regional
development through new investments, setting up tariffs at cost-recovery levels and supporting a transparent and accountable
system of financial management.

Quality

Ministry of Health
MOH is under the supervision of the Cabinet of Ministers and is responsible for implementing government policy related to
improving the health of the population and the development of sanitation norms and rules as well as the monitoring of controls.
MOH is play an important role at local levels in developing and implementing the Sanitation and Hygiene Promotion Program to
reduce the incidence of water-borne disease especially in children.
State Sanitary and Epidemiology Inspectorate (SSEI)
The SSEI is chaired by the chief state Sanitary Doctor who is equivalent to a Deputy Minister of Health. The SSEI provides the
procedural guidelines and supervision of the Sanitary Epidemiological Stations. The SSEI undertakes sanitary inspections on behalf
of the Government to ensure compliance with norms and standards for sanitary and hygiene rules. It has the right to inspect all
institutions, organizations and private businesses. The SSEI is responsible for the implementation of sanitary and epidemiological
measures and sanitary controls including control of drinking water supplies.
                                                                                                                                    page 87




ANNEX B. METHODOLOGY AND SAMPLING STRATEGY
The research methodology consisted of a mix of qualitative and quantitative data collection methods, detailed below.
Qualitative Instruments
The four qualitative instruments used in the study are outlined below.

Desktop review and stakeholder mapping. A thorough desktop review of available information on the WSS sector in
Uzbekistan was conducted. Major international outputs such as the Joint Monitoring Program (JMP), the Multiple Indicator
Cluster Survey (MICS)34 and various studies by organizations such as the ADB, OECD and MSF informed this report. Uzbekistan
government documents and data, as well as international scientific articles were also referenced. The major stakeholders and their
roles and interactions in the Uzbekistan WSS sector are provided in a map and summary in Annex A.

Individual interviews (IDIs). Nineteen (19) IDIs with service delivery stakeholders were conducted. These were semi-structured
interviews, with an objective to obtain a supply-side perspective and to understand the interaction between customers and
service delivery organizations / personnel. IDI guides were created to cover topics of interest. The duration of each IDI was 40
minutes or less.

Focus group discussions (FGDs). Seventeen (17) (FGDs) were conducted, ranging in size from approximately six to twelve
participants from households in the survey areas. FGD guides were created to cover topics of interest and local consulting firm
staff were trained in delivering FGDs and encouraging active participation by all participants. Most FGDs were mixed based on
recommendations from the local consulting firm. Only in some rural areas were female-only focus groups considered necessary
to ensure that the female voice on WSS-related issues was captured. The duration of each FGD was 1.5 hours or less.

Mini case study case studies. Ten (10) mini case study interviews were undertaken in households and in public buildings
(schools and medical centers). Mini case study interview guides were prepared to cover topics of interest. Interviewers spent
a couple of hours with interviewees observing their use of water and sanitation facilities and associated activities. Photographs
were taken of WSS facilities (with the participants’ permission).


Quantitative Instrument
Two household surveys were prepared: (i) for connected households, and (ii) for unconnected households. The connected
household survey consisted of 94 questions and the unconnected household survey consisted of 63 questions. Each survey was
designed to take approximately 45 minutes. Each survey was prepared in English and translated into Russian and surveys were
conducted in Uzbek and Russian languages as preferred by respondents. Surveys were pilot tested in Anhangaran Province in
March 2014 and 300 households were surveyed at full scale during April and May 2014.
The surveys covered a number of key topics relevant to the study objectives, including: (i) the current status of WSS access, water
use patterns and service quality; (ii) coping strategies employed to deal with the lack of access to WSS service or poor quality; (iii)
water and sanitation expenditures (including non-monetary costs) and affordability of WSS services; (iv) interactions between
consumers and service providers, and (v) willingness and capacity to pay for access to improved WSS services. In order to enable
the construction of a welfare estimate, surveys asked information on household asset ownership and for respondents to estimate
their average monthly household expenditures in summer and winter (see Box A). For the purpose of analysis, the bottom 40
percent of households – the most vulnerable as determined by household asset welfare measure – are distinguished35.
The surveys employ two broad categories of approaches (as described by Devicienti et al. 2004) to compute the value to
consumers of potential reforms in the provision of WSS services:
1. The ‘revealed preference in surrogate market approach’, which is based on what people “do” to cope with the absence of a
market for the good they need; hence, it is also named the coping cost method or the averting expenditure method. It relies on the
observed behavior toward some market good that possesses a connection to a non-marketed good of interest. It estimates the
time and financial costs of current household behavior (monetary and non-monetary costs); and


34 MICS is a nationwide periodic survey which depicts the status of women and children in Uzbekistan. It is implemented by the State Statistical
Committee (SSC). The 2006 MICS covered 10,500 households in all regions of the country.
35 In Uzbekistan, there are no reliable poverty measures so for the purposes of analysis the study defined the bottom 40 percent as those most
vulnerable. The top 60 percent are referred to as the ‘non-poor’.
                                  ANNEX B. METHODOLOGY
   page 88                        AND SAMPLING STRATEGY

2. The ‘stated preference approach’, which is based on what people say when they are asked directly about a good in question;
this is often referred to as contingent valuation (CV). It relies on answers to specifically designed surveys relating to a non-market
good in order to understand the basis of the demand. It determines the maximum willingness of individual households to pay for
various options for level of service and payment arrangements within the context of the current or specified institutional regime.
Respondents’ willingness to pay may be far below the costs of providing improved services or closer to the full economic costs of
providing water.

Survey questions on household consumption expenditure aimed to assess household wealth levels. However, the expenditure
module in the household survey was not comprehensive as it did not include detailed food expenditure breakdowns. It instead
focused more on utility expenditures. For that reason, an asset index was calculated (see Annex G).


Sampling Strategy
For the purposes of both qualitative and quantitative research instruments, and households that were connected and
unconnected to a networked system were sampled from four main settlement types. These were (i) Capital City (Tashkent), (ii)
Oblast (Province) Center, (iii) Raion (District) Center, and (iv) Rural Area. Connected and unconnected households across those
settlement types were sampled from four geographical regions (South Karakalpakstan, Jizzak, Fergana, and Tashkent city)36. The
sampling matrix used in the study is provided below.

                                       Table B1. Sampling matrix formal household survey (households)
                                                                               Settlement Types
                            Region
                                           Tashkent          Oblast centers         Raion centers         Rural areas          Total
                                               30
                    Tashkent                                                                                                     30
                                         (Tashkent city)
                    West                                          20                      10                  10
                                                                                                                                 40
                    (Karakalpakstan)                          (Nukus city)          (Beruni center)      (Beruni raion)
    Connected




                    Central                                         20                     10                  10
                                                                                                                                 40
                    (Jizzak)                                   (Jizzak city)        (Dustlik center)     (Dustlik raion)
                    East                                           20                      10                  10
                                                                                                                                 40
                    (Fergana)                                 (Fergana city)        (Tashlak center)     (Tashlak raion)
                    Total                      30                  60                     30                   30               150
                    West                                          10                      20                  20
                                                                                                                                 50
                    (Karakalpakstan)                          (Nukus city)          (Beruni center)      (Beruni raion)
    Not Connected




                    Central                                         10                     20                  20
                                                                                                                                 50
                    (Jizzak)                                   (Jizzak city)        (Dustlik center)     (Dustlik raion)
                    East                                           10                      20                  20
                                                                                                                                 50
                    (Fergana)                                 (Fergana city)        (Tashlak center)     (Tashlak raion)
                    Total                                          30                     60                   60               150
                    Grand total                30                  90                     90                   90               300

Sampling domains were not proportional to the distribution of the population, and therefore the sample is not a self-weighting.
The sampling methodology was ‘purposive’, as it sought to include a number of sites that represent a range of typical conditions
and sub groups in Uzbekistan. As the research regions were not randomly selected, the formal survey data cannot be taken
as representative for the country as a whole, but instead indicative of situations experienced by connected and unconnected
households in different sample regions and in different settlement types across the country. A breakdown of the primary sampling
units is provided below.




36 Similar geographical distinctions were defined by the Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (2006) and Government of Uzbekistan / ORC Macro
(2004)    study for surveying purposes.
                                                                                                                page 89



Tashkent
Sampling in Tashkent was conducted only in the central part of the city (not surrounding suburbs) (see map). A total of 30
households were surveyed, 1 focus group discussion, 2 individual interviews and 1 caset study interview.

                                            Capital city (Tashkent) sample areas




                                     (TO BE FILLED OUT BY THE RESEARCHER BEFORE INTERVIEW)
Number of the questionnaire          |____|____|____|
The quota          City               1
                   Regional city               2
                   Rural area                  3
The exact address of HH
Type of accommodation
Connected to WC system                       YES à CONTINUE INTERVIEW
NOà FINISH THE INTERVIEW
Date of interview: Day      |____|____|      Месяц |____|____|
Interviewer:      surname _______________________             sign____________         № ____
Encoding:         surname _______________________             sign ____________        № ____
Operator:         surname _______________________             sign ____________        № ____
Name of respondent:         _________________________________________________
Contact phone number: (+998) __________________________________________
Gender of respondent (by observation):
Age of the respondent:
Is this your principal residence? (DO YOU RESIDE HERE MORE THAN 6 MONTHS A YEAR?)
                       ANNEX B. METHODOLOGY
   page 90             AND SAMPLING STRATEGY


Karakalpakstan
Sampling in the western region was conducted in the Autonomous Republic of Karakalpakstan. A total of 90 households
were covered in the formal quantitative survey, while 6 focus group discussions, 6 individual interviews and 3 mini
case study interviews were conducted. Surveys and qualitative instruments were conducted in Nukus Oblast center
 (20 connected and 10 unconnected households), Beruni Raion center (10 connected and 20 unconnected households) and
Beruni rural area (10 connected and 20 unconnected households).

                                            South Karakalpakstan sample areas




Jizzak
Sampling in the central region was conducted in Jizzak Oblast. A total of 90 households were covered in the quantitative survey.
In addition, 5 focus group discussions, 6 individual interviews and 3 mini case study interviews were conducted. The quantitative
surveys in Jizzak Oblast center covered 20 connected and 10 unconnected households, in Dustlik Raion center 10 connected and
20 unconnected households and in Dustlik rural area 10 connected and 20 unconnected households.
                                                                                                                         page 91



                                                      Jizzak sample areas




Fergana
Sampling in the eastern region was conducted in Fergana Oblast. A total of 90 households were surveyed as part of the
quantitative assessment. In addition, 5 focus group discussions, 5 individual interviews and 3 mini case study interviews were held.
The quantitative survey was conducted in Fergana Oblast center (20 connected and 10 unconnected households), Tashlak Raion
center (10 connected and 20 unconnected households) and Tashlak rural area (10 connected and 20 unconnected households).

                                                     Fergana sample areas
                       ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
 page 92               QUANTITATIVE SURVEY

ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR QUANTITATIVE SURVEY
                                   +286(+2/'48(67,211$,5(
                                               QHWZRUNFRQQHFWLYLW\
                         7KHSURMHFW³:DWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQVRFLDOLPSDFWDVVHVVPHQW±
                                                    8]EHNLVWDQ´
                       Conversation with a member of the HH at the age of 18, who is aware of the
                        state of water and sanitation services and the costs associated with them.
                                72%(),//('287%<7+(5(6($5&+(5%()25(,17(59,(:

            1XPEHURIWKHTXHVWLRQQDLUH        _BBBB_BBBB_BBBB_

            7KHTXRWD         &LW\           
                               5HJLRQDOFLW\              
                               5XUDODUHD                 
                    72:19,//$*(                                                           ,QGH[BBBBBBBB
            7KHH[DFWDGGUHVVRI++
                    6WUHHW                                                                
                    +RXVH                                                                  ʋ
                    )ODW                                                                   
            7\SHRIDFFRPPRGDWLRQ
                    $SDUWPHQWLQWKHDSDUWPHQWKRXVHJURXQGIORRU                           WRWKHTXHVWLRQ
                                                                                                *
                    +RXVHRUDFRWWDJHRQWKHVLWH+DZOH\                                 WRWKHTXHVWLRQ
                                                                                                ,
                    2WKHUWR:5,7(,1                                                         WRWKHTXHVWLRQ
                                                                                                ,
            &RQQHFWHGWR:&V\VWHP                             <(6Æ&217,18(,17(59,(:

            12Æ),1,6+7+(,17(59,(:
            'DWHRILQWHUYLHZ         'D\    _BBBB_BBBB_      Ɇɟɫɹɰ_BBBB_BBBB_
            ,QWHUYLHZHU      VXUQDPHBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB VLJQBBBBBBBBBBBB               ʋBBBB
            (QFRGLQJ         VXUQDPHBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB VLJQBBBBBBBBBBBB              ʋBBBB
            2SHUDWRU         VXUQDPHBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB VLJQBBBBBBBBBBBB              ʋBBBB
            1DPHRIUHVSRQGHQW        BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
            &RQWDFWSKRQHQXPEHUBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
            *HQGHURIUHVSRQGHQWE\REVHUYDWLRQ
             0DOH                                               )HPDOH
            $JHRIWKHUHVSRQGHQW
           _BBB_BBB_BBB_\HDUVROG

            ,VWKLV\RXUSULQFLSDOUHVLGHQFH"'2<285(6,'(+(5(025(7+$10217+6$<($5"
             <HV                                                1RÆ),1,6+7+(,17(59,(:

           0\QDPHLVBBBBBBBBBBDQG,DPZRUNLQJZLWKDWHDPRIUHVHDUFKHUVRQEHKDOIRIWKH:RUOG%DQNLQYHVWLJDWLQJ
           ZDWHUDQGVDQLWDWLRQLVVXHVDVWKH\UHODWHWR\RXUKRXVHKROG:HDUHLQWHUYLHZLQJDQXPEHURIKRXVHKROGVLQ\RXU
           DUHDDQGRWKHUDUHDVRI8]EHNLVWDQ :HDUHLQWHUYLHZLQJDQXPEHURIKRXVHKROGVLQ\RXUDUHDDQGRWKHUDUHDVRI
           8]EHNLVWDQ
                                                                    
page 93




                     6SHFLI\WKHPRVWLPSRUWDQWVRXUFHVRIZDWHUIRU++,17$6.7+(5(6321'(17$%2877+(+286(+2/'¶60267,03257$17:$7(5
                     6285&(6),//2877+(&2/801)25($&+6285&(63(&,),('%<5(6321'(176285&(6
                                                               
                                                                           3LSLQJIURPVRXUFHLQVLGH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5LYHUODNHSRQGWKHRWKHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             +DQGSXPSRXWVLGH\DUG
                                                                                                                                                                                                +DQGSXPSSXPSLQWKH
                                                                                                                                                                 3LSHGZDWHURXWVLGH\DUG
                                                                                                                                    LQVLGH\DUGRXWVLGHWDS

                                                                                                                                                                 RQWKHVWUHHWQHLJKERUV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      %X\LQJERWWOHGZDWHU
                                                                                                           3LSHGZDWHUVXSSO\




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &KDQQHOIRUGUDLQDJH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           5DLQZDWHUFROOHFWHG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        &DQDOIRULUULJDWLRQ
                                                                           KRPHLQWHUQDOWDS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              7KHWDQNHUWUXFN
                                                                                                                                                                 LQWKHRWKHUYLOODJH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     QDWXUDOUHVHUYRLU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BBBBBBBBBBBBBB
                                                                                                                                                                                                \DUG
                                             'ULQNLQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                             &RRNLQJ'LVKZDVKLQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                   3XUSRVHVWKDW     %DWKLQJ6KRZHULQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
          VRXUFHLVXVHGIRU)257+(       /DXQGU\&OHDQLQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
          /$67<($5                         *DUGHQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                             )DUPLQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                             2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
             $YHUDJHGD\VSHU            GD\VSHUZHHN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                  ZHHNVRXUFHLV            GD\VSHUZHHN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                  DYDLODEOH)257+(         GD\VSHUZHHN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                  /$670217+                GD\VSHUZHHN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                             $OOWKHWLPH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                   'DLO\SHULRGVRI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
          DYDLODELOLW\WRKRXVHKROG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
          )257+(/$670217+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                      3LSLQJIURPVRXUFHLQVLGH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5LYHUODNHSRQGWKHRWKHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        +DQGSXPSRXWVLGH\DUG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           +DQGSXPSSXPSLQWKH
                                                                                                                                                                                                            3LSHGZDWHURXWVLGH\DUG
                                                                                                                                                                               LQVLGH\DUGRXWVLGHWDS

                                                                                                                                                                                                            RQWKHVWUHHWQHLJKERUV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 %X\LQJERWWOHGZDWHU
                                                                                                                                                      3LSHGZDWHUVXSSO\




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              &KDQQHOIRUGUDLQDJH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      5DLQZDWHUFROOHFWHG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   &DQDOIRULUULJDWLRQ
                                                                                                                      KRPHLQWHUQDOWDS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         7KHWDQNHUWUXFN
                                                                                                                                                                                                            LQWKHRWKHUYLOODJH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                QDWXUDOUHVHUYRLU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BBBBBBBBBBBBBB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           \DUG
ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR




                                        3UHGLFWDELOLW\RI        8QSUHGLFWDEOH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                           VRXUFHDYDLODELOLW\             3UHGLFWDEOH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                             1RTXDOLW\SUREOHPV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                             %DGWDVWH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                             %DGRGRU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                      4XDOLW\RIVRXUFH
                                                                             %DGFRORU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                         )257+(/$67
                                                                             6DOW\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                         <($5
QUANTITATIVE SURVEY




                                                                      3UHVHQFHRISDUWLFOHVWXUELGLW\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                             3UHVHQFHRIEDFWHULDYLUXVHV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                      2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                             1RWUHDWPHQWUHTXLUHG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                             6WHULOL]LQJZLWKFKHPLFDOV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                      7UHDWPHQWUHTXLUHG                )LOWHULQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                         )257+(/$67                       %RLOLQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                         <($5                               6XQH[SRVXUH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                             /HWLWVWDQG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                             2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                      6HDVRQDOYDULDWLRQLQ
                                                                            <HV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                         VRXUFHTXDOLW\
                                         )257+(/$67
                                         <($5                              1R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                      $YHUDJHYROXPHRI         
                                         ZDWHUXVHGGDLO\)25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                         7+(/$670217+
                                                                      7LOOPHWHUV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                      )URPPHWHUV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                        'LVWDQFHIURPWKH
                                                                             )URPWLOONP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                           VRXUFH
                                                                             )URPɤɦWLOONP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                      2YHUNP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                               
                     page 94
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                                                            page 95




      6SHFLI\SOHDVHKRZORQJ\RXKDYHZDWHUSLSHGWR\RXUKRXVHKROG",QWRQO\RQHDQVZHU
                                                                                        
     /HVVWKDQ PRQWKV±                                                              0RUHWKDQ
                                      \HDU      \HDUV    \HDUV     \HDUV
       PRQWKV           \HDU                                                                    \HDUV
 
      'LG\RXSD\IRUSLSHGZDWHUVXSSO\GXULQJWKHODVWPRQWKV"
     <HV                                             1Rgo to question ʋ13
 
       +RZPXFKGR\RXSD\PRQWKO\21$9(5$*(IRUSLSHGZDWHUVXSSO\"
     )LOOLQͮͺͺͺͮͺͺͺͮͺͺͺͮͮͺͺͺͮͮͺͺͺͮͮͺͺͺͮͮͺͺͺͮͮͺͺͺͮͮͺͺͺͮͮͺͺͺͮͮͺͺͺͮɫɭɦɦɟɫɹɰ
                  
      +RZGR\RXSD\\RXUELOO",176(9(5$/$16:(56$5(3266,%/(
     7KURXJKWKHWKHEDQNFDVK                                                                
     ,QWKHWKHEDQNE\SODVWLFFDUG                                                          
     ,QWKH9RGRNDQDOLQFDVK                                                                
     ,QWKH9RGRNDQDOE\SODVWLFFDUG                                                        
     &DVKWRDFROOHFWRU                                                                        
     $WWKHSRVWRIILFH                                                                         
     3D\QHW                                                                                     
     'HGXFWLRQVIURPVDODU\RIRQHPHPEHURI++                                                
     2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                           
 
    +RZWKHIHHIRUSLSHGZDWHUVXSSO\LVEHLQJFDOFXODWHGDQGE\ZKDWWDULIIUDWHGR\RXSD\
        IRU++"
%\WKHZDWHUPHWHULQ++                       BBBBBBBBBBBBVRXPɦ
%\WKHQXPEHURISHRSOHLQ++                           BBBBBBBBBB                      
                                                        IRUSHUVRQVRXP
%\WKHVHFWLRQRIWKHSLSHDQGWKH                                                      
SRWHQWLDOWUDQVPLVVLRQFDSDFLW\
%\WKHSUHVHQFHRIVHZDJH                                      
%\WKHSUHVHQFHRIDEDWKVKRZHU                                                  Go to question
                                                                                         ʋ 17
1RWSD\LQJIRUWDSZDWHU                                                               
2WKHU                                                                                    
)LOOLQBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
127685(                                                                               
 




       :KHQZDVWKHZDWHUPHWHULQVWDOOHGLQ\RXU'+"
                                                                                           
     ,QWKHSDVW\HDU       'XULQJWKHODVW\HDUV  2YHU\HDUVDJR              1RWVXUH

             
       'R\RXWKLQNWKDWLWPHDVXUHVH[DFWO\P"
     <HV                          1R                              1RWVXUH
     Go to question ʋ18
 
 
 
 
 
 
                        ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 96                 QUANTITATIVE SURVEY



               :RXOG\RXOLNHWRKDYHDZDWHUPHWHUZKLFKPHDVXUH\RXUDFWXDOH[DFWFRQVXPSWLRQRI
                   WDSZDWHU",176(9(5$/$16:(56$5(3266,%/(
              <HV                                1R                                    1RW
                                                                                                        VXUH8QGHFLGHG
              6DYLQJPRQH\                            1RERG\SURSRVHGWRHVWDEOLVKZDWHU          
                                                         PHWHU
              ,GRQRWWUXVWWKHWDULIIUDWHE\       *RRGZDWHUPHWHULVH[SHQVLYHIRU           
              QRUP                                      ++
              7DULIIUDWHLVRYHUYDOXHG               &KHDSZDWHUPHWHUGHWHULRUDWHV              
              UHODWLYHO\WRVHUYLFHV                    TXLFNO\
              ,KDYHDODUJHQXPEHURISHRSOH         :DWHUSUHVVXUHZLOOGHFUHDVHGXHWR         
              LQWKHIDPLO\                             DZDWHUPHWHU
              2WKHUWR)LOOLQBBBBBBBB               2WKHUWR)LOOLQBBBBBBBB                    
                   
               6SHFLI\ZKDWWKHZDWHUSUHVVXUHLQ\RXU++LQVXPPHUZLQWHU"
                                                         ,QVXPPHU                       ,QZLQWHU
                6WURQJSUHVVXUH                                                            
                1RUPDOSUHVVXUH                                                            
                :HDNSUHVVXUH                                                              
                8QGHFLGHG                                                                  
                   
               :KDWLVWKHPLQLPXPQXPEHURIKRXUVRIVHUYLFHSHUGD\\RXQHHGWRKDYHHQRXJKZDWHU
                   WRPHHW\RXUQHHGV",H5($/1(('6,17)257+26(:+2+$9(+285:$7(5
                   6833/<'2127$6.7+,648(67,21

                                                        )LOOLQͮͺͺͺͮͺͺͺͮͺͺͺͮKRXUGD\
                    
                ,I\RXVRPHWLPHVXVHDVHFRQGDU\VRXUFHRIZDWHUZK\SLSHGZDWHUGRHVQRWIXOO\PHHW\RXU
                    QHHGV" ,17 7,&. $// 7+$7 5(/$7( 72 &2/' :$7(5 7+,6 48(67,21 ,6 )25
                    7+26(:+2+$9($6(&21'$5<6285&(
              6HUYLFHGLVUXSWLRQV                                                                          
              $YDLODEOHRQO\DIHZKRXUVSHUGD\                                                           
              ,QVXIILFLHQWSUHVVXUH                                                                        
              8QVDIHWRGULQN                                                                              
              3RRUWDVWH                                                                                   
              'RQRWXVHDVHFRQGDU\VRXUFH                                                   Go to question ʋ
              2WKHUILOOLQBBBBBBBB                                                                       
                 
                +RZ RIWHQ GR \RX UHO\ RQ D VHFRQGDU\ VRXUFH IRU GULQNLQJ SXUSRVHV" ,17 6(9(5$/
                    $16:(56$5(3266,%/(
              0RUHWKDQRQFHDZHHN                                                                         
              2QFHDZHHN                                                                                   
              2QFHDPRQWK                                                                                  
              2QFHHYHU\PRQWKV                                                                           
              $WOHDVWRQFHHYHU\PRQWKV                                                                  
              1HYHU                                                                                         
          
          
          
                                                                                                              page 97




      )URP ZKDW LQIUDVWUXFWXUH GHSHQGV DQ DYDLODELOLW\ RI ZDWHU" ,17 5(&25' $// 7+$7
           5(/$7(6$1'5($'$16:(56
    ,QIUDVWUXFWXUHRIWKHXWLOLW\FRPSDQ\9RGRFDQDO                                         
    ,QIUDVWUXFWXUHFHOODUVIRUPXOWLVWRU\EXLOGLQJV±FRPPRQVWDQGSLSHV                     
    +RXVHKROGLQIUDVWUXFXUH                                                                    
    2WKHUVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                                     
         
      )URPZKDWIDFWRUVGHSHQGVWULSSLQJRIZDWHULQ\RU++"
                                                                             6WURQJO\ 0HGLXP 'RHVQRW
                                                                               GHSHQGV GHSHQGV   GHSHQG
       )URPRIHOHFWULFLW\                                                                     
       )URP9RGRNDQDOUHGLVWULEXWLRQEHWZHHQDUHDV                                           
       )URPWKHQHLJKERUVZKHQWKH\PDNHDQH[WHQVLYHZDWHUXVH                                
       'XHWRUHSDLURIV\VWHP                                                                 
           
         
      'R\RXOLYHDWWKHVDPHDGGUHVVDV\HDUVDJR"
    <HV                                                 1R      Go to question 29

       $UHFRQGLWLRQVRIZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQVHUYLFHVLQ\RXUKRXVHKROGEHWWHUQRZWKDQ
           \HDUV DJR" ,17 6(/(&7 $16:(5 48(67,21 %(/2: $1' ),// ,1 $&&25'$1&(
           :,7+6(/(&7('5(63216(6
    <HVLWLVEHWWHU                  1RZRUVH                        'LGQRW    1RWVXUH
                                                                                FKDQJH
        6SHFLI\ WKH UHDVRQV IRU  6SHFLI\ WKH UHDVRQV IRU                      
            LPSURYLQJ WKH ZDWHU VXSSO\       ZRUVHQLQJZDWHUVXSSO\DQG
            DQG VDQLWDWLRQ V\VWHPV LQ        VDQLWDWLRQFRQGLWLRQVLQ\RXU
            \RXU'+"                            '+"
    7KHTXDOLW\RIVRXUFHV                7KHTXDOLW\VRXUFHV                               
                                                                         
    LPSURYHG                              ZRUVHQHG
    $YDLODELOLW\RIVRXUFHVRI            $YDLODELOLW\RIVRXUFHV                           
                                                                         
    LPSURYHG                              ZRUVHQHG
    $FFHVVWRZDWHULVQRZHDVLHU         $FFHVVWRZDWHULVQRZ                            
                                                                         
                                           KDUGHU
    %XUGHQRIWKHFROOHFWLRQ            %XUGHQRIWKHFROOHFWLRQ                        
                                                                         
    VWRUDJHQRZORZHU                     VWRUDJHQRZKLJKHU
    6HUYLFHVRI9RGRNDQDOQRZ             6HUYLFHV9RGRNDQDOQRZ                            
                                                                         
    FKHDSHU                               PRUHH[SHQVLYH
    1RZIHZHUKHDOWKSUREOHPV             1RZPRUHKHDOWKSUREOHPV                          
                                                                         
    GXHWRWKH9RGRNDQDO                  EHFDXVHRIWKH9RGRNDQDO
    7KHTXDOLW\RIZDWHUVHUYLFHV         7KHTXDOLW\RIZDWHU                              
                                                                         
    EHFDPHEHWWHU                         VHUYLFHVKDVEHFRPHZRUVH
    2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\B               7KHSLSLQJV\VWHPLV                              
                                                                         
                                           RXWGDWHG
                                         2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\B                          
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
        
                      ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 98               QUANTITATIVE SURVEY



          :KRGRHVWKHIROORZLQJLQ\RXUKRXVHKROG",1763(&,)<$//7+$75(/$7(6
                                                                 0DOHV
                                                                 )HPDOHV
                                                                 0DOHV
              &RRNLQJ
                                                                 )HPDOHV
                                                                 %R\V!
                                                                 *LUOV!
                                                                 0DOHV
                                                                 )HPDOHV
                                                                 0DOHV
              'LVKZDVKLQJ
                                                                 )HPDOHV
                                                                 %R\V!
                                                                 *LUOV!
                                                                 0DOHV
                                                                 )HPDOHV
                                                                 0DOHV
              /DXQGU\
                                                                 )HPDOHV
                                                                 %R\V!
                                                                 *LUOV!
                                                                 0DOHV
                                                                 )HPDOHV
                                                                 0DOHV
              &OHDQLQJ
                                                                 )HPDOHV
                                                                 %R\V!
                                                                 *LUOV!
           
           6$1,7$7,21

              :KHUHLV\RXUWRLOHW",176(9(5$/$16:(56$5(3266,%/(
            ,QVLGHWKHKRXVH                                                                    
            2XWVLGHWKHKRXVHEXWZLWKLQWKH\DUG                                              
            2XWRIWKHKRXVHRQSXEOLFDUHD                                                    
            2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBB                                                  
               
              :KDWNLQGRIWRLOHWGR\RXXVHPRUHRIWHQ"

          )OXVKWRLOHWERZOFRQQHFWHGWRDSLSHGZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQ        JRWRTXHVWLRQʋ
          )OXVKWRLOHWERZOFRQQHFWHGWRWKHZDVWHSLW                                        
          )OXVKWRLOHW%RZOQRWFRQQHFWHGWRWKHLQVXODWHGWDQNZLWKDOHDNLQWR             
          WKHJURXQG
          6KDUHGZLWKQHLJKERUVWRLOHWLQWKH\DUG                                              
          7RLOHWLQDSULYDWH\DUG                                                              
          1RWRLOHWRSHQGHIHFDWLRQ                                                           
          2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                   
                                                                                                                    page 99




      6SHFLI\ZK\\RXDUHQRWFRQQHFWHGWRDSLSHGVDQLWDWLRQQHWZRUN"
    1RSLSHGVDQLWDWLRQQHWZRUNFRQQHFWLRQ                                                     
    1RWKDYHHQRXJKIXQGVDW'+IRUFRQQHFWLRQWRSLSHGVDQLWDWLRQQHWZRUN
                                                                                                
    RXWVLGHWKHKRXVH
    1RWKDYHHQRXJKIXQGVWRFRQQHFWWRDSLSHGVDQLWDWLRQQHWZRUNLQ++                       
    7KHUHDUHQRWHQRXJKIXQGVIURPRWKHU++QHLJKERUVWRFRQQHFWWRWKH
                                                                                                
    SLSHGVDQLWDWLRQQHWZRUNRXWVLGHWKHKRXVH
    6SHFLI\
                                                                                                
    RWKHUBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB

      :KHUHHPSWLHVDVDQLWDWLRQFRQVWUXFWLRQ",175($'237,216$16:(56Ȼ7,&.
          21/<21(
    &RQFUHWHVHSWLFWDQN                                                        
    (DUWKHQVHSWLFWDQN                                                         
    /LQHGSLW                                                                   
    8QOLQHGSLW                                                                 
    'UDLQ                                                                       
    &KDQQHO                                                                     
    ,UULJDWLRQGLWFKQHDUWKHKRXVH                                             
    'RQ¶WNQRZ                                                                  
    2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                         

      :RXOG\RXOLNHWRFRQQHFWWRWKHVDQLWDWLRQSLSH"           ,17*27248(67,21ʋ
    <HV                                                   1R
             
             21/<)25++:+26(72,/(7,62876,'(2)7+(+286(+2/'
      ,IWKHVDQLWDWLRQIDFLOLW\LVORFDWHGRXWVLGHWKHKRXVHKROGGRZRPHQIHHOVDIHWRXVHVDQLWDWLRQ
          IDFLOLWLHVDWQLJKWWLPH"
    <HVYHU\VFDUHG           <HVLWLVQRWVDIH      1RZHXVHGWR       2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\
       

)25$//++V
    ,VVDQLWDWLRQDJHIDFLOLW\XVHGE\RWKHUKRXVHKROGV"
 <HV                                                 1Rgo the question 40
           
    ,I\HVKRZPDQ\KRXVHKROGVXVHWKHP"
 
 )LOOLQͮͺͺͺͮͺͺͺͮͺͺͺͮKRXVHKROGV
     
    +RZRIWHQGR\RXZDVK\RXUKDQGVDIWHUJRLQJWRWKHWRLOHW"
 $OZD\V                                                                    
 2IWHQ                                                                         go the question 42
 1HYHU                                                                     
 'RQ¶WNQRZ                                                                
 6RPHWLPHVQRWDOZD\V                                                           
           
    ,IQRWDOZD\VZK\"
 1RWQHFHVVDULO\                                                                             
 )RUJHWLQJ                                                                                  
 1RVXFKKDELWV                                                                              
 1RIDFLOLWLHVIRUKDQGZDVKLQJ                                                              
 1RWHQRXJKZDWHU                                                                            
 2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBB                                                                  
                                                    
                          ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 100                  QUANTITATIVE SURVEY



           
                'HVFULEHWKHPDLQSUREOHPVLQZRUNRIWKHWRLOHW",176(9(5$/$16:(56$5(
                    3266,%/(
               1RSUREOHPV                                                            JRWRTXHVWLRQʋ
               %ORFNDJHV                                                                        
               /RZZDWHUSUHVVXUHWRIOXVK                                                      
               2GRU                                                                             
               1RSRVVLELOLW\WRXVHWKHVDQLWDWLRQZKHQEORFNDJHVDWQHLJKERUV                
               5DSLGILOOLQJRISLWV                                                            
               ([SHQVLYHQHVVRIWKHFOHDQLQJSLWV                                               
               1RWVDIHIRUFKLOGUHQ                                                            
               2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                             
           
                 'R \RX WKLQN WKDW WKHVH SUREOHPV DUH GXH WR WKH LQIUDVWUXFWXUH RI SXEOLF XWLOLWLHV RU
                     LQIUDVWUXFWXUHRIDSDUWPHQWVKRXVHKROG",1763(&,)<$//7+$75(/$7(6
               8WLOLW\LQIUDVWUXFWXUH                                                                     
               ,QIUDVWUXFWXUHFHOODUVPXOWLVWRU\EXLOGLQJVJHQHUDOVWDQGSLSHV                         
               +RXVHKROGVLQIUDVWUXFWXUH                                                                 
           

           &26760$7(5,$/&2676)25+286(+2/'6(59,&(6)25:66
                                  6(59,&(6
                3OHDVHWHOOKRZPXFKLVWKHFRVWRI\RXU++SUHVHQWHGEHORZRQPXQLFLSDOVHUYLFHV"
                                                                                      8Q
                        ([SHQVHV                                                    GHFL              &RVW8=VRXP
                                                                                      GHG
                                                                  ZLQWHU                   BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
                     (OHFWULFLW\PRQWK
                                                                  VXPPHU                   BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
                                                                  ZLQWHU                   BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
                     *DVPRQWKVHDVRQDOPRQWK
                                                                  VXPPHU                   BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP

                         'ULQNLQJZDWHUWDSERWWOHGIURP      ZLQWHU                   BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
                 
                         WDQNHUWUXFNRURWKHUVRXUFHPRQWK   VXPPHU                    BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
           

                3OHDVHWHOOKRZPXFKZDVVSHQW$//RI\RXUKRXVHKROGSHUPRQWKRQDYHUDJH
                                                                             8Q
                                             1DPH                          GHFL        727$/H[SHQVHV
                                                                             GHG

                         7RWDOH[SHQVHV,QW,1',&$7($//       ZLQWHU                  BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               
                         &26762)++)25$//1(('6             VXPPHU                  BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                                                                                                                   page 101




     ,QGLFDWH DOO H[SHQVHV UHODWHG WR SURYLGLQJ ZDWHU ++ LQ WKH SDVW \HDU" ,17 ),// 21/<
         5(/(9$1732,176

    $FWLRQ                                                              1RQH              &RVW8=VRXP
    ([SHQVHVRQSXPSKDQGSXPSPRQWK                                       BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    3D\PHQWIRUZDWHUIURPWDQNHUWUXFNPRQWK                                BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    %RWWOHGZDWHUZHHN                                                       BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    %X\LQJZDWHUIURPIULHQGV¶KRXVHKROGVZHHN                               BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    :DWHUWUHDWPHQWSURFHVVLQJILOWHULQJHWF\HDU                       BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    3D\PHQWIRUDWWHQGLQJSXEOLFEDWKPRQWK                                  BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    )XHOIRUWUDQVSRUWIRUEULQJLQJZDWHUPRQWK                              BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBB                                        BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP





     :KLFKRQHRIIH[SHQVHV\RXKDGRQ\RXUZDWHUVXSSO\V\VWHP""
                                 $FWLRQ                                 1RQH              &RVW8=VRXP

    &RQVWUXFWLQJJURXQGZDWHUZHOO                                              BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    /LYHVWRFNIRUWUDQVSRUWLQJZDWHU                                           BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    3LSLQJIURPWKHVRXUFHWRWKHKRXVHKROG                                    BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    %HORZJURXQGWDQNVIRUVWRUDJHRIZDWHU                                    BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    7DQNVIRUWKHWUDQVSRUWRIZDWHU                                           BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    :DWHUVWRUDJHWDQNV                                                        BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                      BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP





     6SHFLI\DQ\H[SHQVHVUHODWHGWRVDQLWDWLRQV\VWHP",1763(&,)<$//7+$75(/$7(6

                                           $FWLRQ                                          &RVW8=VRXP
    &OHDQLQJRXWRISLWVHSWLFWDQNE\FRQWUDFWRURUKRXVHKROG
    2QFHLQ\HDU
    0RQWKO\
    0RQWKO\
    <HDUO\
    6SHFLI\FOHDQLQJHYHU\BBBBBBB\HDUV
    1RWUHTXLUHGFOHDQLQJXS
    )LOOLWZLWKHDUWKDQGPDNHDQRWKHURQH                         BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    1RH[SHQGLWXUHV                                                                          
    2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                       BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP





     :KLFKRQHRIIH[SHQVHVKDYH\RXLQFXUUHGIRU\RXUVDQLWDWLRQV\VWHP"

                                 $FWLRQ                                     1RQH          &RVW8=VRXP

    6HSDUDWHEXLOGLQJIRUVHZDJHFRQVWUXFWLRQ                             
                                                                                          BBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    ,QVWDOOHGSLWVHSWLF                                                
                                                                                          BBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    :DWHUVWRUDJHWDQNVIRUVHZDJH                                        
                                                                                          BBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                        
                                                                                          BBBBBBBBWKVRXP
                                                          
                        ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 102                QUANTITATIVE SURVEY



                       121021(7$5<&26762)&855(17:666(59,&(6
                )RUZKDWSXUSRVHVDUH\RXKDYLQJWKHPRVWGLIILFXOWLHVZLWKWKHZDWHU",1763(&,)<$//
                    7+$75(/$7(66(9(5$/$16:(56$5(3266,%/(
                1RSUREOHPV                                                                                
                'ULQNLQJ                                                                                   
                &RRNLQJ                                                                                    
                'LVKZDVKLQJ                                                                              
                %DWKLQJ6KRZHULQJ                                                                        
                *DUGHQ                                                                                     
                $QLPDO/LYHVWRFN                                                                         
                )DUPLQJZDWHULQJ                                                                          
                2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                        
                  
                $UH \RX DZDUH RI DQ\ QHJDWLYH KHDOWK LPSDFWV RI \RXU ZDWHU EHLQJ H[SHULHQFHG E\ DQ\
                    PHPEHUVRI\RXUKRXVHKROG""
                <HV                                                1Rgo to question ʋ 53

                 
                :KDWDUHWKHVHQHJDWLYHHIIHFWVIDFHG",176(9(5$/$16:(56$5(3266,%/(

                *DVWURLQWHVWLQDO'LVRUGHUV                                                                    
                %ORRGGLVHDVHDQHPLD                                                                        
                'LVHDVHVUHODWHGWRLRGLQHGHILFLHQF\                                                         
                *HQLWRXULQDU\NLGQH\VWRQHV                                                                 
                'LVHDVHVUHODWHGWRWKHPXVFXORVNHOHWDOV\VWHPERQHVMRLQWV                                
                'LVHDVHVRIWKHUHVSLUDWRU\V\VWHP                                                            
                &DUGLRYDVFXODUGLVHDVHV                                                                       
                ,QIHFWLRXVGLVHDVHVKHSDWLWLVG\VHQWHU\HWF                                               
                7KHVHYHULW\RIZDWHUGHOLYHU\DQGVHZDJHGLVSRVDOHJEDFNSDLQ                            
                +\JLHQHSUREOHPVGXHWRVHZDJHV\VWHPLHQRWHQRXJKZDWHU                                   
                                                                                                               
                2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
                 

                6(59,&($&&2817$%,/,7<5(/$7,216+,3:,7+87,/,7,(6
                 2IDOOWKHXWLOLW\SURYLGHUV\RXGHDOZLWKSOHDVHUDWHWKHOHYHORIVHUYLFHRIHDFK H[FHOOHQW
                 VHUYLFH YHU\SRRUVHUYLFH1$ QRVHUYLFHIURPXWLOLW\
                 
                 6HUYLFHVRIHOHFWULFLW\VXSSO\                                     
                 6HUYLFHRIJDVVXSSO\SLSHGJDV                                  
                 6HUYLFHVRQZDWHUVXSSO\                                           
           
                :KLFK RI WKH IROORZLQJ RUJDQL]DWLRQV \RX DUH DSSO\LQJ SULPDULO\ ZKHQ \RX KDYH DQ\
                    TXHVWLRQVSUREOHPVUHODWHGWRZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQ",173/($6(7,&.21(
               0DKDOODFRPPLWWHH                                                                        
               +RNLP\DW                                                                                 
               9RGRNDQDO                                                                                
               +RPHRZQHUV$VVRFLDWLRQ                                                                   
               1RQH                                                                                   
               2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\                                                                   
                                                                    
                                                                                                      page 103




       
      $UH\RXVDWLVILHGZLWK\RXUZDWHUXWLOLW\VHUYLFH",175($'7+($16:(56
    <HVVDWLVILHG                                                                     
    /RZOHYHORIUHVSRQVLELOLW\                                                         
    7RRH[SHQVLYHELOOVUHODWLYHWRWKHOHYHORIVHUYLFHV                              
    :DWHUXWLOLW\UHSUHVHQWDWLYHVQHYHUFDPHWRP\KRXVH                               
    4XDOLW\RIVHUYLFHLVYHU\SRRU                                                    
    5HTXHVWVIRUSD\PHQWIRUZRUNIRUZKLFKZHGLGQRWH[SHFWWRSD\                   
    2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
                                                                                         
    

     'RHVWKHZDWHUXWLOLW\LQIRUP\RXLQDGYDQFHRIDQ\PRGLILFDWLRQRIZDWHUVXSSO\UHJLPH
         ZDWHUVXSSO\GLVFRQQHFWLRQRUFKDQJHLQZDWHUTXDOLW\HWF"

    <HVDOZD\V                 <HVVRPHWLPHV              1RQHYHU

      +DVDQ\RQHLQ\RXUKRXVHKROGHYHUFRQWDFWHG\RXU9RGRNDQDOUHJDUGLQJWKHSUREOHPZLWK
          ZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQV\VWHP"
    <HV                                         1Rgo to question ʋ 62

     +RZORQJGLGLWWDNHIRUUHVSRQGDW9RGRNDQDOFRQFHUQLQJZLWKZDWHUDQGVDQLWDWLRQV\VWHP
         SUREOHPV",1721($16:(521/<
    2QHGD\                                                                          
    :LWKLQDZHHN                                                                    
    :LWKLQZHHNV                                                                 
    :LWKLQZHHNVWRPRQWK                                                        
    0RUHWKDQDPRQWK                                                                

      'LGWKH\VROYHWKHSUREOHPVDWLVIDFWRULO\",1721($16:(521/<
    <HV                           1R                        'RQ¶WNQRZ8QGHFLGHG

     ,QWKHODVWPRQWKVKRZRIWHQKDYH\RXUHIHUUHGWRVHUYLFHPHQWRKDYHDQ\SUREOHPVZLWK
         \RXUZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVHZDJHV\VWHPZLWKLQ\RXUKRXVHKROG",1721($16:(521/<
    1HYHU                                                                             
    2QFH                                                                              
    7ZLFH                                                                             
    7KUHHWLPHV                                                                      
    0RUHWKDQWKUHHWLPHV                                                             
    1RWVXUH                                                                          
    8QGLFLGHG                                                                        

     +RZRIWHQGR\RXSD\WR9RGRNDQDOIRUZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVHZDJHV\VWHP",1721(
         $16:(521/<
    0RQWKO\                                                                       
    (YHU\PRQWK                                                                 
    2QFHLQPRQWKV                                                            
    +DOI\HDUO\                                                                   
    2QFHD\HDU                                                                   

      'R\RXXQGHUVWDQGWKHELOOLQJV\VWHPRI9RGRNDQDO"
    <HV                                   1R


                      ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 104              QUANTITATIVE SURVEY



                 'R\RXFXUUHQWO\KDYHDQ\DUUHDUVRQ\RXUZDWHUXWLOLW\ELOOWR9RGRNDQDO"
               <HV                            1R                            1RWVXUH
           
                 'R\RXVRPHWLPHVKDYHWRPDNHXQRIILFLDOSD\PHQWVWRVHFXUH\RXUVXSSO\"
             <HV                         1R                          1RWVXUH
           
                ,I\RXGLGQRWSD\DZDWHUELOOZLWKLQWKHODVWPRQWKVZKDWZDVWKHPDLQUHDVRQ͍7,&.
                    $//7+$7$33/<
               1RVSHFLILFUHDVRQ                                                                  
               &DQQRWDIIRUGLW                                                                    
               'LGQRWUHFHLYHHQRXJKZDWHU                                                        
               %LOOLQJPHWKRGVDUHQRWDFFXUDWH                                                    
               1RERG\SD\VLQP\QHLJKERUKRRG                                                      
               2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\
                                                                                                    
               BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
               3D\UHJXODUO\                                                                      

                ,VWKHUHDQ\SHQDOW\IRUQRQSD\PHQWRIELOOV"
            <HV                           1RÆJRWRTXHVWLRQʋ           1RWVXUH
           
                 ,I\HVZKDWDUHWKHSHQDOWLHV"
             6HUYLFHLVFXWRII                                                                  
             3HQDOW\SD\PHQW                                                                     
             5HSULPDQGHGE\XWLOLW\                                                      
             5HSULPDQGHGE\0DKDOODFRPPLWWHH                                                    
             2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                     
           
                 'R\RXWKLQNWKDWIRUKRXVHKROGVZLWKQRUPDWLYHZDWHUSULFLQJQRPHWHUVLWLVDFRPPRQ
           SUDFWLFHIRUQRWDOOKRXVHKROGPHPEHUVWREHUHSRUWHGWRWKHJRYHUQPHQW"
             <HV                            1R                         1RWVXUH
                     
                 ,IZDWHULVGHOLYHUHGE\DWDQNHUWUXFNDUH\RXVDWLVILHGZLWKWKLVVHUYLFH" ,17,)++
           5(&,9(:$7(5)520758&.7$1.(5$7/($6721&($<($5
             <HVgo to question ʋ 73 1R                              'R QRW JHW ZDWHU E\ WUXFN
                                                                                  WDQNHUgo to question ʋ 73
                     
               :K\DUH\RXQRWVDWLVILHGZLWKWKHVHUYLFHGHOLYHU\RIZDWHUE\WUXFNWDQNHU",177,&.$//
                   7+$7$33/<6(9(5$/$16:(56$5(3266,%/(
             7KHSULFHLVWRRKLJK                                                                 
             7KHSULFHLVKLJKO\YDULDEOH                                                          
             7KHWUXFNWDQNHUGRHVQRWFRPHRIWHQ                                                  
             7KHTXDOLW\LVQRWJRRG                                                               
             2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\
                                                                                                     
             BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
                     
               'R\RXWKLQNWKDWRWKHUKRXVHKROGVZLWKDFFHVVWRSLSHGZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQV\VWHP
                   XVHZDWHULQHIILFLHQWO\"
             <HV                           1Rgo to question ʋ 75 1RWVXUHgo to question ʋ
                                                                                    75
           
           
           
           
                                                                                                                page 105




      +RZLUUDWLRQDOXVHRIZDWHULQRWKHUKRXVHKROGV",17$//7+$7$33/<
    3HRSOHOHDYHWDSVKRVHVRSHQLWLVH[SHFWHGWKDWZDWHUZLOOSRXU       
    3HRSOHVSHQGDORWRIZDWHUZKHQILOOELQVLQSXEOLFSODFHV              
    3HRSOHVSHQGLQHIILFLHQWO\ZDWHUIRUWKHLUDFWLYLWLHV                    
    3HRSOHXVHZDWHUIRUQRQHVVHQWLDOSXUSRVHVVXFKDVFOHDQLQJWKH
                                                                              
    RXWHUVXUIDFHVJDUGHQVHWF
    2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                  

      +RZGR\RXWKLQNZKDWLVWKHEHVWZD\WRHQFRXUDJHWKHUDWLRQDOXVHRIZDWHU",17 $//
          7+$7$33/<
    $EHWWHUSROLF\RIJRYHUQPHQWGHSDUWPHQWV                                    
    (QFRXUDJHPHQWWKURXJKVDYLQJVRQDFFRXQWV                                    
    &RQGXFWWUDLQLQJVRQFDUHIXOXVHRIZDWHU                                    
    %HWWHUVHUYLFHPRUHUHOLDEOHSUHGLFWDEOH                                  
    )UHHWHFKQLFDODVVLVWDQFHWRPDLQWDLQZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQ
                                                                                  
    V\VWHP
    'LVWULEXWLRQRIPDWHULDOVRQFDUHIXODWWLWXGHWRZDWHU                       
    $GYHUWLVLQJLQWKHPHGLD                                                     
    ,QVWDOODWLRQRIZDWHUPHWHUV                                                 
    2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\
                                                                                   
    BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
            
      +RZRIWHQGR\RXWKLQNSHRSOHZKRKDYHSLSHGZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQV\VWHPZLWK
          ZDWHUPHWHULOOHJDOO\FXWLQWRWKHZDWHUV\VWHP",177,&.)520 7+,6+$33(16
          )5(48(17/< ,7'2(6127+$33(1(;$03/(60$<%(&211(&7,1*72
          7+(:$7(56833/<727$.(:$7(5,//(*$//<,17(5)(5(1&(:,7+0(7(5
          (7&

                                                                        
,)&+26(17+$1*27248(67,21ʋ

   +RZ GR \RX WKLQN XQGHU ZKDW FLUFXPVWDQFHV SHRSOH UHVRUW WR LOOHJDO FRQQHFWLRQV WR WKH
       GULQNLQJZDWHUVXSSO\V\VWHP",177,&.$//7+$7$33/<
  1RWHQRXJKPRQH\WRSD\                                                               
  $YRLGSD\PHQWV                                                                        
  $JUHHPHQWZLWKJRYHUQPHQWRIILFLDOV                                                   
  2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                       
  8QGHFLGHG                                                                           

   ,I\RXWKLQNWKHLQWHUIHUHQFHLVDSUREOHPZKDWLVLQ\RXURSLQLRQWKHEHVWZD\WRVROYH
       LW"
  ,GRQRWWKLQNWKDWLVWKHSUREOHP                                                    
  6WULFWHUFRQWUROVDQGSHQDOWLHV                                                       
  ,QVWDOOLQJQHZPHWHUVWKDWFDQQRWEHWDPSHUHGZLWK                                    
  &KDQJLQJWKHELOOLQJV\VWHP                                                           
  5HGXFHGSULFHVIRUZDWHU                                                              
  2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                              
                                                                                         
    8QGHFLGHG

      :HUHWKHUHHYHULQWKHVHWWOHPHQWPDKDOODGLVSXWHVRUFRQIOLFWVUHJDUGLQJIDFLOLWLHVZDWHU
          DQGVDQLWDWLRQLQIUDVWUXFWXUH"
    <HV                            1Rgo to question ʋ 81 1RWVXUH go to question
                                                                          ʋ 81

                                                       
                     ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 106             QUANTITATIVE SURVEY



                 6SHFLI\ OLVWHG GLVSXWHV RU FRQIOLFWV LQ WKH VHWWOHPHQW  PDKDOOD UHODWHG IDFLOLWLHV 
                     LQIUDVWUXFWXUHZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQ",17$//7+$7$33/<
                
               3D\PHQWV                                                                         
               6HUYLFH                                                                          
               3UREOHPVZLWKVHUYLFHV                                                           
               3RRULQIUDVWUXFWXUHIDFLOLWLHV                                                  
               2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                            
           

                              :,//,1*1(66723$<)25,03529(0(176
           ,17029($028172):$7(5&+$5*(6,17+(7$%/(%(/2:)52048(67,21ʋ
             ),//,1BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXPPRQWK

           
              1RZ VXSSRVH WKDW DOO SUREOHPV ZLWK \RXU ZDWHU VXSSO\ DQG VDQLWDWLRQ V\VWHP ZRXOG EH
                  VROYHG,17(;3/$,17+$77+,6*22'48$/,7<:$7(5)25+2856$'$<,1
                  68)),&,(1748$17,7,(6
                  
           +RZPXFK\RXU++LVUHDG\WRSD\IRUZDWHUHYHU\PRQWK"
              
              ),//,1BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXPPRQWK
              
              1RWZLOOLQJWRSD\IRULPSURYHPHQW±
              1RSUREOHPVZHDUHVDWLVILHG
              
           
              3OHDVH VHOHFW RQH RI WKH PRVW VHULRXV SUREOHPV RI ZDWHU VXSSO\ \RXU ++" ,17 5($'
                  237,216$16:(567,&.7:2237,2165($'$16:(56
              1RSUREOHPVZLWKZDWHUVXSSO\                                                       
              ,UUHJXODUZDWHUVXSSO\                                                               
              3RRUZDWHUTXDOLW\                                                                   
              1RZDWHUVXSSO\LQVLGHKRXVH                                                         
              1RZDWHUPHWHU                                                                       
              7KHSULFHLVWRRKLJK                                                                
              8QFOHDUV\VWHPRIFDOFXODWLQJSD\PHQWIRUZDWHU                                      
              2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                     
           

                3OHDVH VHOHFW RQH RI WKH PRVW VHULRXV SUREOHPV RI WKH WRLOHW LQ \RXU ++ ,17 5($'
                    $16:(56237,2160$5.7:2237,2165($'$16:(56
                1RSUREOHPVZLWKVHZDJH                                                              
                1RVDQLWDWLRQ                                                                         
                1RZDWHULQWKHWRLOHW                                                                
                )UHTXHQWVDQLWDWLRQEORFNDJHV                                                         
                4XLFNIXOOQHVVRIWKHSLW6HSWLF7DQN                                               
                2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                   
           

                'R\RXKDYHDGGLWLRQDOFRPPHQWVRULGHDVIRUZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQV\VWHP"
               ),//,1
               BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
               BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
           
                                                                                                    page 107




              ,1)250$7,2121+286(+2/'$1''(02*5$3+,&6
     6SHFLI\WKHQXPEHURIKRXVHKROGPHPEHUVOLYLQJLQWKHKRXVHKROGPRUHWKDQPRQWKVLH
         0DOHV                                                BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
         )HPDOHV                                             BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
         0DOHV                                                    BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
         )HPDOHV                                                  BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
         %R\V!                                                 BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
         *LUOV!                                                 BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
            727$/                                                     BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV


     1XPEHURIDFWLYHZRUNLQJPHPEHUVRIWKHKRXVHKROG
    PHPEHURIWKH++                                                         
    PHPEHUVRIWKH++                                                        
    PHPEHUVRIWKH++                                                        
    PHPEHUVRIWKH++                                                        
    PHPEHUVRIWKH++                                                        
    PHPEHUVRIWKH++                                                        
    PHPEHUVRIWKH++                                                        
    PHPEHUVRIWKH++                                                        
    PHPEHUVRIWKH++                                                        
    0RUHWKDQPHPEHUVRIWKH++                                             

     :KDWW\SHRIEDVLFKRXVLQJ"
    $SDUWPHQWLQSULYDWHDSDUWPHQWEXLOGLQJ                                        
    $SDUWPHQWLQJRYHUQPHQWDSDUWPHQWEXLOGLQJ                                     
    2QHVWRUH\SULYDWHKRXVHZLWKODQGSORW                                        
    2QHVWRUH\SULYDWHKRXVHZLWKRXWODQGSORW                                   
    7ZRWKUHHVWRUH\SULYDWHKRXVHZLWKODQGSORW                         7RTXHVWLRQʋ
    7ZRWKUHHVWRUH\SULYDWHKRXVHZLWKRXWODQGSORW                               
    ,PSURYLVHGGRPLFLOHPXGVKDFN                                                
    2WKHUSOHDVH                                                                   
    VSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
         




     6SHFLI\WKHIORRUZKHUH\RXOLYH",17),//,1,)++,108/7,6725(<+286(

    ),//,1BBBBBBBBBIORRUBBBBBBBBBPXOWLVWRUH\KRXVH

     3URSHUW\W\SHRIWKHEDVLFKRXVLQJ
    2ZQ                          5HQW                     2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBB

     $JHRIKRXVHKROGKHDG_BBB_BBB_BBB_

      (GXFDWLRQDO/HYHO",17,1',&$7(7+(+,*+(67/(9(/2)('8&$7,215(&(,9('
                                           5HVSRQGHQW      +HDGRI++
    3ULPDU\HGXFDWLRQVFKRRO                                        
    6HFRQGDU\VSHFLDO                                                 
    +LJKHUHGXFDWLRQGLSORPD                                        
    $FDGHPLFGHJUHH                                                   





                                                   
                     ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 108             QUANTITATIVE SURVEY



                 (PSOR\PHQW6WDWXV
                                                    5HVSRQGHQW            +HDGRI++
               (PSOR\HHHPSOR\HHLQDSULYDWH
                                                                                      
               FRPSDQ\3(
               6WDWHHPSOR\HHHPSOR\HHRI
                                                                                      
               EXGJHWRUJDQL]DWLRQ
               :RUNHURI++7DPRUND                                                
               1RSHUPDQHQWMREVVHDVRQDOZRUN                                      
               )DUPHUDJULFXOWXUDOZRUNHU
                                                                                      
               ZDJHZRUNHU
               8QHPSOR\HG                                                            
               +RXVHNHHSHU                                                           
               3HQVLRQHU                                                             
               'LVDEOHG                                                              

               /HDUQHUVWXGHQW                                                  
                                                                              
                :KLFKRIWKHIROORZLQJGR\RXKDYHDWKRPH",175(&25'$//5(63216(6
               8VXDO79                                                                        
               3ODVPD79/&'                                                                  
               '9'WKHYLGHRSOD\HU                                                           
               &RPSXWHUODSWRS                                                                
               7DEOHW                                                                          
               VPDUWSKRQH                                                                      
               6SOLWDLUFRQGLWLRQHUZLQWHUVXPPHU                                         
               :DVKLQJPDFKLQH6RYLHWVW\OH                                                  
               :DVKLQJPDFKLQH                                                                 
               %RLOHUIRUKRWZDWHU                                                           
               0LFURZDYHRYHQ                                                                 
               )ULGJH                                                                         
               *DVVWRYH                                                                      
               &DUXSWR\HDU                                                            
               &DUDIWHUWKHUHOHDVH                                                     
           
                 +RZ GR \RX TXDOLI\ \RXU FXUUHQW ILQDQFLDO VLWXDWLRQ ,17 6+2: 7$%/( 72
                     5(6321'(17&+226(21/<21($16:(5
               :HGRQRWKDYHHQRXJKWRFRYHUEDVLFIRRGQHFHVVLWLHV
                                                                                                      
               
               :HFDQSD\IRUIRRGQHFHVVLWLHVEXWWKHLQFRPHLVQRWHQRXJKWRSXUFKDVHQHZFORWKHV
               RUSD\IRUXWLOLWLHV                                                                  
               
               :HFDQSD\IRUIRRGQHFHVVLWLHVXWLOLWLHVDQGFORWKHVEXWQRWHQRXJKIRUDSSOLDQFHV
               OLNHDQHZIULGJH                                                                     
               
               (QRXJKIRUDOORIWKHDERYHDQGWRSD\IRUVRPHDSSOLDQFHVOLNHDQHZIULGJH
                                                                                                      
               
               (QRXJKIRUHYHU\WKLQJH[FHSWDQHZKRXVHQHZDSDUWPHQWRUDQHZFDU
                                                                                                      
               
               (QRXJKLIQHFHVVDU\WRJHWDQHZKRXVHQHZDSDUWPHQWRUDQHZFDU                    
                                                                  
                                                                  
                                     7+$1.<289(5<08&+)25<255(63216(6
           
                                                                                                                   page 109




                    +286(+2/'48(67,211$,5(
                   81&211(&7('721(7:25.
   7KHSURMHFW³:DWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQVRFLDOLPSDFWDVVHVVPHQWRQWKH
                           WHUULWRU\RI8]EHNLVWDQ´
         Conversation with a member of the HH at the age of 18+, who is aware of the
           state of water and sanitation services and the costs associated with them
                   72%(),//('287%<7+(5(6($5&+(5%()25(,17(59,(:

1XPEHURIWKHTXHVWLRQQDLUH         _BBBB_BBBB_BBBB_

7KHTXRWD       &LW\                       

                 5HJLRQDOFLW\               

                 5XUDODUHD

       &,7<9,//$*(                                                                    ,QGH[BBBBBBBB

7KHH[DFWDGGUHVVRI++

       6W                                                                            

       $SDUWPHQW                                                                       ʋ

       )ODW                                                                            

7\SHRIDFFRPPRGDWLRQ

       $SDUWPHQWLQWKHDSDUWPHQWKRXVHJURXQGIORRU                                WRWKHTXHVWLRQ
                                                                                        *

       +RXVHRUDFRWWDJHRQWKHVLWH+DZOH\                                      WRWKHTXHVWLRQ
                                                                                        ,

       2WKHUWR),//,1                                                               WRWKHTXHVWLRQ
                                                                                        ,

&RQQHFWHGWR:6V\VWHP                              <(6Æ&217,18(,17(59,(:

12Æ),1,6+7+(,17(59,(:

'DWHRILQWHUYLHZ                 GDWH     _BBBB_BBBB_   PRQWK_BBBB_BBBB_

,QWHUYLHZHU VXUQDPHBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB VLJQBBBBBBBBBBBB                           ʋBBBB

(QFRGLQJ       VXUQDPHBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB VLJQBBBBBBBBBBBB                       ʋBBBB

2SHUDWRU       VXUQDPHBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB VLJQBBBBBBBBBBBB                        ʋBBBB

1DPHRIUHVSRQGHQW BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB

0\QDPHLVBBBBBBBBBBDQG,DPZRUNLQJZLWKDWHDPRIUHVHDUFKHUVRQEHKDOIRIWKH:RUOG%DQNLQYHVWLJDWLQJZDWHU
DQGVDQLWDWLRQLVVXHVDVWKH\UHODWHWR\RXUKRXVHKROG:HDUHLQWHUYLHZLQJDQXPEHURIKRXVHKROGVLQ\RXUDUHDDQG
RWKHUDUHDVRI8]EHNLVWDQ :HDUHLQWHUYLHZLQJDQXPEHURIKRXVHKROGVLQ7KHREMHFWLYHRIWKLVVWXG\LVWREHWWHU
XQGHUVWDQGFRQVXPHUH[SHULHQFHVDQGQHHGVUHODWHGWRZDWHUDQGVDQLWDWLRQVHUYLFHVIURPKRXVHKROGVOLNH\RXUV
7KHFROOHFWHGLQIRUPDWLRQZLOOUHPDLQFRQILGHQWLDO,WLVIRUWKHSXUSRVHRIWKLVVXUYH\RQO\
                                 ,17$6.7+(5(6321'(17$%2877+(+286(+2/'¶60267,03257$17:$7(56285&(6),//2877+(&2/801)25($&+6285&(
                                     63(&,),('%<5(6321'(176285&(66SHFLI\WKHPRVWLPSRUWDQWVRXUFHVRIZDWHUIRU++
                                     
                                                                                        




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5LYHUODNHSRQGWKHRWKHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                +DQGSXPSRXWVLGH\DUG
                                                                                                                                    3LSHGZDWHUVXSSO\LQVLGH
                                                                                                    3LSLQJIURPVRXUFHLQVLGH




                                                                                                                                                                                                   +DQGSXPSSXPSLQWKH
                                                                                                                                                                    3LSHGZDWHURXWVLGH\DUG
                                                                                                                                                                    RQWKHVWUHHWQHLJKERUV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         %X\LQJERWWOHGZDWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      &KDQQHOIRUGUDLQDJH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5DLQZDWHUFROOHFWHG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           &DQDOIRULUULJDWLRQ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 7KHWDQNHUWUXFN
                                                                                                                                                                    LQWKHRWKHUYLOODJH
                                                                                                    KRPHLQWHUQDOWDS



                                                                                                                                    \DUGRXWVLGHWDS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        QDWXUDOUHVHUYRLU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BBBBBBBBBBBBBB
                                                                                                                                                                                                   \DUG
                                                                     'ULQNLQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR




                                                                     &RRNLQJ'LVKZDVKLQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                          3XUSRVHVWKDW     %DWKLQJ6KRZHULQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                  VRXUFHLVXVHGIRU)257+(       /DXQGU\&OHDQLQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                  /$67<($5                         *DUGHQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                     )DUPLQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                     2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                     $YHUDJHGD\VSHU           GD\VSHUZHHN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
QUANTITATIVE SURVEY




                                          ZHHNVRXUFHLV            GD\VSHUZHHN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                          DYDLODEOH)257+(         GD\VSHUZHHN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                          /$670217+                GD\VSHUZHHN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                                                     $OOWKHWLPH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                          'DLO\SHULRGVRI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                  DYDLODELOLW\WRKRXVHKROG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
                                  )257+(/$670217+                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                     page 110
                                                                                                                                                                                         
page 111




                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5LYHUODNHSRQGWKHRWKHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    +DQGSXPSRXWVLGH\DUG
                                                                                                                        3LSHGZDWHUVXSSO\LQVLGH
                                                                                        3LSLQJIURPVRXUFHLQVLGH




                                                                                                                                                                                       +DQGSXPSSXPSLQWKH
                                                                                                                                                        3LSHGZDWHURXWVLGH\DUG
                                                                                                                                                        RQWKHVWUHHWQHLJKERUV




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             %X\LQJERWWOHGZDWHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          &KDQQHOIRUGUDLQDJH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5DLQZDWHUFROOHFWHG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               &DQDOIRULUULJDWLRQ




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     7KHWDQNHUWUXFN
                                                                                                                                                        LQWKHRWKHUYLOODJH
                                                                                        KRPHLQWHUQDOWDS



                                                                                                                        \DUGRXWVLGHWDS




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            QDWXUDOUHVHUYRLU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BBBBBBBBBBBBBB
                                                                                                                                                                                       \DUG
              3UHGLFWDELOLW\RI          8QSUHGLFWDEOH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                  VRXUFHDYDLODELOLW\       3UHGLFWDEOH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                             1RTXDOLW\SUREOHPV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                             %DGWDVWH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                                             %DGRGRU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  
            4XDOLW\RIVRXUFH
                                             %DGFRORU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                 )257+(/$67
                                             6DOW\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                 <($5
                                             3UHVHQFHRISDUWLFOHVWXUELGLW\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                             3UHVHQFHRIEDFWHULDYLUXVHV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                             2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                             1RWUHDWPHQWUHTXLUHG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
                                             6WHULOL]LQJZLWKFKHPLFDOV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
            7UHDWPHQWUHTXLUHG        )LOWHULQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                 )257+(/$67               %RLOLQJ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                 <($5                       6XQH[SRVXUH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                             /HWLWVWDQG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                             2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
            6HDVRQDOYDULDWLRQLQ
                                             <HV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                 VRXUFHTXDOLW\
                 )257+(/$67
                 <($5                       1R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       
            $YHUDJHYROXPHRI        
                 ZDWHUXVHGGDLO\)25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 
                 7+(/$670217+
            6SHHGRIWKHVRXUFH        +LJK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                 IORZIRU7+(/$67          0LGGOH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          
                 <($5                       /RZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             
                                             7LOOPHWHUV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
            'LVWDQFHIURPWKH          )URPPHWHUV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                 VRXUFH                     )URPWLOONP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                             )URPɤɦWLOONP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                             2YHUNP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                             
                      ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 112              QUANTITATIVE SURVEY



           
            3OHDVH VSHFLI\ WKH UHDVRQV ZK\ \RX DUH QRW FRQQHFWHG WR D SLSHG ZDWHU VXSSO\" ,17
                 6(9(5$/$16:(56$5(3266,%/(5($'$//237,216
             1RSLSHGVDQLWDWLRQQHWZRUNFRQQHFWLRQ                                                    
             1RWKDYHHQRXJKIXQGVDW'+IRUFRQQHFWLRQWRSLSHGVDQLWDWLRQQHWZRUN                    
             RXWVLGHWKHKRXVH
             1RWKDYHHQRXJKIXQGVWRFRQQHFWWRDSLSHGVDQLWDWLRQQHWZRUNLQ++                      
             7KHUHDUHQRWHQRXJKIXQGVIURPRWKHU++QHLJKERUVWRFRQQHFWWRWKH                    
             SLSHGVDQLWDWLRQQHWZRUNRXWVLGHWKHKRXVH
             ,IDOO++DUHFRQQHFWHGWKHUHZLOOQRWEHZDWHUSUHVVXUHLQWKHWDS                     
             6SHFLI\RWKHUBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                  
                 
            +RZGR\RXJHWZDWHUIRUWKHQHHGVRI++" ,176(9(5$/$16:(5237,216$5(
                 3266,%/(
             7DQNHUWUXFNGHOLYHUVWRKRXVHKROG                                                        
             'ULYHPRWRUYHKLFOHWRVRXUFHDQGEDFN                                                    
             &ROOHFWIURPIULHQGVKRXVHKROG                                                           
             &DUU\ZDWHUE\IRRWEDFNIURPVRXUFH                                                      
             8VHDQLPDOWRFDUU\ZDWHUEDFNIURPVRXUFH                                                
             2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                                   
           
            :KLFKPHPEHUVRIWKHKRXVHKROGW\SLFDOO\FROOHFWZDWHU",176(9(5$/$16:(56$5(
                 3266,%/(
             0DOHV                                                                                 
             )HPDOHV                                                                               
             0DOHV                                                                                     
             )HPDOHV                                                                                   
             %R\V                                                                                  
             *LUOV                                                                                 
                             
            +RZRIWHQGR\RXJHWZDWHU",1721/<21($16:(5
             WLPHVDGD\                                                                           
             WLPHVDGD\                                                                           
             WLPHDGD\                                                                              
             WLPHVDZHHN                                                                          
             WLPHVDZHHN                                                                          
             WLPHVDPRQWK                                                                         
                 
            +RZPXFKWLPHLVVSHQWRQWKLVWDVNWRWDOIRUDOOLQGLYLGXDOVLQFOXGLQJPRYHPHQWWRDQG
                 IURPVRXUFHDQGZDLWLQJWLPHDWVRXUFHDWRQHWLPH"
                                            ),//,1ͮͺͺͺͮͺͺͺKRXUVͮͺͺͺͮͺͺͺͮPLQXWHVSHUGD\

           
            $UH\RXOLYLQJLQWKHVDPHGZHOOLQJDV\RXZHUH\HDUVDJR"
             <HV                                            1R      go to question 21
           
           
           
           
           
           
                                                                                                            page 113




  $UHFRQGLWLRQVRIZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQVHUYLFHVLQ\RXUKRXVHKROGEHWWHUQRZWKDQ
      \HDUVDJR" ,176(/(&7$16:(548(67,21%(/2:$1'),//,1$&&25'$1&(
      :,7+6(/(&7('5(63216(6
   <HVWKH\DUHLPSURYHG          1RZRUVHQHG                         'LG QRW 1RWVXUH
                                                                               FKDQJH
    6SHFLI\ WKH UHDVRQV RI  6SHFLI\ WKH UHDVRQV RI                        
        LPSURYLQJ WKH ZDWHU VXSSO\     ZRUVHQLQJ ZDWHU VXSSO\ DQG
        DQG VDQLWDWLRQ V\VWHPV LQ      VDQLWDWLRQ FRQGLWLRQV LQ \RXU
        \RXU'+"                          '+"
   7KHTXDOLW\RIVRXUFHV             7KHTXDOLW\VRXUFHVZRUVHQHG           
                                                                          
   LPSURYHG
   $YDLODELOLW\RIVRXUFHVRI         $YDLODELOLW\RIVRXUFHVZRUVHQHG       
                                                                          
   LPSURYHG
   $FFHVVWRZDWHULVQRZHDVLHU  $FFHVVWRZDWHULVQRZKDUGHU          
   %XUGHQRIWKHFROOHFWLRQ         %XUGHQRIWKHFROOHFWLRQVWRUDJH     
                                                                          
   VWRUDJHQRZORZHU                  QRZKLJKHU
   6HUYLFHVRI9RGRNDQDOQRZ          6HUYLFHV9RGRNDQDOQRZPRUH            
                                                                          
   FKHDSHU                            H[SHQVLYH
   1RZIHZHUKHDOWKSUREOHPV          1RZPRUHKHDOWKSUREOHPV               
                                                                          
   GXHWRWKH9RGRNDQDO               EHFDXVHRIWKH9RGRNDQDO
   2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\             2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\                 
   BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                 BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
      
:KRGRHVWKHIROORZLQJLQ\RXUKRXVHKROG",1763(&,)<$//7+$75(/$7(65($'
237,216
                                            0DOHV
                                            )HPDOHV
                                            0DOHV
    &RRNLQJ
                                            )HPDOHV
                                            Ɇɚɥɶɱɢɤɢ
                                            Ⱦɟɜɨɱɤɢ
                                            Ɇɭɠɱɢɧɵ
                                            )HPDOHV
                                            0DOHV
    'LVKZDVKLQJ
                                            )HPDOHV
                                            %R\V!
                                            *LUOV!
                                            0DOHV
                                            )HPDOHV
                                            0DOHV
    /DXQGU\
                                            )HPDOHV
                                            Ɇɚɥɶɱɢɤɢ!
                                            *LUOV!
                                            0DOHV
                                            )HPDOHV
                                            0DOHV
    &OHDQLQJ
                                            )HPDOHV
                                            %R\V!
                                            *LUOV!
 
 
 
 
                       ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 114               QUANTITATIVE SURVEY



            ,Q\RXURSLQLRQGR\RXWKLQNWKDWDKRXVHKROGFRQQHFWLRQWRWKHSXEOLFQHWZRUNZDWHU
                DQG VHZDJH VHUYLFHV LV PRUH OLNHO\ WR LPSURYH WKH TXDOLW\ RI OLIH IRU PHQ ZRPHQ RU ERWK
                HTXDOO\",7121/<21($16:(5
             0DOHV                   )HPDOHV                  %RWKHTXDOO\               1RWVXUH
           

           6DQLWDWLRQ

            :KHUHLV\RXUWRLOHW",176(9(5$/$16:(56$5(3266,%/(
            ,QVLGHWKHKRXVH                                                                              
            2XWVLGHWKHKRXVHEXWZLWKLQWKH\DUG                                                        
            2XWRIWKHKRXVHRQSXEOLFDUHD                                                              
            2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBB                                                            
               
            :KDWNLQGRIWRLOHWGR\RXXVHPRUHRIWHQ"

           )OXVKWRLOHWERZOFRQQHFWHGWRDSLSHGZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQ                          
           )OXVKWRLOHWERZOFRQQHFWHGWRWKHZDVWHSLW                                                
           )OXVKWRLOHW%RZOQRWFRQQHFWHGWRWKHLQVXODWHGWDQNZLWKDOHDNLQWR                     
           WKHJURXQG
           6KDUHGZLWKQHLJKERUVWRLOHWLQWKH\DUG                                                      
           7RLOHWLQDSULYDWH\DUG                                                                      
           1RWRLOHWRSHQGHIHFDWLRQ                                                                   
           2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\
                     
            ,I WKH VDQLWDWLRQ IDFLOLW\ LV ORFDWHG RXWVLGH WKH KRXVHKROG GR ZRPHQ IHHO VDIH WR XVH
                VDQLWDWLRQIDFLOLWLHVDWQLJKWWLPH" ,QW'2127$6.7+,648(67,21)257+26(:+2
                +$9($6$1,7$7,21)$&,/,7,(6,1++
             <HVYHU\VFDUHG                  <HVLWLVQRWVDIH                   1RZHXVHGWR
                
            ,VWKHUHZDWHUIRUDQ\QHHGVLQWKHWHUULWRU\RI\RXUVDQLWDWLRQIDFLOLW\"
             <HVDOZZD\V                      <HVVRPHWLPHV                        1R
           
            ,VWKHVDQLWDWLRQIDFLOLW\VKDUHGZLWKRWKHUKRXVHKROGV"
             <HV                                                    12go to question 32
                     
            ,I\HVKRZPDQ\KRXVHKROGVXVHLW"
             
             ),//,1ͮͺͺͺͮͺͺͺͮͺͺͺͮ++
                
            +RZRIWHQGR\RXZDVK\RXUKDQGVDIWHUJRLQJWRWKHWRLOHW"
             $OZD\V                                                                       
             2IWHQ                                                                            go the question 42
             1HYHU                                                                        
             'RQ¶WNQRZ                                                                   
             6RPHWLPHVQRWDOZD\V                                                             
                     
                     
                     
                     
                     
                                                                                                            page 115




 ,IQRWDOZD\VZK\"
 1RWQHFHVVDULO\                                                                          
 )RUJHWLQJ                                                                               
 1RVXFKKDELWV                                                                           
 1RIDFLOLWLHVIRUKDQGZDVKLQJ                                                           
 1RWHQRXJKZDWHU                                                                         
 2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBB                                                               
        

 6SHFLI\ZK\\RXDUHQRWFRQQHFWHGWRDSLSHGVHZHUV\VWHP",176(9(5$/$16:(56
      $5(3266,%/(5($'3266,%/(237,216
  1RSLSHGFRQQHFWLRQ                                                         
  1RW KDYH VXIILFLHQW IXQGV DW ++ IRU FRQQHFWLRQ WR SLSHG VDQLWDWLRQ
                                                                                
  RXWVLGHWKHKRXVH
  1RWKDYHHQRXJKIXQGVWRFRQQHFWWRDSLSHGVDQLWDWLRQLQVLGHWKH++         
  7KHUHDUHQRWHQRXJKIXQGVIURPRWKHU++QHLJKERUVWRFRQQHFWWRWKH
                                                                                
  SLSHGVDQLWDWLRQRXWVLGHWKHKRXVH
  2WKHUSOHDVH
                                                                                
  VSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB

 :RXOG\RXOLNHWRFRQQHFWWRVHZHUSLSHOLQHV\VWHP"
  <HV                                                    1R
      
 :KHUHHPSWLHVVDQLWDWLRQFRQVWUXFWLRQ",175($'$16:(56237,2167,&.21/<
      21(
  &RQFUHWHVHSWLFWDQN                                                         
  (DUWKHQVHSWLFWDQN                                                          
  /LQHGSLW                                                                    
  8QOLQHGSLW                                                                  
  'UDLQ                                                                        
  &KDQQHO                                                                      
  ,UULJDWLRQGLWFKQHDUWKHKRXVH                                              
  'RQ¶WNQRZ                                                                   
  2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                          

&26760$7(5,$/&2676)25+286(+2/'6(59,&(6)25:66
                       6(59,&(6
      3OHDVHWHOOKRZPXFKLVWKHFRVWRI\RXU++SUHVHQWHGEHORZIRUSXEOLFXWLOLWLHV"
                                                                      8Q
          ([SHQVHV                                                  GHFL            &RVW8=VRXP
                                                                      GHG
                                                    ZLQWHU                BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
       (OHFWULFLW\PRQWK
                                                    VXPPHU                BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
                                                    ZLQWHU                BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
       *DVPRQWKVHDVRQDOPRQWK
                                                    VXPPHU                BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP

           'ULQNLQJZDWHUWDSERWWOHGIURP      ZLQWHU                BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    
           WDQNHUWUXFNRURWKHUVRXUFHPRQWK   VXPPHU                 BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP



                            ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 116                    QUANTITATIVE SURVEY




                    3OHDVHWHOOZKDWDUH727$/H[SDQVHVRI\RXUKRXVHKROGSHUPRQWKRQDYHUDJH
                                                                                8Q
                                                1DPH                          GHFL        727$/H[SHQVHV
                                                                                GHG

                         7RWDOH[SHQVHV,QW,1',&$7($//         ZLQWHU                     BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               
                         &26762)++)25$//1(('6    VXPPHU              BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               
            ,QGLFDWHDOOH[SHQVHVUHODWHGWRSURYLGLQJZDWHU++LQWKHSDVW\HDU" ,17),//21/<
               5(/(9$1732,176

               $FWLRQ                                                               1RQH                &RVW8=VRXP
               ([SHQVHVRQSXPSKDQGSXPSPRQWK                                         BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               3D\PHQWIRUZDWHUIURPWDQNHUWUXFNPRQWK                                  BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               %RWWOHGZDWHUZHHN                                                         BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               %X\LQJZDWHUIURPIULHQGV¶KRXVHKROGVZHHN                                 BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               :DWHUWUHDWPHQWSURFHVVLQJILOWHULQJHWF\HDU                         BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               3D\PHQWIRUDWWHQGLQJSXEOLFEDWKPRQWK                                    BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               )XHOIRUWUDQVSRUWIRUEULQJLQJZDWHUPRQWK                                BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBB                                          BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
           




                    :KLFKRQHRIIH[SHQVHV\RXKDGRQ\RXUZDWHUVXSSO\V\VWHP"
                                            $FWLRQ                                  1RQH                &RVW8=VRXP

               &RQVWUXFWLQJJURXQGZDWHUZHOO                                                BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               /LYHVWRFNIRUWUDQVSRUWLQJZDWHU                                             BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               3LSLQJIURPWKHVRXUFHWRWKHKRXVHKROG                                      BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               %HORZJURXQGWDQNVIRUVWRUDJHRIZDWHU                                      BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               7DQNVIRUWKHWUDQVSRUWRIZDWHU                                             BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               :DWHUVWRUDJHWDQNV                                                          BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                        BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
           




                    6SHFLI\DQ\H[SHQVHVUHODWHGWRVDQLWDWLRQV\VWHP",1763(&,)<$//7+$75(/$7(6

                                                      $FWLRQ                                             &RVW8=VRXP
               &OHDQLQJRXWRISLWFRQFUHWHSLWVE\FRQWUDFWRURUKRXVHKROG
               2QFHLQ\HDU
               0RQWKO\
               0RQWKO\
               <HDUO\
               6SHFLI\FOHDQLQJHYHU\BBBBBBB\HDUV
               1RWUHTXLUHGFOHDQLQJXS
               )LOOLWZLWKHDUWKDQGPDNHDQRWKHURQH                           BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
               1RH[SHQGLWXUHV                                                                            
               2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                         BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXP
           


           


           
                                                                                                  page 117




   :KLFKRQHRIIH[SHQVHVKDYH\RXLQFXUUHGIRU\RXUVDQLWDWLRQV\VWHP"

                              $FWLRQ                               1RQH         &RVW8=VRXP

 6HSDUDWHEXLOGLQJIRUVHZDJHFRQVWUXFWLRQ                       
                                                                                BBBBBBBBWKVRXP
 ,QVWDOOHGSLWVHSWLF                                          
                                                                                BBBBBBBBWKVRXP
 :DWHUVWRUDJHWDQNVIRUVHZDJH                                  
                                                                                BBBBBBBBWKVRXP
 2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                  
                                                                                BBBBBBBBWKVRXP
    

         121021(7$5<&26762)&855(17:666(59,&(6
  )RUZKDWSXUSRVHVDUH\RXKDYLQJ WKHPRVWGLIILFXOWLHVZLWKWKHZDWHU" ,1763(&,)<
      $//7+$75(/$7(66(9(5$/$16:(56$5(3266,%/(
  1RSUREOHPV                                                                          
  'ULQNLQJ                                                                             
  &RRNLQJ                                                                              
  'LVKZDVKLQJ                                                                        
  %DWKLQJ6KRZHULQJ                                                                  
  *DUGHQ                                                                               
  $QLPDO/LYHVWRFN                                                                   
  )DUPLQJZDWHULQJ                                                                    
  2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                  
    
  $UH\RXDZDUHRIDQ\QHJDWLYHKHDOWKLPSDFWVRI\RXUZDWHUEHLQJH[SHULHQFHGE\DQ\
      PHPEHUVRI\RXUKRXVHKROG"
  <HV                                          1Rgo to question ʋ 46

    
   :KDWDUHWKHVHQHJDWLYHHIIHFWVIDFHG",176(9(5$/$16:(56$5(3266,%/(

  *DVWURLQWHVWLQDO'LVRUGHUV                                                         
  %ORRGGLVHDVHDQHPLD                                                             
  'LVHDVHVUHODWHGWRLRGLQHGHILFLHQF\                                              
  *HQLWRXULQDU\NLGQH\VWRQHV                                                      
  'LVHDVHVUHODWHGWRWKHPXVFXORVNHOHWDOV\VWHPERQHVMRLQWV                     
  'LVHDVHVRIWKHUHVSLUDWRU\V\VWHP                                                 
  &DUGLRYDVFXODUGLVHDVHV                                                            
  ,QIHFWLRXVGLVHDVHVKHSDWLWLVG\VHQWHU\HWF                                    
  7KHVHYHULW\RIZDWHUGHOLYHU\DQGVHZDJHGLVSRVDOHJEDFNSDLQ                 
  +\JLHQHSUREOHPVGXHWRVHZDJHV\VWHPLHQRWHQRXJKZDWHU                        
                                                                                      
  2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
   
   
   
   
                       ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 118               QUANTITATIVE SURVEY



               6(59,&($&&2817$%,/,7<5(/$7,216+,3:,7+87,/,7,(6
                 2IDOOWKHXWLOLW\SURYLGHUV\RXGHDOZLWKSOHDVHUDWHWKHOHYHORIVHUYLFHRIHDFK H[FHOOHQW
                 VHUYLFH YHU\SRRUVHUYLFH1$ QRVHUYLFHIURPXWLOLW\
                 6HUYLFHVRIHOHFWULFLW\VXSSO\                                  
                 6HUYLFHRIJDVVXSSO\SLSHGJDV                                
                 6HUYLFHVRQZDWHUVXSSO\                                        
           
            ,IZDWHULVGHOLYHUHGE\DWDQNZDWHUWUXFNFDUULHUVDUH\RXVDWLVILHGZLWKWKLVVHUYLFH"
                $VNLIKRXVHKROGUHFHLYHVZDWHUIURPZDWHUWUXFNVFDUULHUVDWOHDVWRQFHD\HDU
             <HVgo to question ʋ 51 1R                            'RQRWJHWZDWHUIURPDZDWHU
                                                                                 WUXFNFDUULHUgo to question ʋ
                                                                                 51
                    
            :K\ DUH \RX QRW VDWLVILHG ZLWK WKH VHUYLFH GHOLYHU\ RI WKH ZDWHU WUXFN FDUULHU"
           ,QWHUYLHZHUPRUHWKDQRQHDQVZHULVSRVVLEOH
             7KHSULFHLVWRRKLJK                                                                 
             7KHSULFHIOXFWXDWHVWRRPXFK                                                         
             :DWHUWUXFNVGRQRWFRPHKHUHYHU\RIWHQ                                               
             7KHTXDOLW\RIWKHZDWHULVQRWJRRG                                                   
             2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB                                         
                    
                              :,//,1*1(66723$<)25,03529(0(176
            +RZ PXFK ZRXOG \RX EH ZLOOLQJ WR SD\ IRU FRQQHFWLRQ WR WKH ZDWHU VXSSO\" 12:
               683326(7+$7,7:28/'%(3266,%/(726833/<*22'48$/,7<3,3(':$7(5
                +2856 3(5 '$< ,1 68)),&,(17 $028176 72 0((7 $// <285 '5,1.,1*
               6(59,&($1'6$1,7$7,211(('6627+$7<28:28/'127+$9(7286($1<
               27+(5 :$7(5 6285&(6 :28/' <28 %( :,//,1* 72 3$< 7+( )2//2:,1*
               $02817,1727$/"
             
             ),//,1BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBWKVRXPPRQWK
                  <RXDUHZLOOLQJSD\OXPSRULQLQVWDOOPHQWV"
                     /XPS
                     ,QLVWDOOPHQWV
             
                  1RWZLOOLQJWRSD\IRULPSURYHPHQW±
                  8QGHFLGHG
             
           
            +RZPXFKDUH\RXZLOOLQJWRSD\SHUPRQWKIRUZDWHU"
             
             ),//,1BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBɬɵɫɫɭɦɦɟɫɹɰ
             
             1RWZLOOLQJWRSD\IRULPSURYHPHQW±
             :LOOLQJWRSD\DFFRUGLQJWKHPHWHU
             


                'R\RXKDYHDGGLWLRQDOFRPPHQWVRULGHDVIRUZDWHUVXSSO\DQGVDQLWDWLRQV\VWHP"
               ),//,1
               BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
               BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
           
                                                                                              page 119




          ,1)250$7,2121+286(+2/'$1''(02*5$3+,&6
  6SHFLI\WKHQXPEHURIKRXVHKROGPHPEHUVOLYLQJLQWKHKRXVHKROGPRUHWKDQPRQWKV
     LH
     0DOHV                                               BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
     )HPDOHV                                            BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
     0DOHV                                                   BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
     )HPDOHV                                                BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
     %R\V                                               BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
     *LUOV                                               BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV
          ȼɋȿȽɈ                                                  BBBBBBBBBPHPEHUV


 1XPEHURIDFWLYHZRUNLQJPHPEHUVRIWKHKRXVHKROG,17(;3/$,17+$77+(<$5(
     $// 0(0%(56 2) ++ :+2 :25. :+(7+(5 7+(< *(7 6$/$5<  25 127 )25
     (;$03/(:25.217+(/2&$/$5($72025.$
  PHPEHURI++                                                        
  PHPEHUVRI++                                                       
  PHPEHUVRI++                                                       
  PHPEHUVRI++                                                       
  PHPEHUVRI++                                                       
  PHPEHUVRI++                                                       
  PHPEHUVRI++                                                       
  PHPEHUVRI++                                                       
  PHPEHUVRI++                                                       
  ȻɨɥɟɟPHPEHUVRI++                                                

 :KDWW\SHRIEDVLFKRXVLQJ"
  $SDUWPHQWLQSULYDWHDSDUWPHQWEXLOGLQJ                                  
  $SDUWPHQWLQJRYHUQPHQWDSDUWPHQWEXLOGLQJ                               
  2QHVWRUH\SULYDWHKRXVHZLWKODQGSORW                                  
  2QHVWRUH\SULYDWHKRXVHZLWKRXWODQGSORW                             
  7ZRWKUHHVWRUH\SULYDWHKRXVHZLWKODQGSORW                   7RTXHVWLRQʋ
  7ZRWKUHHVWRUH\SULYDWHKRXVHZLWKRXWODQGSORW                         
  ,PSURYLVHGGRPLFLOHPXGVKDFN                                          
  2WKHUSOHDVH                                                             
  VSHFLI\BBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBBB
     




 ɍɤɚɠɢɬɟ ɷɬɚɠ ɧɚ ɤɨɬɨɪɨɦ ȼɵ ɩɪɨɠɢɜɚɟɬɟ" ɂɇɌ ɁȺɉɈɅɇɂɌȿ ȿɋɅɂ Ⱦɏ ȼ
     ɆɇɈȽɈɗɌȺɀɇɈɆȾɈɆȿ

  ),//,1BBBBBBBBBɷɬɚɠɜBBBBBBBBBɷɬɚɠɧɨɦɞɨɦɟ

 3URSHUW\W\SHRIWKHEDVLFKRXVLQJ
  2ZQ                       5HQW                  2WKHUSOHDVHVSHFLI\BBBB

 $JHRIKRXVHKROGKHDG_BBB_BBB_BBB_\HDUVROG

 (GXFDWLRQDO/HYHO",17,1',&$7(7+(+,*+(67/(9(/2)('8&$7,215(&(,9('
                                        5HVSRQGHQW        +HDGRI++
  3ULPDU\HGXFDWLRQVFKRRO                                           
  6HFRQGDU\VSHFLDO                                                    
  +LJKHUHGXFDWLRQGLSORPD                                           
  $FDGHPLFGHJUHH                                                      

                                              
                  ANNEX C. QUESTIONNAIRE FOR
page 120          QUANTITATIVE SURVEY


           
            (PSOR\PHQW6WDWXV
                                                  5HVSRQGHQW            +HDGRI++
             (PSOR\HHHPSOR\HHLQDSULYDWH
                                                                                    
             FRPSDQ\3(
             6WDWHHPSOR\HHHPSOR\HHRI
                                                                                    
             EXGJHWRUJDQL]DWLRQ
             :RUNHURI++7DPRUND                                                
             1RSHUPDQHQWMREVVHDVRQDOZRUN                                      
             )DUPHUDJULFXOWXUDOZRUNHU
                                                                                    
             ZDJHZRUNHU
             8QHPSOR\HG                                                            
             +RXVHNHHSHU                                                           
             3HQVLRQHU                                                             
            'LVDEOHG                                                               

            /HDUQHUVWXGHQW                                                     
           
            :KLFKRIWKHIROORZLQJGR\RXKDYHDWKRPH",175(&25'$//5(63216(6
             8VXDO79                                                                               
             3ODVPD79/&'                                                                         
             '9'WKHYLGHRSOD\HU                                                                  
             &RPSXWHUODSWRS                                                                       
             7DEOHW                                                                                 
             VPDUWSKRQH                                                                             
             6SOLWDLUFRQGLWLRQHUZLQWHUVXPPHU                                                
             :DVKLQJPDFKLQH6RYLHWVW\OH                                                         
             :DVKLQJPDFKLQH                                                                        
             %RLOHUIRUKRWZDWHU                                                                  
             0LFURZDYHRYHQ                                                                        
             )ULGJH                                                                                
             *DVVWRYH                                                                             
             &DUXSWR\HDU                                                                   
             &DUDIWHUWKHUHOHDVH                                                            
           
            +RZ GR \RX DVVHVV \RXU PDWHULDO VLWXDWLRQ RI \RXU ++ ,17 6+2: 7$%/( 72
                5(6321'(17&+226(21/<21($16:(5
             :HGRQRWKDYHHQRXJKWRFRYHUEDVLFIRRGQHFHVVLWLHV
                                                                                                     
             
             :HFDQSD\IRUIRRGQHFHVVLWLHVEXWWKHLQFRPHLVQRWHQRXJKWRSXUFKDVHQHZFORWKHV
             RUSD\IRUXWLOLWLHV                                                                   
             
             :HFDQSD\IRUIRRGQHFHVVLWLHVXWLOLWLHVDQGFORWKHVEXWQRWHQRXJKIRUDSSOLDQFHV
             OLNHDQHZIULGJH                                                                      
             
             (QRXJKIRUDOORIWKHDERYHDQGWRSD\IRUVRPHDSSOLDQFHVOLNHDQHZIULGJH
                                                                                                     
             
             (QRXJKIRUHYHU\WKLQJH[FHSWDQHZKRXVHQHZDSDUWPHQWRUDQHZFDU
                                                                                                     
             
             (QRXJKLIQHFHVVDU\WRJHWDQHZKRXVHQHZDSDUWPHQWRUDQHZFDU                     
                                                                
                                                                
                                   7+$1.<289(5<08&+)25<2855(63216(6



                                                        
                                                                                                                                 page 121




ANNEX D. FOCUS GROUP DISCUSSION GUIDES
  Social Impact Analysis of Drinking Water and Sanitation in Uzbekistan
 Focus Group Discussion Guide and Write Up Template - For Households
                   Without Networked Connection
The following guide is included to help the research firm carry out focus group discussions (FGDs) with consumers WITHOUT piped (utility
supplied) water connection. Each FGD shall comprise the following elements:
• Introduction
• Consumption Patters: designed to capture perception of water and sanitation (WSS) availability / quality, water needs and
usage, and coping strategies.
• Costs and Coping Strategies : designed to capture expenditure/costs incurred for WSS services and non-monetary impacts
of poor service on health, earnings opportunities, livelihood among others.
• Improvements and Willingness to Pay: designed to capture willingness of households to pay for WSS access and quality
improvements, tariff price increases, behavioral change and demand management options, improvements households would like to see
and conditions under which households would accept price increases. This exercise also explores what kind of interaction occurs
between consumers and suppliers in WSS provision / management and the responsive of public bodies; and
• Wrap-up.


INTRODUCTION (approx 15 mins)
Introduce the purpose of the research. Explain that the purpose of the FGD is to explore how consumers obtain their water supply and
sanitation (WSS) services and how their experience has been, what activities they use water for, what type of improvements they would
like to see in their water supply and sanitation, and their impressions of and interactions with any public bodies in their attempt to gain
access or better quality WSS provision. Ask for permission to record the discussion. Explain that people’s anonymity will be respected and
participants will not be cited based on any personal identifiers.
Fill Table 1 and 2 at the beginning of the meeting and proceed to the exercises. Table 1 can be filled in by the interviewer. For Table 2, ask
each participant to briefly introduce themselves with some basic information (see Table 2).These questions are for introductory purposes
only. If the discussion becomes heated over one particular point, explain that these will be covered in more detail during the discussion
to follow, and proceed to the first exercise. If participant feels uncomfortable answering anything in the group, move on to the next point
(you may try to catch them during breaks or at end of meeting). Note any issues that are brought up and may not be specifically covered
in the research. Prompt respondents to discuss/elaborate more in the relevant section of the discussion.

Table 1: Composition of Group

 Type of settlement                                               e.g. Rural/District City/Oblast City
 Region, District Name
 No of participants
 Gender Composition                                               e.g. 100% female, 40% male..
                            ANNEX D. FOCUS GROUP
      page 122              DISCUSSION GUIDES

Table 2: FGD participant details

    Participant1        Gender and Age       Employment          Number of         Main Source         Brief description   Type of
                                             Status              Household         of Household        of dwelling         Sanitation
                                                                 Members           Income              (House/apt)         system




                        e.g. Male, 32                                              e.g. remittances/                       e.g. Shared
                                                                                   manual labor/                           Toilet
                                                                                   farm income
                                                                                                                           e.g. Flush Toilet

Any Comments on Participant Composition:

EXERCISE 1: CONSUMPTION/USAGE PATTERNS (Water Source, Availability, Supply, Usage
[approximately 35 min]
The goal of this exercise is to understand where consumers get their water from, what type of sanitation facility they have, what they
use water for, how much they demand and when demand peaks,.what the water quality is like. Gender dynamics should be carefully
studied as women’s needs and perceptions might differ from men’s. Building upon the participants details on Table 2, start the
discussion covering the following topics37.
Interactive Exercise: Water Sources and Usage
Ask participants what water sources they use and for what purposes. List these on a flip chart as shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Water Sources and Usage

                       Source               Use                  Source            Use
    Participant 1      Handpump             Washing/             Truck Delivery    Drinking
                                            Bathing




Building on this exercise, discuss the following issues:
Water Source/Availability
•      How long does it take for them to collect the water? How often to they buy water?
•      Has it been stressful at times to obtain water?
•      Would they like to have networked water? Have they tried to get it? What happened?
Water Storage, Quality, System
•      How do you store your water? (capture all different systems used).
•      Do you leave the public standpipe tap open before the availability period if irregular hours?
•    What is the quality of water like? Have you experienced getting bad quality water? Regularly, not at all? What was wrong with it? Do
you know why?
• How often do they come across problems of repair/maintenance and what are the problems? How do they solve it or why are they
unable to solve it? i.e. can they ask any organization/local government agency/Makhalla for help?
•      Do they know where the waste water goes from bathing/washing?

37 The questions in each category do not have to be asked in the same order.
                                                                                                                                        page 123



Sanitation
•      What sort of sanitation facility do they have?
• If off site, how long do they need to travel to access it?
• If offsite, what are the factors that is making it difficult for them to have an onsite facility? (i.e high costs of building toilet, irregular
water supply, no sewerage connection etc).
• Ask them to describe any other problems they have with accessing and quality of sanitation facility. (i.e. If offsite, is water available
there?).
Write-up: This exercise will be first summarized by a table to capture sources of water for households and its usages as shown in Figure 1.
The different storage options people use should then be listed in another similar table (see table 3), with their importance on a scale from
0 to 3. The write-up should then describe information on i) Source - if and why availability varies ii) water quality received and treatment
strategies iii) water usage - including gender differences in water and sanitation demand and usage iv) sanitation facilities and the costs
and/or benefits, and v) any accounts/stories of households trying to get connected to piped water/have onsite sanitation. The write up
will provide contextual descriptions and quotes regarding these.
Table 3: Sources of Water and Storage Options for Non Networked Households

    Storage Options                       Frequency2                 Significance3                                  Comments
    e.g. Ground Tank                           8                            3
    e.g. e.g. X litre Container                5                            2
    Storage Options                       Frequency                   Significance             Comments
    e.g.


Main Summary of Discussion and Quotes:


EXERCISE 2: Monetary WSS costs and Affordability38, Non Monetary WSS costs and Coping Strategies
[approximately 35 min]
The goal of this exercise is to gauge how expensive WSS is for household without piped water, compared to those with piped but also
compared to how much they spend on other utilities and other household spending. This includes costs of buying equipment, installation
and repairs as well as non-monetary costs associated to their coping strategies, health, livelihood, and other impacts. Participants should
be asked to elaborate on the costs they incur in accessing WSS services. Answers should be elicited for similar units – per month, per year
(to ensure comparability in the final analysis). Questions should first be asked regarding relative monetary costs of water and sanitation
compared to other utility costs or other household expenditure. This should cover a) costs of initial installation of the water source (i.e.
assets purchased) iii) recurring costs of accessing and treating water and sanitaion; and iv) costs of maintenance and repair (of buying
new containers, new electric pump, new handpump spare parts, etc). v) how people cope with WSS expenditures, in particular seasonal
spikes and price increases. Questions should then be asked about the non-monetary costs of using water and sanitation.
Interactive Exercise: Monetary Costs of Current WSS System
Ask participants to think about the various purchases related to accessing and using water supply and sanitation (including buying water
itself ). Start with water supply i.e. any purchases required to install water source in or outside dwelling, to store the water, to treat the water,
or any other related purchases. Then continue to ask about expenses incurred to access and use sanitation facilities. i.e. construction,
maintenance etc. Then going around in a circle, ask participants what these items are (if participant buys water, write “buying water” as
one item), list it on a flip chart in front of them, as shown in Figure 2.




38 Questions about finances and payment may prove to be especially sensitive and need to be approached carefully.
                             ANNEX D. FOCUS GROUP
      page 124               DISCUSSION GUIDES

Figure 2: Monetary Costs Related to WSS access/use

    Buy water
    Electric Pump
    Container
    Handpump and parts




• Then continue the discussion by asking them whether any of these purchases have been expensive or problematic to obtain and
why? Which items are more significant to their needs? Summarize the results of this in Table 4 (below).
•       How much do you spend on water compared to other utilities? i.e. compared to gas? electricity?
Non Monetary Costs
• The moderator should move the discussion to non monetary costs of the current system of water supply and sanitation. How much
time a day would they save if they did not have to collect water? treat water?
•       Does not having piped water in any way impact their time, earnings, or opportunity to work, or engage in other activities? How?
•       Are people facing any health problems due to the quality of water? Have they gotten ill because of the water consumed?
•       Are they facing any physical/health problems because of the sanitation system?
• How much do you think they have spent in the last year treating illnesses and ailments related to lack of water access/physical strains,
or consuming bad quality water?
• The moderator should now move the discussion to how they are coping with the monetary and non monetary costs of their WSS
systems (if they mentioned any i.e. of expenses, lack of supply of water or difficult to use sanitation facilities, water quality problems,
difficulty repairing/ maintaining the infrastructure they have etc).
Write-Up: The findings from this exercise will be summarized (similar to Exercise 1) - using description of relative costs of water and
sanitation and quotes that illustrate the various points made. Based on results from the interactive exercise and subsequent question, list
the monetary costs incurred to access and use WSS, the number of people this applied to, and its importance to them. Then summarize
the discussion on i) monetary costs mentioned, whether and why certain purchases were difficult/problematic ii) non monetary – health,
time, earnings, opportunity costs mentioned iii) how people cope with these.

Table 4 - Measures adopted to cope with WSS expenditures

    Costs of input infrastructure needed to               Frequency4                 Significance5                   Comments
    obtain water/ sanitation facility
    e.g. Electric pump                                         3                           5
    e.g. Water Boiler                                          5                           4
    e.g Filter

    Non Monetary Costs                            Frequency                           Significance                   Comments
    e.g. Illness                                              8
    e.g. Time away from school                                5
    e.g. Less time at work                                    2
 etc.                                                         Etc
Summary of Discussion and Quotes:

Additional Comments:
                                                                                                                                       page 125



EXERCISE 3. Willingness to pay and improvements sought [approximately 25 min]

The goal of this exericse is to assess what i) sort of changes and improvements consumers would like to see in their water supply and
sanitation system (access and use) and/or what factors they think are working well for them in the current system ii) if they would be
willing to start paying for piped connections - why or why not? ii) which improvements matter most to them and why? iii) willingness to
pay for particular improvements and why?

Interactive Exercise: Benefits and Improvements Sought of Current WSS System

Provide participants with a card/pen and ask them to write down 1) if they find anything beneficial about the current system of water
supply in their households? And current method of sanitation? (e.g. this could be probed by asking whether they are happy for example
that they are not paying for water? What aspects of the current system are working for them?).

Then ask participants to write down 2) what they perceive to be the two or three most problematic issues of the current system of water
supply and sanitation.

Then start the discussion by asking participants to say out loud what benefits they indicated (if any) and write them down on a flip chart.
Then ask participants what problems they indicated and write these down on the flip chart. The main focus of this section should be on
these challenges and the improvements they would like to see.
• Lead the discussion to what improvements they would like to see (given these problems). If people only mention wanting to get
piped connection, probe about hours of availability, water quality issues etc under current system. Ask participants to rank the mentioned
improvements (verbally). In the write up, provide these answers in Table 5, with importance of each measure indicated on a scale from
0-3..
• If no improvements are mentioned, then probe using the examples such as: less time to collect water, better quality, increased hours
of water supply, on site sanitation, toilets with better infrastructure?
The moderator should now move on to asking if households would be willing to pay to obtain such improvements. Reiterate the
improvements that were discussed or mention the examples below:
o   If you had piped connection – would you be willing to pay for water? Why/why not?
o   If you got very good quality water (no treatment needed) would be willing to pay for water? How much?
o   Would you be willing to invest on an an onsite sanitation facility? Why/why not?
The above discussion should generate very specific issues and suggestions for improvement. The moderator should help the group
constructively discuss the issues mentioned and explore in detail each of the issues. The moderator or assistant should note whether all
participants agree with a certain issue or whether different respondents feel strongly about a different type of issue with WSS providers /
managers.
• Moderator should now move discussion onto consumer experiences with trying to obtain water (networked or through other means)
and their interactions with relevant public bodies i.e. utilities, Mahallas, Khokimiyat representatives, donors etc. do they come into contact
with any of these bodies for water/sanitation related issues? Ask them to describe reasons and their perceptions on the attitude of officials.
• What are the avenues /places to go if they are having problems with water and/or sanitation? Ask participants to give details on
what their experience has been with pursuing their issues, seeking more information/ clarification.
•   If they felt officials were not as responsive, what do they think is the main issue why (e.g. lack of capacity, lack of interest, etc.).
Write-Up: The write-up should list mentioned improvements and their importance to consumers in Table 4; and types of difficulties
consumers have with public bodies in Table 5. The rest of the discussion and answers should then be summarized in a description format
similar to the above exercises – with appropriate quotes.
                          ANNEX D. FOCUS GROUP
   page 126               DISCUSSION GUIDES

Table 5 – Improvements that Consumers would like to see in WSS Services

 Improvement                          # respondents         Rank or score (starting with               Willingness to Pay
                                       mentioning             highest ranked/scored)
 e.g. more information on …                 8                                                 50% more than current tarriff
 e.g. better metering system                5                                                 20% more
 e.g. suggested mechanism for              etc.                                               Not mentioned
 inforamtion delivery


Table 6 – Challenges with trying to obtain piped water

 Issues/ Challenges with public bodies                       Frequency                              Comments (examples of
                                                                                                  improvements/ measures that
                                                                                                    have made a difference)
 e.g. no possibility to get information on services          8
 e.g. refusal to connect to network                          5
Summary of Answers and Quotes:


Additional Comments:


Wrap – Up [5 min]
Thank FGD respondents for allocating [1.5-2 hours] of their time to answer the questions. Emphasize that their answers are very important
and valuable and will be used to inform water supply strategies and options carried out by the Government of Uzbekistan. Re-emphasize
that their anonymity will be respected.
General Provisions
A minimum of two people should facilitate the FGDs: 1) a main moderator, with extensive experience of conducting FGDs, and 2) a
note-taker/ second facilitator. All FGDs should be recorded, to allow anyone to go back and check responses if insufficient information
is provided in the write-ups and tables. All notes and flip charts used during the FGDs should be kept. Since the qualitative assessment
aims to understand impact on and attitudes to WSS service delivery changes among different groups of consumers, it is very important
to retain stories and experiences shared by respondents. The narrative write-ups should include vivid quotes that illustrate different points
of view. All quotes should include proper references (locale, type of FGs, gender, age and occupation of the respondent). Responses that
required prompting by the facilitator should be noted. The facilitator should keep the discussions of any given issue “on track” and remind
respondents that the FGD may not cover all of the raised issues. However, concerns should be noted and if possible, ranked based on their
relevance and extent of importance to the respondents. The moderator should note any age or gender variations in answers, pose follow-
up questions to explore these variations and record the noted differences carefully for the final report.



          Social Impact Analysis of Drinking Water and Sanitation in Uzbekistan

      Focus Group Discussions Guide and Write Up Template For Households With
                               Networked Connection
The following guide is intended to help the research firm carry out focus group discussions (FGDs). All members of this focus group should
received piped water supply by the utilities. Each FGD shall comprise the following elements:
• Introduction
• Consumption Patterns: designed to capture water and sanitation (WSS) availability / quality, water needs and usage, and
nature and quality of services provided by utilities.
                                                                                                                                 page 127



• Costs and Coping Strategies: designed to capture expenditure/costs incurred for WSS services, non-monetary impacts of
poor service on health, earnings opportunities, livelihood among others, and coping strategies.
• Improvements and Willingness to Pay: designed to capture willingness of households to pay for WSS service improvements, tariff
price increases, behavioral change and demand management options, improvements households would like to see and conditions under
which households would accept tarriff increases. This exercise also explores households’ expectations of utility services; and
• Wrap-up.

INTRODUCTION (approx 15 mins)
Introduce the purpose of the research. Explain that the purpose of the FGD is to explore 1) how consumers obtain their water supply
and sanitation (WSS) services and how their experience has been; 2) what activities they use water for; 3) how they have
benefitted because of water and sanitation access or whether they are facing any problems due to water and sanitation
access/use; 4) whether they would like to see improvements in their water supply and sanitation services, including those
related to service quality by the utilities.
Ask for permission to record the discussion. Explain that people’s anonymity will be respected and participants will not be cited based on
any personal identifiers.
Fill Table 1 and 2 at the beginning of the meeting and proceed to the exercises. Table 1 can be filled in by the interviewer. For Table 2, ask
each participant to briefly introduce themselves with some basic information (see Table 2).These questions are for introductory purposes
only. If the discussion becomes heated over one particular point, explain that these will be covered in more detail during the discussion
to follow, and proceed to the first exercise. If participant feels uncomfortable answering any question infront of the group, move on to
the next point (you may try to catch them during breaks or at end of meeting). Note any issues that are brought up and may not be
specifically covered in the research. Prompt respondents to discuss/elaborate more in the relevant section of the discussion.



Table 1: Composition of Group

 Type of settlement                                               e.g. Rural/District City/Oblast City
 Region, District Name
 No of participants
 Gender Composition                                               e.g. 100% female, 40% male..




Table 2: FGD participant details

 Participant6     Gender and Employment              Number of Main   Source Brief          Type of Sanitation system
                  Age        Status                  Household of Household description
                                                     Members   Income        of    dwelling
                                                                             (House/apt)



                  e.g. Male, 32                                      e.g. remittances/                     e.g. Flush toilet
                                                                     manual labor/
                                                                     farm income
                                                                                                   e.g. Shared toilet
Comments on Participant Composition: e.g. Main source of income of participants changes due to seasonal employment.
                           ANNEX D. FOCUS GROUP
   page 128                DISCUSSION GUIDES

EXERCISE 1: CONSUMPTION/USAGE PATTERNS (Water Source, Availability, Supply, Usage
[approximately 35 min]
The goal of this exercise is to understand where consumers get their water from, what type of sanitation facility they have, what they
use water for, how much they demand and when demand peaks, their experience with water and sanitation services i.e. whether water
is sufficient with adequate pressure, billing methods, quality of water etc. Gender dynamics should be carefully studied as women’s
needs and perceptions might differ from men’s. Building upon the participants details in Table 2, start the discussion with
the interactive exercise on water availability and needs (described below) and continue covering topics and questions
provided subsequently.
The moderator should create two diagrams on a flip chart, beforehand, that look like Figure 1.

Figure 1:




         6am       7am       8am      9am       10am     11am       12pm      1pm      2pm    3pm      4pm      5pm              6pm
# of Days                                          Water Availability Hours (continue numbers to represent 24 hours)




Interactive Exercise: Water Availability and Needs39
Ask participants a) How many days a week do you receive water in your tap? B) How many hours per day do you receive water in your tap?
Ask the participants to come to the flip chart and indicate the number of days in the first column, and the number of hours by drawing a
line between the hours as shown in Figure 2.


Then on the second diagram, ask participants to indicate, the hours of water supply they would ideally need per day to fulfill their water
needs, as shown in Figure 3. Using the results, calculate average water availability (days and hours/day) and provide this information in
the write up summary.



Figure 2: Water Availability

 e.g.5
 e.g.7


         6am       7am       8am      9am       10am     11am       12pm      1pm      2pm    3pm      4pm      5pm              6pm
# of Days                                          Water Availability Hours (continue numbers to represent 24 hours)



Figure 3: Water Needs

 e.g.7
 e.g.7


         6am       7am       8am      9am       10am     11am       12pm 1pm 2pm 3pm 4pm 5pm
# of Days                                          Water Availability Hours (continue numbers to represent 24 hours)

39 For those participants who receive 24 hours of supply, focus on the second and subsequent questions on needs and usage of water.
                                                                                                                                    page 129




Building on these results, start a discussion around:

•      Why participants need their indicated amount of water? What are the different usages for them?
•      If current supply is inadequate, do they use other sources than the tap?
•      What is the water pressure like from the tap – strong, weak, sufficient?
Water Storage, Water Quality, Service system and quality
•      How do you store your water? (capture all different systems used).
•      Do you leave your tap on before the availability period if irregular hours?
•      Are there times (monthly, seasonally) when getting water is more difficult than usual? Why?
• What is the quality of water normally like? Have you experienced getting bad quality water? Regularly, not at all? What was wrong
with it? Do you know why?
• How often do you come across problems of leakage or any other problems? (If yes, ask them to describe how they dealt with the
problems).
•      Are the utilities responsive to your needs and issues?
•      Do you have an installed meter? Ask them to describe what benefits they see of having a meter (or not)?
•      Do you clearly understand your bills and the overall billing system?
•      Do you know where the waste water goes from bathing/washing?
Sanitation
•      What sort of sanitation facility do you have?
• If offsite: how long do you need to travel to access it?
• If offsite - what are the factors that is making it difficult for you to have an onsite facility? (i.e high costs of building toilet, irregular
water supply, no sewerage connection etc).
Describe any other problems you have with accessing and quality of sanitation facility.
Write-up: This exercise will be summarized by one table to capture water usage and the different storage options people use (See Table 3),
with their importance on a scale from 1 to 5. The write-up will then describe information on i) supply - if and why availability varies and
other sources that piped consumers depend on ii) gender differences in water needs and usage iii) system of service provision by utilities
(billing methods etc) and any issues or problems discussed in terms of operation and maintenance iv) sanitation facilities. The write up
will provide a detailed summary of discussion and quotes regarding these.

Table 3: Other Sources of Water and Storage Options

    Water Usage                        Frequency7                  Significance8                               Comments
    Domestic Use (Cooking,                  8                            3
    bathing)
    Gardening                               5                            2
    Cattle


    Storage Options                    Frequency                   Significance           Comments
    e.g. No need for storage
    e.g. X litre Container
Summary of Discussion and Quotes:


Additional Comments:
                             ANNEX D. FOCUS GROUP
    page 130                 DISCUSSION GUIDES

EXERCISE 2: Monetary WSS costs and Affordability40, Non Monetary WSS costs, and Coping Strategies
[approximately 35 min]
The goal of these exercises are to estimate the costs that WSS households incur to obtain and use water and sanitation facilities.
Questions should first be asked regarding monetary costs41 such as i) tarriffs, costs of installation, maintenance and repair of pipes and
related infrastructure, costs of treating the water and ii) non monetary costs such as health, time costs, costs to livelihood opportunities,
productive work, or other opportunity costs. This exercise also explores affordability or how people cope with WSS expenditures, in
particular seasonal spikes and price increases, as well as how people cope with the non monetary costs of accesing and using WSS.
Interactive Exercise: Monetary Costs of Current WSS System
Ask participants to think about the various purchases related to their water supply and sanitation system. Start with water supply i.e. any
purchases required to get connected to piped supply, to store the water, to treat the water, or any other related purchases. Then continue
to ask about expenses incurred to access and use sanitation facilities. i.e. construction, maintenance etc. Then going around in a circle, ask
participants what these items have been and list it on a flip chart in front of them - first related to water and then to sanitation.
• Then continue the discussion by asking them whether any of these purchases have been expensive or problematic to obtain and
why? i.e. are certain repair items not accessible in the market? Are they too expensive? Which items are more significant to their needs?
Summarize the results of this in Table 4 (below).
•    How much do they spend on water fees compared to other utilities? i.e. compared to gas? electricity?
•    What happens if they are unable to pay their bills?
Non Monetary Costs
• The moderator should move the discussion to non monetary costs of the current system of water supply and sanitation. How much
time a day would they save if they did not have to treat water? i.e. If no issues come up, probe by providing examples such as do they
have to still use other sources of water i.e. buy water from trucks/bottle water and does this in any way impact their time, earnings, or
opportunity to work, or engage in other activities?
•    Are people facing any health problems due to the quality of water? Have they gotten ill because of the water consumed?
•    Are they facing any physical/health problems because of the sanitation system?
• How much do you think they have spent in the last year treating illnesses and ailments related to lack of water access/physical strains,
or consuming bad quality water?
• The moderator should now move the discussion to how they are coping with the monetary and non monetary costs of their WSS
systems (if they mentioned any i.e. of expenses, lack of supply of water or difficult to use sanitation facilities, water quality problems,
difficulty with dealing with utility providers, difficulty repairing/ maintaining the pipes etc).
Write-Up: The findings from this exercise will be summarized (similar to Exercise 1) - using description of relative costs of water and
sanitation and quotes that illustrate the various points made. Based on results from the interactive exercise and subsequent question, list
the monetary costs incurred to access and use WSS, the number of people this applied to, and its importance to them. Then summarize
the discussion on i) monetary costs mentioned, whether and why certain purchases were difficult/problematic ii) non monetary – health,
time, earnings, opportunity costs mentioned iii) how people cope with these.




40 Questions about finances and payment may prove to be especially sensitive and need to be approached carefully.
41 Where applicable, answers should be elicited for similar units – per month, per year - to ensure comparability in the final analysis.
                                                                                                                               page 131



Table 4: Monetary and Non Monetary Costs to Consumers

 Monetory Costs                     Frequency                  Significance                              Comments
 e.g. Filters                           8                           3
 e.g. Connection charge                 5                           2
 Non Monetory Costs                 Frequency                  Significance                              Comments
 e.g. Illness (specify)                 8                           3
 e.g. Time away from paid               5                           2
 work
Summary of Answers and Quotes:

Additional Comments:



EXERCISE 3. Willingness to pay and improvements sought in water and sanitation delivery
[approximately 25 min]

The goal of this exericse is to assess what i) sort of changes and improvements consumers would like to see in their water supply and
sanitation system (access and use) and/or what factors they think are working well for them in the current system ii) if they would be
willing to increase payment for the system as it is now – why or why not? iii) how much they are willing to pay for particular improvements/
which improvements matter most to them and why?

Interactive Exercise: Benefits and Improvements Sought of Current WSS System

Provide participants with a card/pen and ask them to write down 1) if they find anything beneficial about the current system of water
supply in their households? And current method of sanitation? (e.g. this could be probed by asking whether they are experiencing any
benefits due to the fact that they have piped water supply).

Then ask participants to write down 2) what they perceive to be the two or three most problematic issues of the current system of water
supply and sanitation.

Then start the discussion by asking participants to say out loud what benefits they indicated and write it down on a flip chart. Then ask
participants if they would be willing to increase their payments for the current system of WSS – why or why not?
Then ask participants what problems they indicated and write this down on the flip chart. The main focus of this section should be on
these issues and the improvements they would like to see.
• Lead the discussion to what improvements they would like to see (given these problems). Ask participants to rank the improvements
(verbally). In the write up, provide these answers in Table 5, with importance of each measure indicated on a scale from 0-3..
• If no improvements are mentioned, then probe using the examples such as: better water pressure, better quality, increased hours of
water supply, on site sanitation, toilets with better infrastructure?
• The moderator should then move the discussion to whether participants would be willing to increase tarriffs/payments to obtain
these improvements. Provide specific conditions:
o    If you had water 24 hours a day – would you be willing to pay 50% more than your current tarriff? 30% more? Why/why not?
o    If you had adequate water pressure throughout the day, would you be willing to pay more? 40% more? 30% more?
o    If you got very good quality water (no treatment needed) would be willing to pay more? How much more?
o    Would you be willing to invest on an onsite sanitation facility? Why/why not?
                          ANNEX D. FOCUS GROUP
   page 132               DISCUSSION GUIDES

• The above discussion should generate very specific issues and suggestions for improvement. The moderator should help the group
constructively discuss the issues mentioned and explore in detail each of the issues. The moderator or assistant should note whether all
participants agree with a certain issue or whether different respondents feel strongly about a different type of issue with WSS providers /
managers.
• Continue discussion asking:
• What do you think is the fairest way of dividing up payments for water supply? Flat rate for everyone or higher rates for those who use
more water? What about lower payments for poorer households?
• Do you think there is inefficient water use by other households? How do you think greater water efficiency could be encouraged? i.e.
better oversight from utilities, savings incentives on bills, more reliable service, information on benefits of saving water?
• What are some of the key concerns and suggestions participants have in terms of their interaction with WSS service providers/utilities
(pose the question openly; if necessary prompt for issues having to do with reliability of services and quality of services in general, fairness,
transparency, handling of customer inquiries or complaints, etc.)?
• How common do you think it is to have some forms of agreement with the bill collector privately? What kind of agreements could
these be? i.e. if bill not paid? lower payments in exchange for a gift?
• What are the grievance redress or complaint handling mechanisms if any? Ask participants to give details on what their experience is
with pursuing claims or complaints, seeking more information/ clarification on their bill/ quality of service/ other. Were claims resolved or
not. If not, what do they think is the main reason why (e.g. lack of capacity, lack of interest, etc.).
Write-Up: The write-up should list the mentioned improvements and their importance to consumers in Table 5; and whether or not
households were willing to pay more, including an indication of how much more (if provided). The rest of the discussion and answers
should then be summarized in a description format similar to the above exercises – with appropriate quotes. This should cover i) why
consumers are (are not) willing to increase payment for current WSS services ii) why they are willing to pay for particular improvements
over others (if this is the case). iii) any difficulties consumers have with utilities and their importance.

Table 5 – Salient Problems with Current WSS Provision

 Problems                                                     Frequency                                Comments (examples of
                                                                                                      improvements/ measures
                                                                                                         that have made a
                                                                                                            difference)
 e.g. no possibility to get information on services           8
 e.g. non-transparency on tariff setting                      5
Table 6 –Improvements Consumers Would Like to See and Willingness to Pay

 Improvement                          # respondents           Rank or score (starting with                Willingness to Pay
                                       mentioning               highest ranked/scored)
 e.g. more information on …                  8                                                   50% more than current tarriff
 e.g. better metering system                 5                                                   20% more
 e.g. suggested mechanism for               etc.                                                 Not mentioned
 information delivery

Summary of Discussion and Quotes:


Additional Comments:
                                                                                                                                page 133



Wrap – Up [5 min]
Thank FGD respondents for allocating [1.5-2 hours] of their time to answer the questions. Emphasize that their answers are very important
and valuable and will be used to inform water supply strategies and options carried out by the Government of Uzbekistan. Re-emphasize
that their anonymity will be respected.
General Provisions
A minimum of two people should facilitate the FGDs: 1) a main moderator, with extensive experience of conducting FGDs, and 2) a
note-taker/ second facilitator. All FGDs should be recorded, to allow anyone to go back and check responses if insufficient information
is provided in the write-ups and tables. All notes and flip charts used during the FGDs should be kept. Since the qualitative assessment
aims to understand impact on and attitudes to WSS service delivery changes among different groups of consumers, it is very important
to retain stories and experiences shared by respondents. The narrative write-ups should include vivid quotes that illustrate different points
of view. All quotes should include proper references (locale, type of FGs, gender, age and occupation of the respondent). Responses that
required prompting by the facilitator should be noted. The facilitator should keep the discussions of any given issue “on track” and remind
respondents that the FGD may not cover all of the raised issues. However, concerns should be noted and if possible, ranked based on their
relevance and extent of importance to the respondents. The moderator should note any age or gender variations in answers, pose follow-
up questions to explore these variations and record the noted differences carefully for the final report.
                         ANNEX E. REVIEW OF DRINKING WATER AND
   page 134              SANITATION REFORM IN EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

ANNEX E. REVIEW OF DRINKING WATER AND SANITATION REFORM
IN EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
ECA countries have faced common challenges to maintain over-sized, inefficient infrastructure from the Soviet
period. Amongst other challenges, including lack of operation and maintenance, insufficient finance, weak institutions, and only
partial decentralization, ECA countries have often managed to maintain access but experienced steady declines in levels and
quality of service and infrastructure (OECD 2011). These have had negative consequences for human health, the environment and
economic development.

Uzbekistan finds itself in a ‘low-level equilibrium trap’ with regard to WSS service. The literature describes this trap as
being characterized by features such as political interference in service delivery, inadequate investment and reinvestment to
expand and/or maintain the system, low tariffs insufficient to cover expenses (below the marginal cost of provision), low consumer
expectations regarding service quality and low willingness to pay, non-payment by customers and low levels of enforcement by
agencies, and deteriorating service quality linked in a vicious cycle (Savedoff & Spiller 1999, Walker 1999, (Singh et al. 1993, Altaf et
al. 1993, Spiller and Savedoff 1999 (in Davis & Whittington nd)), Herrera & Post 2014). This leads to systems needing to be funded
out of national funds rather than user fees, or more likely not being funded at all, and hence becomes difficult to finance. This
also effectively subsidizes households with access to water (Walker 1999) and prevents extension of services to unconnected
households.

Box C1 describes the Soviet legacy that has contributed to the low-level equilibrium trap in Uzbekistan and other ECA countries.

 Box E1 – Soviet legacy for WSS systems

 The infrastructure built during the Soviet era was relatively reliable albeit capital intensive. This can be explained by the fact that,
 at the time, the benchmark water consumption (consumption norms) and the planning standards (including the spare capacity
 in the event that water consumption grows in the long-term) were set at an excessively high level (frugal water consumption
 was not encouraged at that time). During the Soviet period, water pricing was focused solely on the objective of poverty
 alleviation, seeing water as a human right and attempting to provide free service to everyone. Cost recovery objectives were
 ignored, meaning financial resources had to be obtained from other sectors of the economy. This created macroeconomic
 distortions as the economic system struggled to meet such unfunded liabilities. Today these bills are coming due in the form of
 run-down utilities. Also, because water was provided free it was not used efficiently by consumers. The water supply system was
 overly expensive because the public sector attempted to treat and deliver more water to households than they really wanted
 or were willing to pay for. Water utilities did not have their own revenue streams and could not obtain sufficient resources from
 higher levels of government, meaning that water distribution systems became unreliable.

 The end of the Soviet era led to substantial transfers of responsibilities to local governments in most countries and associated
 decentralization of water and sanitation services. This, in some cases, led to over-fragmentation of water and sanitation
 operators and created a number of challenges, such as inefficient scale of operations and difficulties to access financing –
 rural water services have particularly suffered from over-fragmentation. In many places, it was not possible to maintain access
 to water supply services, and some wastewater treatment facilities simply stopped operating. Inefficiency further increased
 because households left their taps open in the hope of collecting and storing water when it became available. So a policy
 of “free water” not only meant that the cost recovery and economic efficiency objectives were not met, but also that service
 quality itself declined.

 Information sourced from Whittington (2003) & OECD (2011).
                                                                                                                        page 135



Related to the low-level equilibrium trap, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) compiles
a WSS sector transition index42, tracking the extent to which the countries in the region have implemented reforms that
enable open and democratic market economies in the sector. The index ranks Uzbekistan at the lower end of the ECA region
with key challenges including improvements in the technical, operational and financial performance of utilities, the rehabilitation
of physical infrastructure, the clear separation of operating companies from regulatory bodies and the establishment of sound
regulation (EBRD 2010 in OECD 2011).


Regional examples of how to get out of a low-level equilibrium trap?
Some ECA countries have overcome elements of the low-level equilibrium trap and provide examples of successful
approaches that could be scaled-up and replicated (OECD 2011). In 2000, ECA countries endorsed the ‘Almaty Guiding
Principles for Reform of Water Supply and Sanitation in New Independent States’ to reverse the deterioration of water services.
Some ECA countries have successfully implemented approaches which are yielding positive results, and selected examples are
outlined below.
Private sector p!articipation (PSP)

It is estimated that 20 percent of the 2008 ECA population is served by operators with private sector participation
(PSP), a more than doubling since 2004 (OECD 2011). PSP ranges from 53 percent in Armenia (a 50 percent growth compared to
2004) down to zero percent in Uzbekistan.

With regard to Uzbekistan, OECD (2011) reports that the appetite for PSP was reduced after the failure of two successive
contracts with international private operators in Bukhara and Samarkand. However, there is a declared political will to facilitate
PSP and more positive experiences from countries such as Armenia, Kazakhstan, Russian Federation and Georgia – particularly the
pace of growth – could serve as a revised model for Uzbekistan.

Improved enabling environments encouraged private operator involvement and helped enhance the performance
of water utilities in Armenia, Kazakhstan, Russian Federation and Georgia. OECD (2011) reports that in the Russian Federation,
private operators have in many cases been ‘agents of positive change’ in the sector; in Armenia the international private operator
substantially improved the performance of the Armenian Water and Sewerage Company; and in the Kyrgyz Republic, a small
domestic private operator managed to transform the local water utility from a chronic loss-maker into a profitable entity. However,
authors such as Davis & Whittington (nd) caution about relying too greatly on PSP to play a significant role in water sector reform
and instead encourage transition economies such as Uzbekistan to focus on creating adequate enabling environments and then
eliciting more interest from private firms.
Closing funding gaps and strategy for tariff increases

Over the past decade, the WSS sector has received a declining share of domestic public funding in most ECA countries
(OECD 2011). Concurrently, international finance (through donors, etc.) has been greater in some countries and less in others
(such as Uzbekistan). This has led to a failure to adequately value the costs of poor water policy and the potential benefits of
investment (ibid.).
WSS tariffs in the region are at or below 0.4 US$/m3 in seven of twelve ECA countries – insufficient to cover O&M costs (OECD
2011). Revenues from water sales in Uzbekistan are among the lowest in the ECA region and remain close to their 1990 levels
(OECD 2011).

Uzbekistan has the lowest operating cost coverage ratio of the ECA countries – this is a financially unstable situation
(OECD 2011). In 2009, the average tariff for households in Uzbekistan covered 90 percent of operating costs alone (OECD 2011). In
such a case, water sales cannot finance appropriate maintenance and capital expenditure.

ECA countries should support the emergence of utilities whose operations can be financed by tariffs so that they can
concentrate their support on capital investment and social protection (OECD 2011). There appears to be scope in many
ECA countries to raise tariffs further, if service quality improves, and in conjunction with targeted support for poorer sections of
the population who would be adversely affected by such price increases (OECD 2011).



42 An index value of 4 is for a country that has ‘fully transitioned’. Uzbekistan rating was just over 1.5 in 2010.
                         ANNEX E. REVIEW OF DRINKING WATER AND
   page 136              SANITATION REFORM IN EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

Armenia has made significant efforts to improve their tariff-setting frameworks to better reflect economic realities
and to insulate tariff-setting from excessive political interference. Importantly, Armenia’s tariff increases were accompanied
by substantial improvements in key service provisions for customers, such as regularity of drinking water supply (Khachatryan
2009 in OECD 2011). Armenia is a case where tariff increases have generated more revenue for the water utilities and customers
have received improved service. Analysis in Armenia showed that a certain level of tariffs and collection rate would allow covering
O&M costs of the service in urban areas after a transition period. Additional analysis confirmed that this level of tariff was affordable
for 90 percent of the population and helped design targeted measures to support the lowest decile that could not afford paying
their water bills as well as other essential goods and services (OECD 2011).
Subsidies only for Capital Expenditures, not Operational Expenditures


In ECA countries, significant state transfers (financed from taxes) are used to cover the shortfall between tariff
revenues and costs, thus leading to the provision of O&M subsidies, rather than on capital expenditure. A key issue with
such transfers is that the amounts effectively disbursed are often lower than those committed, which results in a high degree
of unpredictability of water and sewerage utility providers (OECD 2011). Examples from Armenia and the Russian Federation
illustrate the challenges of eliminating OpEx subsidies. In Armenia, only about 20 percent of the committed funds for operational
subsidies had been effectively disbursed in 2008 and 2009. Over time, central governments are looking to decrease such transfers
to the utilities (OECD 2011). In the Russian Federation, public transfers from various levels of government account for more than
50 percent of the value of capital investments in the WSS sector. For example, in 2009, total capital investments in the water sector
were estimated at RUR 57 190 million (EUR 1 570 million) and public budgets had funded roughly 50 percent of that total (ibid.).
Part of these transfers was channeled via the specially-established Russian Federation Investment Fund.
Maintaining, renovating and in some cases, down-sizing infrastructure
A critical priority in ECA countries consists of maintaining, renovating and in some cases, down-sizing infrastructure
(when oversized assets are expensive to operate) (OECD 2011). OECD (2011) analysis found that in the ECA region, even if tariffs
were increased up to an average of 5 percent of household income (with social protection measures to support the poorest who
would pay more than this average), user charges would only generate about 50 percent of cash flow needs for the foreseeable
future, going up to 95 percent by 2028. Therefore, prioritization of investments is recommended, starting with investments to
reduce water related morbidity and halt the deterioration of existing infrastructure. Further to this, Davis & Whittington (nd), in a
study on Ukraine’s WSS network, find that the Soviet legacy infrastructure is overbuilt in the sense that the capital stock exceeds
the ability of the economic base to maintain it (9 in Davis & Whittington nd). If so, economic theory suggests that the existing
water supply infrastructure should be allowed to deteriorate until it adjusts to a lower, socially optimal level. Even ‘strategic
disinvestment’ approaches focusing on incremental improvements to some parts of the capital stock (while allowing others to
deteriorate) may not result in perceptible service improvement to many households (ibid.). However, prioritizing investments in
service levels and regions that generate the highest benefits at least cost (e.g. improved sanitation in rural areas) (OECD 2011) may
be preferential.
Increasing water metering
The share of households in the ECA region with water meters is relatively low. Meters are most common in Moldova and
Belarus (over 90 and 80 percent respectively) and just over 30 percent in Uzbekistan (OECD 2011). Installing meters can be a costly
and technically challenging undertaking (Davis & Whittington nd).

Moldova and Armenia provide good examples of mixed experiences with metering programs (as reported by OECD
2011). (i) Moldova promoted nationwide installation of water meters which led to significant reductions in user charges revenue
because of differences between housing water consumption norms and the volume of water actually consumed based on meter
readings. This generated a difficult financial situation for WSS utilities. Besides, cross-subsidizing of domestic water tariffs at the
expense of commercial and industrial users prompted many of them to drill their own boreholes instead of using water supply
services. This again reduced revenues from user charges for water utilities. (ii) Armenia has taken drastic actions to increase water
metering. To that end, a water use metering strategy was designed and implemented. This helped reduce water consumption,
water leaks, production costs, and increase collection rate. In Yerevan, Armenia, a metering program reached more than 80
percent of connections. This has significantly driven down consumption, which is now in line with Western Europe averages.
Yet the problem of how to accurately meter water use in multifamily houses/apartment blocks persists. While attention focused
on metering domestic (indoor) water use, unaccounted-for water related to water supplies to apartment blocks has grown and
generated significant losses for utilities.
Improving rural WSS service coverage
                                                                                                                        page 137



About 20 percent of the rural population in ECA does not have improved access to safe drinking water (OECD 2011).
To date, much international assistance and public domestic spending has been focused on large investments in major centers
whereas many acute problems are in smaller centers and rural areas. Since the early 1990s, the situation in rural areas has improved
remarkably in countries such as Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia, but has deteriorated in Uzbekistan.

While many of the ECA governments have been slow to react to the rural water situation, some such as the Kyrgyz
Republic have developed a rural water sector policy. Also, Armenia initiated a national policy dialogue on Financing Rural
Water Supply which helped identify realistic policy objectives for minimal water supply standards for rural populations, which are
being incorporated in the legislative framework (OECD 2011).
Determining the appropriate scale and scope of water systems (decentralization / aggregation)
Decentralization has occurred in ECA countries to varying degrees and with varying levels of success. Box C outlines
common challenges encountered by decentralized WSS systems in ECA countries based on an assessment by OECD / EAP Task
Force (2009).

 Box E2 – Common challenges encountered by decentralized WSS systems in ECA countries

 Regulatory / Legal
 - Ownership rights not always located at municipal level, or not clearly defined.
 - Unclear distribution of responsibilities for tariff regulation.
 - Difficulties with obtaining licenses and permits.

 Administrative / Organizational
 - Administrative structure is inefficient from the economic development perspective (great number of medium-sized and small
 municipalities).
 - Lack of coordinating mechanisms between the different levels of government (oblast, Raion, and village levels) and the water
 suppliers in rural areas.
 - Lack of institutional structures allowing citizens to participate in decision making processes related to water supply
 infrastructure operations and development.

 Fiscal / financial
 - A great number of water supply services are not financially and fiscally independent.
 - Existing state budget financing of capital investment projects in water supply is unpredictable and unreliable even for the
 short-term planning.
 - The share of total revenues that remain with the local budgets is not adequate to the needs of the communities.
 - The choice of possible local taxes and fees is not adequate for local governments performing service provision functions to
 generate revenues.
 - Lack of direct financial relations between the local governments and the national budget.
 - Rural local self-governments are not allowed to borrow.
 - Lack of financial resources for water companies mostly in rural areas to fund operations and capital investment.

 Capacity
 - Insufficient number of staff in local governments are responsible for coordination and control of rural water supply sector.
 - Lack of expertise of rural local governments regarding public law, contractual arrangements, interactions between utility
 providers, tariff procedures and regulatory impact assessment, raising external financing for infrastructure development.
 - Lack of skills among rural water operators to raise external financing on the basis of quality investment projects / business
 plans.
 - Lack of experience with pro-active maintenance practices.
 - Lack of equipment and tools to monitor efficiency of the water systems (i.e. leak detection equipment), to maintain and
 rehabilitate the water infrastructure.

 Source: OECD / EAP Task Force (2009) in OECD 2011.
                        ANNEX E. REVIEW OF DRINKING WATER AND
   page 138             SANITATION REFORM IN EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

In some countries, decentralization has led to over-fragmentation with negative impacts, as utilities may be too
small to operate, maintain and finance infrastructure needs (OECD 2011). In response, some countries have aggregated
neighboring water utilities or created regional companies or even national companies. Several countries have commenced this
reform, but Uzbekistan is among the countries that remain tied to the decentralized approach. In particular, Armenia, Georgia,
the Kyrgyz Republic, Moldova, and Ukraine have moved towards some aggregation of the municipal water sector with the
objectives of simplifying tariff regulation, attracting more finance for investment into the sector, generating economies of scale,
and encouraging cross-subsidization of utilities.

Taking Georgia as a specific example, the WSS Sector Reform Strategy, designed with USAID support, envisaged
setting up regional water companies to help achieve economies of scale and remove some resource limitations
(including shortages of staff ). At the beginning of 2009, almost 60 municipal water supply and sanitation utilities were
integrated, and two new legal entities were created. This integration aimed to improve the technical and financial conditions of
utilities and pave the way for future privatization. Later in 2009, it was decided to go further with consolidation, with one new
integrated national company replacing the two companies. However, just as devolution to local authorities is not a panacea,
regional operators are not necessarily the optimal option. Economies of scale and scope have to be considered for a country like
Uzbekistan.
                                                                                                                              page 139




ANNEX F. TARIFFS AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR TARIFF STRUCTURE
CHANGES
1. Issues to consider for any potential tariff reforms
A tariff structure is a set of procedural rules used to determine the conditions of service and the monthly bills for water users
in various categories or classes (Whittington 2006, Boland & Whittington nd). It is a tool capable of promoting a number of
objectives, although tradeoffs among them are commonly required. Primary issues to consider when setting tariffs are (Boland &
Whittington nd, Whittington 2003, 2006):
• Revenue sufficiency / cost recovery. From the water supplier’s point of view, the main purpose of the tariff is cost recovery.
Before design can begin, there must be a decision as to how much revenue the tariff should recover. The revenue from water
users should be sufficient to pay the operation and maintenance costs of the water utility’s operations, repay loans undertaken to
replace and expand the capital stock, provide a return on capital at risk and maintain a cash reserve for unforeseen events.
• Economic efficiency. An efficient tariff will create incentives that insure, for a fixed water supply cost, that users obtain the
largest possible aggregate benefits. A different, but equivalent statement of this objective is that for a given level of aggregate
benefits from water use, the supply cost should be minimized. Prices should signal to consumers the financial, environmental, and
other costs that their decisions to use water impose on the rest of the system and on the economy.
• Equity and fairness. Equity requires that equals be treated equally, and that unequals be treated unequally. In public utility tariff
design, this usually means that users pay amounts which are proportionate to the costs they impose on the utility. Equity is thus
a quantifiable proposition, subject to precise definition and verification. Fairness, on the other hand, is wholly subjective. Each
participant in a tariff design process may have a different notion of the meaning of fairness.
• Income redistribution. Although this objective may be considered part of fairness, it is so often explicitly stated that it requires
separate treatment. Briefly, it is widely assumed in developing countries that utility tariffs should be used to redistribute income
among groups of customers.
• Resource conservation. Water tariffs are often called upon to discourage “excessive” or “wasteful” uses of water, thus promoting
the conservation of depletable sources, or the sustainable use of renewable water sources. If one assumes that large users of
water are the most likely to engage in “excessive” or “wasteful” use, then the IBT design confronts those users with higher prices
and thus discourages further use. This notion, of course, rests on the belief that only large users can waste water. It also assumes
that these users are aware of the tariff design and of the significance of the various thresholds, and can respond accordingly.
• Poverty alleviation / affordability. Many people feel that water services are a “basic right” and should be provided to people
regardless of whether or not they can pay (Charging for water may also be perceived as inappropriate on cultural or religious
grounds. For example, in Islamic societies it is often considered wrong to charge for water per se, although asking people to
pay for the infrastructure to deliver water is typically acceptable). This objective leads many people to recommend that water
services be provided free, at least to the poor. Providing water free through private connections conflicts with the objectives of
cost recovery and efficient water use. One objective of tariff design is to ensure that poor households are able to obtain adequate
supplies of clean water.

Secondary issues to consider include:
• Public acceptability. A successful tariff design is one that is not controversial, or which does not serve as a focus of public
criticism of the water supply agency.
• Political acceptability. A tariff design that is objectionable to political leaders will lead to loss of political support and may cause
increased political interference in the operations of the agency.
• Simplicity and transparency. A tariff design should be easy to explain and easy to understand. It should be possible for most
users to know what price they are paying for water.
• Net revenue stability. When water use changes as a consequence of weather or economic conditions, revenue and cost should
change by approximately equal amounts. When this does not happen, cyclical changes will result in net revenue volatility, creating
cash flow and financing difficulties for the agency.
• Ease of implementation. The promulgation and implementation of the revised tariff should not encounter significant barriers
in terms of legal authority, administration competence, information requirements, or billing procedures.
                          ANNEX F. TARIFFS AND CONSIDERATIONS
   page 140               FOR TARIFF STRUCTURE CHANGES

2. Types of tariffs to consider
There are two general types of tariffs for consideration: (i) single-part tariffs, and (ii) two-part tariffs.

Single-part tariffs
Single-part tariffs can be based upon either fixed-charges or volumetric charges.
Fixed-charges are the only possible tariff structure in the absence of metering. With a fixed charge the consumer’s monthly
water bill is the same regardless of the volume used (although it can vary across households or consumer classes depending on
characteristics of the consumer). With this charge, consumers have no incentive to economize on water use, as using more water
will not increase their water bill. Also, customers that do have a connection can supply water to other users (e.g. unconnected
households, vendors) without incurring an increase in the household water bill. WSS service providers may be reluctant to expand
coverage because more customers may mean more financial losses. Fixed-charge tariffs are thus especially prone to locking
communities into low-level equilibrium traps of few customers, low revenues, and poor service (Whittington et al.1990).
Volumetric charges base consumers’ water bills on the amount of water they use. All volumetric charges require that the consumer
has a metered connection and that this meter works reliably and is read on a periodic basis. In mathematical terms, the monthly
water bill is thus a function of the quantity of water a consumer uses. The precise formula used for the calculation of the water bill
can differ. There are three main options:
(i) a uniform volumetric charge, where the household’s water bill is simply the quantity used (e.g., cubic meters) times the price per
unit of water (e.g., US$ per cubic meter).
(ii) a block tariff, where the unit charge is specified over a range of water use for a specific consumer, and then shifts as use
increases – they create a stepwise price structure. With an increasing block tariff (IBT), consumers incur a low volumetric per-unit
charge (price) up to a specified quantity (or “block”); for any additional water consumed, they pay a higher price up to the limit for
a second block, even higher for the third, and so on. It may or may not be accompanied by a nonuse component.The rationale
commonly given for an IBT structure is that, in theory, it can achieve three objectives simultaneously. It promotes affordability
by providing the poor with affordable access to a “subsistence block” of water (the “lifeline” rate). It can achieve efficiency by
confronting consumers in the highest price block with the marginal cost of using water. And it can raise sufficient revenues to
recover costs; and
(iii) an increasing linear tariff, whereby the unit charge increases linearly as water use increases - the price that a consumer pays per
unit increases continuously (rather than in block increments) as the quantity of water used increases. This tariff structure sends the
consumer a powerful signal that increased water use is costly.

Two-part tariffs
With a two-part tariff, the consumer’s water bill is based on the sum of two calculations: (i) a fixed charge, and (ii) a charge related
to the amount of water used. There are many variations in the way these two components can be put together. The fixed charge
can be either positive (a flat fee) or negative (a rebate). The water use charge can be based on any of the volumetric tariff structures
described above (a uniform volumetric tariff, an increasing or decreasing block tariff, or an increasing linear tariff.) In many cases,
the fixed charge is kept uniform across customers and relatively low in value, and is used simply as a device for recovering the
fixed administrative costs associated with meter reading and billing that are unrelated to the level of water consumption.
                                                                                                                            page 141




ANNEX G. ANALYTICAL APPROACH FOR CALCULATING THE ASSET
INDEX USING THE QUANTITATIVE SURVEY
This annex presents the analytical approach used for calculating an asset index of the quantitative conducted for this study
(n=300). Expenditure data collected through the survey are limited in scope. In order to arrive at a more robust method for
forming wealth groups among the surveyed households, asset indices are created as and used to check the robustness of the
expenditure data in the survey.

1. Approach
(1) Asset Indices
Six asset indices were constructed using factor analysis. In order to do so, asset indicators in the survey are grouped in 5 categories:
assets, water, toilet, housing, and electricity and gas Table G1`.

Table G1. Variables used in the calculation of the asset indices (Assets)
                                              Observations        No of households (HH)         No of HH          Percentage of HH
                                                                      with the asset           without the        with the asset (%)
                                                                                                  asset
                Usual TV                           300                      255                     45                   85.00
            Plasma TV, LCD                         300                       91                     209                  30.33
         DVD, the video player                     300                      166                     134                  53.33
           Computer, laptop                        300                       74                     226                  24.67
                 Tablet                            300                        9                     291                  3.00
              Smartphone                           300                       38                     262                  12.67
      Split A/C (winter/summer)                    300                       38                     262                  12.67
          Washing machine (Soviet-                 300                       49                     251                  16.33
                style)
           Washing machine                         300                       39                     261                  13.00
          Boiler for hot water                     300                       15                     285                  5.00
            Microwave oven                         300                       43                     257                  14.33
                 Fridge                            300                      254                     46                   84.67
               Gas-stove                           300                      287                     13                   95.67
          Car up to 2000 year                      300                       37                     263                  12.33
       Car after the 2000 release                  300                       81                     219                  27.00
               Anything                            300                        2                     298                  0.67

Six asset indices were constructed by using all or part of the categorized asset indicators (see below).
(2) Expenditure data
The monthly household expenditure aggregate was constructed by averaging all household expenditures for winter and summer
months (q45_1S, q45_1W). However, expenditure aggregates are not spatially deflated to adjust for regional prices differences
due to lack of data.
Averaged monthly household expenditure were then adjusted to consider the economies of scale within household. Filmer
and Scott (2008) use the formula described below, where α is the equivalence between children and adults, and θ accounts for
economies of scale.
     Adj. Expenditures = (Total Expenditures) / (α*No. of Children + No. of Adults)θ (1)
Then the congruence with asset indices in rankings at different values of α and θ were then estimated. Adult equivalence α is set
to 1 because adult equivalence does not generally affect the results (Filmer & Scott, 2008). Economies of scale parameter θ is tested
between 0 and 1 using the ad hoc approach used by Deaton and Zaidi (2002), which was also adopted by Filmer and Scott (2008).
                        ANNEX G. ANALYTICAL APPROACH FOR CALCULATING
   page 142             THE ASSET INDEX USING THE QUANTITATIVE SURVEY

2. Analytical steps

Asset Indices
Most asset indicators are recoded to binary variable of 0 and 1, with the exception of continuous variable for number of employed
household member in this survey.
- Assets in q93_1-q93_13 are recoded to binary variables of q93_1-q93_99 to match the description in codebook.xlsx, where each
question is linked to following 16 assets:
- Level of education of the household head (q91h) is used as human capital - education indicator. Level of education of the
respondent (q91r) is not included.
- Employment status of household head (q92h) and number of working members in the household (q86) are used as human
capital - employment indicator. Employment status of respondent (q92r) is not included.
- Type of basic housing (q87), floor living in (q88), number of floors in the house (q88_1) and property type of the basic housing
(q89) are used as housing variable.
- “access to electricity” and “access to gas” is created by from seasonal expenditure for electricity (q44_1w, q44_1s) and gas
(q44_2w, q44_2s). If there is expense from the utility in either winter or summer month, it is considered that the household has
access to the energy source.
A tentative “asset score” is created as the sum of all asset indicators listed above, before conducting factor analysis.
     Asset indicators are grouped to construct 6 asset indices
1) asset index with all indicators: q91h1-q93_99
2) asset index without education indicators: q92h1-q93_99
3) asset index without employment indicators: q91h1-q91h3 electricity-q93_99
4) asset index without electricity and gas indicators: q91h1-q86 q871-q93_99
5) asset index without housing indicators: q91h1-gas q93_1-q93_99
6) asset index with assets only: q93_1-q93_99

Only asset indicators used for each asset index, and identification variables were kept.

We removed asset variables that i) have no observations, ii) for which all observations have the same value, or iii) for which the
standard deviation is smaller than 0.05 for asset indicators if the household has at least one asset indicator.Subsequently asset
indices were created using factor analysis. Six asset indices were created and rank and quintiles were computed according to the
index.

Expenditure data
Monthly household expenditure was constructed by averaging all household expenditures for winter and summer months
(q45_1S, q45_1W). Since the expenditure states “all expenditure” in the household, seasonal monthly expenditures for electricity
(q44_1w, q44_1s), gas (q44_2w, q44_2s), drinking water (q44_3w, q44_3s) are not added. Irregular expenditures, such as one-off
expenditures for water storage or sanitation system, are also excluded.
Monthly household expenditure was then adjusted by household size using economies of scale parameter θ in formula (1). In
order to find the θ that has highest congruence with asset indices, 11 values of adjusted household expenditures are created by
incrementing the value of θ by 0.1 between 0 and 1(hh_exp_pc10-hh_exp_pc110). Note that the equivalence between children
and adults parameter α is fixed at 1. Note that household weight is not included in both expenditure data and asset indices due
to lack of data.
Comparison of asset indices and expenditure data. Pairwise correlation and Spearman rank correlation are used to compare 1)
6 asset indices with different set of asset indicators and 2) adjusted household expenditure created by 11 different economies
of scale parameter θ, between 0 and 1 with 0.1 increments. Both asset scores, rank and quintiles are used to find the θ with the
highest congruence.

3. Results
(1) Economies of scale parameter (θ) for adjusted expenditure and congruence with asset indices
The expenditure data and asset indices generates different results, part of it owing to the fact that the expenditure data adjust
for household size, while asset indices do not. Therefore, in order to adjust the expenditure data to find highest congruence with
asset indices, the optimal value of the economies of scale parameter (θ) between 0 and 1 were tested. However, adult equivalence
α is set to 1 because adult equivalence does not generally affect the results (Filmer & Scott, 2008) as noted above.
Adj. Expenditures = (Total Expenditures) / (α*No. of Children + No. of Adults)θ (1)
                                                                                                                             page 143



11 values of economies of scale parameter θ, between 0 and 1 with increments of 0.1, were applied to find θ with the highest
congruence. Unlike the inverse U-shaped pattern described by Filmer and Scott (2008) whose correlation coefficient is lowest
when scaling values are 0 or 1 and highest in-between, rank correlation comparison in the six asset indices either increased or
decreased as θ increased in most cases.
Despite some differences in the three comparison methods, the congruence is highest in each comparison when θ is 1.0 at asset
index (3), the asset index without employment indicators. θ value of 1.0 also generates most number of highest congruence for
asset indices. Therefore, θ is set at 1.0, which makes adjusted expenditure with the highest congruence same as expenditure per
capita.
(2) Relative rankings
This section assesses household ranking generated by different methods by 1) comparisons of relative rankings and 2) overlapping
the poorer quintiles generated by each methods. As said, θ was set at 1.0, and the adjusted expenditure value, identical to
expenditure per capita, is used to compare with the asset indices.
Household rankings. The six asset indices and expenditure data show statistically significantly related household rankings. All rank
correlation coefficients for asset indices and adjusted expenditure are compared in Table G2 fall under statistical significance level
under 0.01.
As can be expected, rankings between asset indices are higher, with the lowest rank correlation coefficient higher than 0.75. Rank
correlation between six asset indices are higher within two groups of asset indices: (1) through (4), and (5) and (6). Within each
groups, rank correlation coefficients are higher than 0.9.
Per capita household expenditure and the six asset indices are scattered at significantly lower values between 0.25 and 0.38. Asset
indices between (1) and (4) have higher correlation coefficient above 0.34, while asset indices (5) and (6) have lower value around 0.25.
Table G2 Spearman rank correlation coefficients between asset index and adjusted household expenditure

  Per Capita Household         Asset Index        Asset Index   Asset Index       Asset Index       Asset Index      Asset Index with
       Expenditure               with All           without      without            without           without          Assets Only
                                Indicators        Education     Employment       Electricity and      Housing
                                                   Indicators    Indicators      Gas Indicators      Indicators
                                                                                       (4)
                                    (1)               (2)            (3)                                 (5)                (6)
 Correlation with ranking by per capita household expenditures
             1                    0.3634            0.3475         0.3813             0.364            0.2535             0.2567
          0.3634                     1              0.9745         0.9654            0.9963            0.8147             0.7541
          0.3475                  0.9745              1            0.9303            0.9692            0.7741             0.7506
          0.3813                  0.9654            0.9303            1              0.9619            0.8282             0.8045
           0.364                  0.9963            0.9692         0.9619               1              0.8107             0.7561
          0.2535                  0.8147            0.7741         0.8282            0.8107              1                0.9553
          0.2567                  0.7541            0.7506         0.8045            0.7561            0.9553                1
Note: Largest values by each index are in bold.

Overlap in classifications. Using the economies of scale parameter θ at 1, the overlap in asset indices quintiles and adjusted
expenditure quintiles are compared in 3 categories. Table G3 shows comparison between 1) the poorest quintiles (top 2 panels),
2) the poorest quintile and the poorest two quintiles (40%) (middle 2 panels), and 3) the poorest two quintiles (40%) (bottom two
panels). In each comparison, household expenditure per capita, asset index with all indicators (1), asset index without employment
indicators (3), and asset index with assets only (6) are used as the base for comparison.
Naturally, the proportion of per capita household expenditure overlapping with other asset indices is smaller than the proportion
of asset indices overlapping with other asset indices. Only one fifth of the people categorized as being in the poorest 20% by
expenditure data are categorized in the same quintile for 6 asset indices (top panel of Table G3), but the proportion of overlap
rises up to 0.48 when the poorest 40% are compared (bottom panel of Table G3). Overlaps with asset indices (1) through (3) are
higher than those of other asset indices.
On the other hand, the overlap in the poorer in quintiles between asset indices is higher. Among the three asset indices that are
used, asset index with all indicators (1) are overlap most with other asset indices, in both comparison to poorest quintile with
poorest 40% of other indices.
                        ANNEX G. ANALYTICAL APPROACH FOR CALCULATING
   page 144             THE ASSET INDEX USING THE QUANTITATIVE SURVEY

Table G3 Overlap in the classification in the poorer quintiles

 Per Capita Household       Asset Index      Asset Index       Asset Index      Asset Index      Asset Index      Asset Index with
 Expenditure                  with All         without          without           without          without          Assets Only
                             Indicators      Education        Employment       Electricity and     Housing
                                              Indicators       Indicators      Gas Indicators     Indicators
                                                                                     (4)
                                 (1)              (2)              (3)                                (5)                (6)
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 20 percent by per capita household expenditure who are in the poorest
 20 percent according to other asset indices
              1                0.2167           0.2333           0.2167            0.2333             0.2              0.2667
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 20 percent by asset index using all indicators (1) who are in the poorest 20
 percent according to other welfare indices
         0.2407                   1             0.8333           0.7037            0.9074           0.6667             0.5926
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 20 percent by asset index without employment indicators (3) who are in
 the poorest 20 percent according to other welfare indices
         0.2364                0.6909           0.5818              1              0.6727           0.6727             0.6727
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 20 percent by asset index with assets only (6) who are in the poorest 20
 percent according to other welfare indices
         0.2500                0.5000           0.4688           0.5781            0.5000           0.6719               1
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 20 percent by per capita household expenditure who are in the poorest
 40 percent according to other asset indices
              1                0.4833           0.4833           0.4500            0.4500           0.4000             0.3667
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 20 percent by asset index using all indicators (1) who are in the poorest 40
 percent according to other asset indices
         0.4815                   1                1                1                1              0.9630             0.9074
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 20 percent by asset index without employment indicators (3) who are in
 the poorest 40 percent according to other welfare indices
         0.5273                   1             0.9455              1                1                1                  1
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 20 percent by asset index with assets only (6) who are in the poorest 40
 percent according to other welfare indices
         0.5000                0.8281           0.8281           0.8125            0.8281           0.9688               1
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 40 percent by per capita household expenditure who are in the poorest
 40 percent according to other asset indices
              1                0.4701           0.4701           0.4701            0.4615           0.4359             0.4359
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 40 percent by asset index using all indicators (1) who are in the poorest 40
 percent according to other asset indices
         0.4867                   1             0.9026           0.8938            0.9646           0.8496             0.7699
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 40 percent by asset index without employment indicators (3) who are in
 the poorest 40 percent according to other welfare indices
         0.4867                0.8938           0.8407              1              0.8850           0.8673             0.8230
 Proportion of the population classified in the poorest 40 percent by asset index with assets only (6) who are in the poorest 40
 percent according to other welfare indices
         0.4474                0.7632           0.7719           0.8158            0.7719           0.8947               1
                                                                                                            page 145



Table G4. Household expenditure per capita (θ=1) regressed on all asset indicators

                                                                                         Number of
                  Source                      SS       df MS                                              288
                                                                                           obs
                                                                                          F( 49, 238)     3.98
                   Model                    1900107     49 38777.6908                     Prob > F         0
                 Residual                   2316826     238 9734.56332                    R-squared      0.4506
                                                                                             Adj
                                                                                                         0.3375
                                                                                          R-squared
                   Total                    4216933                 287 14693.1461        Root MSE       98.664
        Household Expenditure
                                             Coef.        Std. Err. t      P>t           [95% Conf.     Interval]
           per capita (θ=1)
                                                          75.07057
 HHH edu -primary                           -39.2244                       0.602     -187.112           108.6632
                                                            -0.52
                                                          73.89816
 HHH edu- secondary                         17.67584                       0.811     -127.902           163.2538
                                                            0.24
                                                          74.44716
 HHH edu- higher                            -5.9805                        0.936     -152.64            140.679
                                                            -0.08
                                                          49.02534
 HHH employed in private sector             -50.603                        0.303     -147.182           45.97597
                                                            -1.03
                                                          48.32283
 HHH state employee                         -39.9289                       0.409     -135.124           55.26614
                                                            -0.83
 HHH worker of HH/Tamorka                   17.61177    55.7644 0.32       0.752     -92.2431           127.4666
                                                          50.07509
 HHH seasonal worker                        -41.1025                       0.413     -139.75            57.54448
                                                            -0.82
                                                          66.61624
 HHH farmer                                 9.512143                       0.887     -121.721           140.7449
                                                            0.14
                                                          62.30283
 HHH unemployed                             -39.2537                       0.529     -161.989           83.48169
                                                            -0.63
                                                          54.68762
 HHH housekeeper                            -50.6787                       0.355     -158.412           57.05494
                                                            -0.93
                                                          47.25645
 HHH pensioner                              -35.0421                       0.459     -128.136           58.05222
                                                            -0.74
                                                          4.348093
 No. of working members in HH               -5.65261                       0.195     -14.2183           2.913052
                                                            -1.30
                                                          20.58875
 Access to gas                              3.440743                       0.867     -37.1187           44.0002
                                                            0.17
                                                          157.3314
 Live in private apartment                  130.6947                       0.407     -179.245           440.6346
                                                            0.83
                                                          171.9704
 Live in government apartment               -66.169                        0.701     -404.948           272.6096
                                                            -0.38
                                                          101.5534
 Live in 1-story private house w/landplot   50.62307                       0.619     -149.435           250.6814
                                                            0.50
 Live in 1-story private house w/o                        142.3183
                                            -13.258                        0.926     -293.623           267.1064
 landplot                                                   -0.09
 Live in 2/3-story private house w/                       104.1017
                                            51.8501                        0.619     -153.228           256.9285
 landplot                                                   0.50
                        ANNEX G. ANALYTICAL APPROACH FOR CALCULATING
  page 146              THE ASSET INDEX USING THE QUANTITATIVE SURVEY

         Household Expenditure
                                      Coef.      Std. Err. t    P>t         [95% Conf.   Interval]
            per capita (θ=1)
Live in 2/3-story private house w/                127.4625
                                     40.55755                   0.751   -210.541         291.6562
olandplot                                           0.32
                                                  145.7564
Live in 1st floor                    0.300734                   0.998   -286.837         287.4381
                                                    0.00
                                                  153.5633
Live in 2nd floor                    -94.0538                   0.541   -396.571         208.4632
                                                    -0.61
                                                  161.4224
Live in 3rd floor                    -116.203                   0.472   -434.202         201.7963
                                                    -0.72
Live in 4th floor                    -155.086   159.339 -0.97   0.331   -468.981         158.8088
                                                  146.3103
Live in 5th floor                    17.60356                   0.904   -270.625         305.8321
                                                    0.12
                                                  142.7196
Live in 6th floor                    -82.181                    0.565   -363.336         198.9739
                                                    -0.58
                                                  145.8545
Live in 7th floor                    29.1437                    0.842   -258.187         316.4744
                                                    0.20
                                                  142.6378
Live in 8th floor                    13.47112                   0.925   -267.523         294.465
                                                    0.09
Live in 9th floor                       0        (omitted)
                                                  143.7459
Live in 11th floor                   -112.814                   0.433   -395.991         170.3625
                                                    -0.78
2 floors in the house                175.2432   206.511 0.85    0.397   -231.58          582.066
3 floors in the house                -25.3819   207.502 -0.12   0.903   -434.157         383.3932
                                                  197.9484
4 floors in the house                101.374                    0.609   -288.581         491.3288
                                                    0.51
                                                  160.5214
9 floors in the house                56.04673                   0.727   -260.178         372.271
                                                    0.35
                                                  46.39149
Own dwelling                         26.29384                   0.571   -65.0965         117.6842
                                                    0.57
                                                  22.85899
Usual TV                             -38.0831                   0.097   -83.1149         6.948724
                                                    -1.67
                                                  16.91868
Plasma TV, LCD                       9.716652                   0.566   -23.6128         43.04615
                                                    0.57
                                                  14.27242
DVD, the video player                -15.629                    0.275   -43.7454         12.4874
                                                    -1.10
                                                  16.68046
Computer, laptop                     -10.0621                   0.547   -42.9223         22.79813
                                                    -0.60
                                                  52.11114
Tablet                               226.6924                    0      124.0344         329.3504
                                                    4.35
                                                  21.37135
Smartphone                           -22.7028                   0.289   -64.804          19.39833
                                                    -1.06
                                                  23.88478
Split AC (winter/summer)             35.19181                   0.142   -11.8608         82.24438
                                                    1.47
                                                  17.02712
Washing machine (Soviet-style)       -9.03897                   0.596   -42.5821         24.50413
                                                    -0.53
                                                                                                                                    page 147



             Household Expenditure
                                                  Coef.          Std. Err. t       P>t                    [95% Conf.            Interval]
                per capita (θ=1)
                                                                  23.40748
    Washing machine                             48.98782                          0.037              2.875518                   95.10013
                                                                    2.09
                                                                  30.89502
    Boiler for hot water                        18.09595                          0.559               -42.7667                  78.95857
                                                                    0.59
                                                                  22.83585
    Microwave oven                               10.4486                          0.648               -34.5376                  55.43481
                                                                    0.46
                                                                  18.02018
    Fridge                                      20.63494                          0.253               -14.8645                  56.13437
                                                                    1.15
                                                                  35.49507
    Gas-stove                                   35.99219                          0.312               -33.9325                  105.9168
                                                                    1.01
    Car up to 2000 year                         18.44723        20.3375 0.91      0.365               -21.6173                  58.51174
                                                                  16.17201
    Car after the 2000 release                  19.93525                          0.219               -11.9233                  51.79381
                                                                    1.23
                                                                  85.70758
    Anything                                     -6.8215                          0.937               -175.664                  162.0209
                                                                    -0.08
                                                                  154.0703
    _cons                                        100.501                          0.515               -203.015                  404.0166
                                                                    0.65

Note: Electricity is omitted because all household have access to electricity.




1    The use of full name is optional. First name only (or simply a participant number) may be used to preserve anonymity.
2    How many respondents of the focus group mentioned the source.
3    Where – 3 stands for to the most important source, 2 for quite important source, 1 - not so important source 0 – irrelevant.
4    How many respondents of the focus group mentioned the measure.
5    Where – 3 stands for to the most important measure, 2 for quite important measures, 1 - not so important measures, 0 – irrelevant.
6    The use of full name is optional. First name only (or simply a participant number) may be used to preserve anonymity.
7    How many respondents of the focus group mentioned the source.
8    Where – 3 stands for the most important, 2 for quite important, 1 - not so important 0 – irrelevant.
