                                                                                                                    97954
                                                                                                                       NOTE
                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                        3
Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
The Role of Social Protection
Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar1




                           Myanmar’s spending on and coverage of social pro-
                           tection programs is low. Developing the building blocks of a social
                           protection system needs to be a gradual process based on strength-
                           ening institutional capacity and ensuring fiscal sustainability. Key
                           social security reforms and the expansion of government-led social
                           assistance programs can promote poverty reduction and help Myan-
                           mar address vulnerabilities in an effective and sustainable way. De-
                           velopment partners’ experience can be an important asset govern-
                           ment can resort to when designing and implementing social
                           assistance in Myanmar.




1.	 This Note was prepared by Mariana Infante-Villarroel, with contributions from Puja Vasudeva Dutta, Hnin Hnin Pyne, Reena Badiani-
    Magnusson, Yuko Okamura, and Khin Aye Yee (World Bank). Any comments and questions can be addressed to ainfantevillarro@
    worldbank.org. The team is grateful to the Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement and to the Ministry of Livestock,
    Fisheries and Rural Development for their inputs and facilitation of field trips for the entire assessment; and to the Ministry of Labor,
    Employment and Social Security, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of National Planning and Economic Development for their
    inputs and guidance. The team benefited from contributions and field support from WFP, ILO, UNOPS-LIFT, SC, HAI, ActionAid, IOM,
    MDRI, and several UN agencies and NGOs throughout the process. The team is grateful to the Rapid Social Response program and
    its five donors the Russian Federation, Sweden, Norway, the United Kingdom and Australia for funding this assessment.
2   Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
    The Role of Social Protection
                                            Inventory of social protection programs
                                                                        in Myanmar             3

1. Overview

Social protection is not a new concept in Myanmar. There is a wealth of schemes, although these
are small in scale, particularly when it comes to social assistance. Government has programs
across all age groups through various ministries, although its more prominent role is in the provi-
sion of social security schemes for the formal working-age population.

Government-implemented social assistance programs have so far been few, small, and underde-
veloped and thus are far from providing a comprehensive safety net in the country. In this con-
text, development partners (DPs) have resorted to several social assistance instruments to serve
vulnerable populations in particular geographic areas.

Government-led social assistance is starting to evolve thanks to new policy developments. The
drafting in 2014 of the Rural Development Strategic Framework (RDSF) and the Social Protection
Strategic Plan (SPSP) has set the stage for social protection in general, and social assistance in
particular, to help achieve poverty reduction targets in Myanmar. Programs under these frame-
works are still being articulated.




Figure 1: Social protection along the lifecycle




Source: Adapted from World Bank (2012).
4            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



The World Bank team has compiled an inventory of social protection programs in order to in-
form the development of these strategic frameworks. This marks a first attempt to systematically
document the range of programs in the country implemented by both government and DPs (see
Annex 1 for methodology). This Note analyses the information compiled in the inventory database
and identifies areas where government could increase investment to improve the coverage and
effectiveness of social protection provision.

Figure 1 illustrates the risks and potential roles of social protection programs along the life-cycle.
The inventory captures government and DP programs that can help households and communities
build resilience, equity, and opportunity through social insurance, social services, and social as-
sistance programs across the life-course. These involve primarily demand-side interventions – pro-
grams that provide transfers and/or facilitate access to services – and, in the case of DP programs,
focus mostly on social assistance.2



Figure 2: Summary of social protection programs by life cycle category

    Early childhood         School-age children        Working-age popu-          Old age (equity and           All age groups
  (equity and oppor-        (equity and oppor-         lation (equity and             resilience)            (opportunity, equity
        tunity)                   tunity)                  resilience)                                          and resilience)

 *	 Institutional           *	Stipends, scholar-       *	 Social security for     *	 Pensions for            *	 Care for people
    care for orphans          ships, supply of            formal workers             formal workers             with disabilities
    (MSWRR)                   textbooks (MOE)             and government             and government             (MSWRR)
 *	 Support for triplet     *	School supplies             employees (MO-             employees (MO-          *	 Welfare services
    and greater sets          and access to               LESS)                      LESS, MOF)                 for people with
    of newborns               education for vul-       *	 Employment ser-         *	 Voluntary homes            leprosy (MSWRR)
    (MSWRR)                   nerable children            vices for migrant          for the elderly         *	 Rice donations to
 *	 Early childhood           (UNICEF)                    workers (MOLESS)           (MSWRR)                    homes (MSWRR)
    development             *	School-feeding           *	 Voluntary homes         *	 Pensions for over       *	 Cash and in-kind
    programs (MOE)            (WFP)                       for women (MS-             100 year olds              emergency
 *	 Maternal and                                          WRR)                       (President's Of-           support after
    child health                                       *	 Food and cash for          fice)                      disasters (MOBA,
    vouchers (MOH)                                        work (WFP)              *	 Support to old             MSWRR, WFP, SC,
 *	 Provision of food                                  *	 Cash for work and          people self-help           others)
    and micronutri-                                       other livelihood           groups (MSWRR/          *	 Cash and in-kind
    ent supplements                                       programs for               HAI)                       support to inter-
    for pregnant and                                      vulnerable com-                                       nally displaced
    lactating mothers,                                    munities (LIFT and                                    people (WFP and
    fortified food for                                    partners, ILO)                                        partners, HAI)
    children (MOH/                                     *	Migration centers
    WFP)                                                 (MOLESS/IOM,
 *	 Community case                                       ILO)
    management of
    illness (UNICEF)
 *	 Cash transfers
    (SC)




2.	 Some interventions can be considered supply-side and hence are not necessarily social protection programs, such as the Ministry
    of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement (MSWRR) voluntary pre-schools and youth centers. These are captured in the inventory
    and subsequently in the SPSP, but for the purposes of this Note the analysis focuses on demand-side interventions. For more
    information on methodology, see Annex 1.
                                                           Inventory of social protection programs
                                                                                       in Myanmar                                5




                                                                                                   Photo - Sithu Lwin/World Bank

2. Social protection provision in Myanmar

Early childhood programs include health and nutrition programs such as a maternal and child
health voucher scheme (MCHVS) implemented by the Ministry of Health (MOH) with support
from the World Health Organization (WHO), benefiting more than 1,300 women, as well as the
provision of food and micronutrient supplements for pregnant and lactating women and supple-
mentary and complementary fortified foods for children (MOH with support from the World Food
Programme, WFP).3 Save the Children (SC) has used cash transfers (CTs), both conditional and
unconditional (the latter in the context of emergency response), to promote adequate health-
seeking behavior and supplement the income of mothers with young children (currently 253 ben-
eficiaries in the conditional cash transfer (CCT) implemented in Rakhine). The Ministry of Social
Welfare, Relief and Resettlement (MSWRR) supports small-scale programs of direct assistance to
mothers with triplets and institutional care for orphans (more than 1,400 orphans).

School-age children: The Ministry of Education (MOE) has been an active player in the provision
of stipends for poor and vulnerable students (37,000 beneficiaries in school year 2014/15),4 CTs

3.	 Besides food transfers, the nutrition program also includes behavioral change activities such as the promotion of adequate health
    and nutrition practices.
4.	 These are beneficiaries of the school stipends pilot that tests enhanced implementation mechanisms of the national program. For
    more information on the stipends, MCHVS, the SC CCT and CTs for internally displaced people (IDPs) see Note on ‘The experience
    of cash transfers in Myanmar’.
6            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



to all primary school students (MMK 1,000/year), scholarships, and textbooks to encourage school
enrollment and prevent dropouts. WFP and the UN Children’s Fund (UNICEF) have been active in
complementing government efforts through school-feeding, provision of school supplies, and lan-
guage enrichment programs, which facilitates access to education for vulnerable groups (food-in-
secure children, out-of-school adolescents, and ethnic minorities).

Within the working-age population, the Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social Security (MO-
LESS) provides social insurance for formal sector workers covering more than 765,000 beneficia-
ries as of February 2015 through 77 offices in 110 townships.5 MOLESS also provides training op-
portunities and labor market services in Myanmar, as well as services for migrant workers and
their families, facilitating international labor mobility.6 MSWRR provides homes and training for
about 1,000 vulnerable women. The largest DP-implemented programs are by WFP and the Liveli-
hoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT), with the former reaching more than 1.1 million benefi-
ciaries in 2014 and the latter about 576,000 households until mid-2014 (see Table 2). Both ac-
tively support community infrastructure development through cash for work (CFW) schemes, in
addition to food for work (FFW) in the case of WFP and other livelihood support programs in the
case of LIFT.


Photo - Tun Lynn/World Bank




5.	The MOLESS Social Security Board (SSB) provided the number of beneficiaries. Figures on the number of offices and townships cov-
   ered can be found at ILO (2015).
6.	According to the Department of Labor, MOLESS, nearly 1.9 million workers migrated overseas between 1990 and January 2014.
                                                           Inventory of social protection programs
                                                                                       in Myanmar                                7
The most important social protection program for the elderly is the Ministry of Finance (MOF)
civil service pension scheme, covering more than 840,000 pensioners in 2014/15. The Social Secu-
rity Law (2012) mandates a contributory pensions scheme for private formal sector workers, but
this has not yet been introduced. In terms of programs for the poor and vulnerable elderly, MS-
WRRR administers 33 voluntary homes with limited coverage (less than 1 percent of the vulnera-
ble old according to Social Policy and Poverty Research Group (SPPRG) estimates). MSWRR is plan-
ning to introduce social pensions for those
over 90 years of age while HelpAge Inter-
national (HAI) supports MSWRR in the im-                       Several programs also overlay 	
plementation of community-based older
people self-help groups (OPSHGs).
                                                               poverty and vulnerability criteria,
                                                               typically with communities 	
Situations of emergency and crisis arising                     applying these to identify the most
as a result of natural disasters or conflict
are the main shocks affecting all ages in                      vulnerable within a specific 	
Myanmar. Programs addressing these vul-                        category.
nerabilities include individual cash and in-
kind assistance after disasters (WFP, SC,
Oxfam, and others) and support to inter-
nally displaced people (IDPs) in conflict-affected areas on food security (WFP) and social reintegra-
tion (HAI). Health shocks are another important source of vulnerability, and one that few pro-
grams currently address (with the exception of social security provisions for formal sector workers).
Community transfers benefiting several age groups (the elderly, children, women-headed house-
holds, and people with disabilities of all ages) have been part of some LIFT programs.




3. Spending and coverage

Despite recent increases, total government spending on social protection remains very low, at
0.57 percent as a share of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2014/15 (see Table 1). In particular,
spending on social assistance (0.02 percent of GDP) is low compared with other investments, such
as those in pensions (0.55 percent of GDP). This is well below the 1-2 percent of GDP being spent
on safety nets in much of East and South Asia, and even in poorer Sub-Saharan African countries
(World Bank, 2014).

Coverage of main government social protection programs is low, reaching less than 3.25 percent
of the population compared with a mean of 44.2 percent in the East Asia Pacific region (MIP,
2014).7 Government programs providing social assistance reach 0.1 percent of the population;
such programs assist on average more than 39 percent of the population in other countries in the
region.




7.	Estimates on the coverage of social protection programs in East Asia and the Pacific can be found at http://datatopics.worldbank.
   org/aspire/region/east-asia-and-pacific.
8            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



The government is taking steps towards increasing the funding for social assistance, with the
introduction of social pensions (MSWRR) and the efforts of MOE to expand and strengthen the
implementation of the school stipends program. MOE is planning to expand the stipends budget
in the following school year and is testing a more systematic approach to implementation that
can support expansion effectively. In addition, there have been substantial budget increases in
MSWRR in recent years, particularly in the areas of care for orphans and youth, the elderly, and
vulnerable women, albeit from a low base. MOH’s discussions on universal health coverage may
include measures to decrease out-of-pocket expenditures and address financial protection of the
poor. The RDSF and SPSP identify a range of social assistance programs that will need to be priori-
tized from the perspective of fiscal sustainability and implementation capacity.

Table 1: Government’s expenditure on social protection, 2014/15 (revised estimates)

 Government programs       Total expenditure   % government   % GDP    Estimated number   Percentage total popula-
                           2014/15 (MMK        expenditure             of beneficiaries   tion covered (percentage of
                           billion)                                                       eligible population covered
                                                                                          and age group) (a)
 Civil service pensions    362                 1.65%          0.55%    843,000            1.64% (18.84%, + 60)
 (MOF)
 Social security for       4 (b)               0.02%          0.01%    765,000            1.49% (2.44%,15-59)
 formal sector workers
 (MOLESS)
 Social welfare pro-       10                  0.05%          0.02%    25,000             0.05% (all groups)
 grams (Department
 of Social Welfare,
 MSWRRR) (c)
 Stipends program (d)      3.1                 0.014%         0.005%   37,000             0.07% (0.38% 10-19 (5-11
 (MOE)                                                                                    grade))
 Total social protection   379.1               1.73%          0.57%    1,670,000          3.24% (all groups)

 Total social assistance   13.1                0.06%          0.02%    62,000             0.12% (all groups)
 (e)

Notes: a) Myanmar’s population is 51,486,253 and age disaggregated figures are used based on Census 2014 (GoM,
  2015). b) Budget estimate. Social security figures exclude contributions from affiliates (more than MMK9 billion in
  2013/14 based on ILO figures shared by the SSB). c) The number of beneficiaries of social welfare programs is taken
  from the SPSP (2014) and includes supply-side beneficiaries for consistency with budget figures. d) Figures for the
  stipends pilot program are provided by MOE. e) The Department of Budget does not compile disaggregated figures
  of programs such as the stipends, MCHVS, or other programs of MOLESS, such as the services for migrants. Budget
  figures for MCHVS and MOLESS migrant services are small and may not significantly alter the analysis.
	 Exchange rate: USD1=MMK1,034.13.
Source: Department of Budget and Department of Pensions (MOF), SSB (MOLESS), Department of Social Welfare (MS-
  WRR), Department of Planning (MOE), Ministry of Immigration and Population (MIP).



Among development partners, WFP and LIFT are the biggest financers of social assistance pro-
vision in Myanmar, motivated by the need to provide emergency support and humanitarian
relief in times of crises. Table 2 shows how the provision of social assistance by WFP and LIFT has
reached a significant number of beneficiaries (2.2 percent of the population in the case of WFP
and 1.1 percent in the case of LIFT) with a substantially higher budget compared with that using
public support (MIP, 2014).
                                                          Inventory of social protection programs
                                                                                      in Myanmar                                9

 Table 2: Social assistance provision by DPs – WFP and LIFT

  DP              Type of program                                     All programs (e)   No. of beneficiaries (2014) (% of
                                                                      billion) (year)    population)
  WFP             Nutrition program                               -                      40,399
  WFP             Asset creation (FFW and CFW)                    -                      225,511 beneficiaries
  WFP             School-feeding                                  -                      583,271
  WFP             Emergency relief (including for IDPs)           -                      318,157
  WFP             Food assistance for HIV/AIDS and TB patients    -                      12,477
  Total WFP       All programs                                    211 (2013-             1,113,743 beneficiaries (2.2% of
                                                                  2015) (a)              the population) (b)
  LIFT            CFW                                             32 (c)                 172,800 households (until mid-2014)
                                                                                         (d)
  Total LIFT      All programs (e)                                76 (2010-              576,000 households (until mid-2014)
                                                                  2014) (f)              (1.1 % of the population) (g)


Notes: a) USD 204,455,828 (exchange rate: USD 1=MMK 1,030.00). b) Total beneficiaries after deducting overlap among
  different activities. c) Includes other social protection components such as CTs as well as non-social protection activi-
  ties. Excludes Tat Lan Program. USD 31,192,929 (exchange rate: USD 1=MMK 1,034.13). d) LIFT estimates of house-
  holds benefiting from CFW by mid-2014: http://www.lift-fund.org/impact. Estimates based on information provided
  for the inventory reach 96,655 beneficiary households. e) Includes Tat Lan Program and all programs included in inven-
  tory. Programs include non-social protection components. f) USD 73,661,058 (exchange rate: USD 1=MMK 1,034.13).
  g) LIFT estimates of households benefiting from all LIFT programs by mid-2014: http://www.lift-fund.org/impact. In-
  cludes beneficiaries of non-social protection programs.
Sources: WFP and LIFT.



4. Type of programs and delivery mechanisms

Public works programs (PWPs) and CTs are part of a limited range of social assistance schemes
used in Myanmar.8 There are some examples of CCTs with the longer-term objective of human
capital development (e.g. MOE’s stipends program, MOH’s MCHVS, SC’s maternal health pro-
gram). PWPs such as CFW and FFW have been supported by WFP and LIFT (see Table 2). WFP’s
asset creation (cash and food for work) programs helped address food security issues for 225,500
beneficiaries in 2014 for 45 days/year on average. LIFT supported several CFW schemes reaching
more than 172,000 households until mid-2014, providing on average 25 days of household food
security. Recent LIFT-supported PWPS as part of the Tat Lan Program in Rakhine provided a higher
number of days (40-90). Social assistance has been delivered mostly in the context of humani-
tarian and disaster relief. LIFT has actively financed community-based schemes to support rice
banks, revolving funds, and community-based self-help groups. MSWRR’s welfare services focus
on the provision of homes and training for disadvantaged groups. There are also several examples
of mechanisms to support the poor and vulnerable (especially old people) or promoting access
to education and health for poor children, through either the monastery system or other village
organizations in these regions (Enlightened Myanmar Research and World Bank, 2015; Thu and
Griffiths, 2012).

8.	Further details on these two instruments can be found in the Experience of Cash Transfers in Myanmar and the Experience of
   Public Works Programs in Myanmar.
10             Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
               The Role of Social Protection



Geographic coverage of government’s social assistance programs remains limited, with some
pilot programs covering a few townships, or national programs with presence in all regions/
states but typically covering no more than one or two townships per region/state. MSWRR’s
presence below region/state level is minimal, translating into few facilities for the provision of so-
cial services deemed to be national programs. This has prompted alternative arrangements, such
as MSWRR providing support to community-run pre-schools and resorting to non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) to support administrative and technical tasks. Likewise, the school stipends
program, currently reaching 37,000 children nationally, has the potential to increase coverage
within target schools and townships. The pilot with enhanced operations is currently being imple-
mented in eight townships in Ayeyarwaddy, Mandalay, Shan South, and Yangon. The implementa-
tion of community-based OPSHGs through MSWRR is being piloted in a few communities in Mon,
Kayin, Ayeyarwaddy, Yangon, and Mandalay, covering around 5,000 beneficiaries. MOH’s MCHVS
is being piloted in two townships in Bago region.

DP programs focus resources on specific geographic areas and specific population groups. Geo-
graphic targeting is the most common way of identifying beneficiaries reflecting the regional na-
ture of social protection needs in Myanmar.9 For instance, WFP covers mainly border areas and
the Dry Zone, whereas LIFT focuses on regional programs articulating operations around geo-
graphic needs in the Delta, the Dry Zone, and Rakhine (Tat Lan Program) and in the near future in
the Uplands (Shan, Chin, and Kachin states). However, coverage within regions and states remains
patchy. Categorical targeting is also widely present as a complementary tool. Several programs
also overlay poverty and vulnerability criteria, typically with communities applying these to iden-
tify the most vulnerable within a specific category.

Government systems are the primary implementation mechanism of social security and pension
programs. Social assistance delivered through government is only recently being tested, most
extensively in the stipends program. Most CTs rely on communities (often organized into commit-
tees, such as school-level committees in the stipends program) for the identification of benefi-
ciaries, cash distribution, and mobilization. With respect to PWPs, DPs and NGOs have filled the
vacuum by helping with community mobilization and planning. However, DP and NGO priorities
are inevitably emphasized in program objectives and project selection; sustainability of support is
not guaranteed or predictable; and other geographical areas in need of support are left out.




5. Towards a social protection system in Myanmar

Government spending on social protection is low and overly focused on formal sector workers.
Provision of social assistance needs to be expanded and strengthened. At present, the majority
of the population, particularly the poor and vulnerable, has no access to predictable social pro-
tection. Instead, people have to rely on informal coping mechanisms and ad hoc assistance from
donor-financed programs, with issues of fragmentation and insufficient coverage.



9.	 This can also reflect restrictions on the geographic scope of DP operations posed by Memoranda of Understanding between
    government and agencies.
                                                      Inventory of social protection programs
                                                                                  in Myanmar                            11
The government is making a concerted effort to tackle poverty and inequality and recognizes
an effective social protection system needs to be a core component of its poverty reduction
strategy. This will require building on the government’s existing programs and pilots to increase
coverage, especially of underserved groups and in underserved areas. International experience
shows social protection interventions can play a critical role in addressing several vulnerabilities
of Myanmar households.10

Government has an important technical resource in DPs’ experience in designing and imple-
menting social protection programs in Myanmar. Several instruments DPs are implementing are
worth exploring in light of their feasibility for social assistance provision through government sys-
tems in Myanmar. Household and community transfers are widely used and there seems to be
scope to expand the use of cash assistance.

The challenge of government-led implementation lies in finding the right approaches and se-
quencing for building delivery systems within government structures and gradually expanding
coverage. DPs can support government in identifying appropriate designs and delivery functions
that can facilitate transitioning to government-led implementation. Small-scale, government-led
pilot schemes can provide important lessons for sustainable scale-up and implementation of so-
cial protection through government systems.

Developing the building blocks of a social protection system needs to be a gradual process
based on strengthening institutional capacity and ensuring fiscal sustainability. For instance, the
planned social security reforms would increase coverage but raise additional concerns about the
financial sustainability of the proposed provisions and about further fragmentation. The expan-
sion of social assistance programs such as the school stipends and social pensions is a welcome
sign of the increasing commitment of government to institutionally sustainable social assistance
provision. Further steps towards expanding social assistance as outlined in the RDSF and SPSP
will need to ensure fiscally and institutionally sustainable models that test the appropriateness
of design and implementation arrangements through government systems and allow for gradual
expansion of programs.

All these steps will ultimately help Myanmar in transitioning from reactive and short-lived
emergency assistance to a more proactive and predictable long-term social protection system.
In the short and medium terms, this entails transitioning from donor-implemented and funded
programs to national or regional government programs. During this phase, sequencing and ex-
isting capacity deserve special attention so government can build institutional sustainability for
future scale-up processes. The fiscal feasibility of programs proposed is an important criterion
to identify the right sequencing and pace of reforms, as it is easier to scale program benefits and
coverage up than down. Against a backdrop of emerging global emphasis on coordinated social
protection provision, Myanmar can take advantage of innovative ideas and technological solutions
that have emerged globally, while avoiding the costly mistakes other countries have made. Quick
wins need to be balanced with building the foundations of a sustainable social protection system.
In the long term, consolidating delivery systems that allow for effective coordination of social pro-
tection components and programs will allow Myanmar to have social protection as a sustainable
mechanism for poverty reduction and economic and social development.

10. See Note on ‘Framework for the development of social protection systems: Lessons from international experience’ for examples
    of international experience that can be relevant to Myanmar.
12         Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
           The Role of Social Protection



References


Enlightened Myanmar Research and World Bank (2015) ‘Qualitative Social and Economic Monitor-
ing (QSEM) of Livelihoods in Myanmar, Round 5’. Report commissioned by LIFT.
ILO (International Labour Organization) (2015) ‘Social Protection Assessment Based National Dia-
logue: Towards a nationally defined social protection floor in Myanmar’. Yangon: ILO. http://www.
social-protection.org/gimi/gess/ShowProject.action?id=2487
MIP (Ministry of Immigration and Population) (2014) ‘The Population and Housing Census of
Myanmar: Summary of the Provisional Results’. Naypyidaw: MIP.
Thu, E.E. and Griffiths, M. (2012) ‘Strengthening Community Based Social Protection Practices for
Child Protection’. Yangon: SPPRG.
World Bank (2012) ‘The World Bank 2012-2022 Social Protection and Labor Strategy: Resilience,
Equity and Opportunity’. Washington, DC: World Bank.
World Bank (2014) ‘The State of Social Safety Nets 2014’. Washington, DC: World Bank.
WHO (World Health Organization) (2014) ‘Mid-Term Review of Maternal and Health Voucher
Scheme’. Yangon: WHO.
                                         Inventory of social protection programs
                                                                     in Myanmar             13

Annex 1:

Methodological note on the social protection inventory


Objective
The World Bank team conducted an inventory of social protection programs in September
2013-February 2014 in order to identify the most important schemes in Myanmar and un-
derstand the characteristics of social protection provision, which could be useful to inform
policy discussions (e.g. development of the SPSP, implementation of the RDSF, policy reforms
on pensions and social security). Specifically, the inventory aimed to inform the definition of so-
cial protection in Myanmar, vision of a social protection system, potentially useful programs (or
instruments), coverage (of groups and areas), and main stakeholders involved in provision. The
inventory is not intended to be a comprehensive census of social protection programs. Rather, it
is the first attempt to document the spread and nature of social protection provision in Myanmar.




Methodology
A simple data collection tool was designed and discussed with stakeholders involved in social
protection provision in Myanmar. Primary inputs received were compiled into a single database
in Excel format. Secondary research in project documents, websites, and databases helped com-
plete the information. See section on data sources below.




Conceptual framework
As one of the main objectives of the inventory was to identify what social protection provi-
sion entails in Myanmar from the perspective of implementers; no predefined definition was
imposed on contributors. When in doubt, contributors were advised to include programs catego-
rized as social assistance or safety net programs that provide transfers and/or guarantee access
to social services (demand-side interventions).

In order to organize the information and facilitate the analysis, the database follows a life-cycle
approach as its main conceptual reference (see Figures 1 and 2). It also identifies whether inter-
ventions create opportunity, promote equity, build resilience, or (as is often the case) a combi-
nation of these objectives. Additional categories of analysis include type of program, particular
target groups within age groups, geographical and population coverage, duration/timeframe of
program, budget, and whether assistance was given to household, communities, or both. The
inventory was limited to programs and did not include policy mapping.
14          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection




Scope and limitations of the inventory
The inventory has been a useful resource used by government and donor stakeholders alike
in social protection policy development. The structure of the life-cycle approach correlates well
with how ministries think about social protection and was well accepted by DPs, who added
further elements (e.g. risks) to provide a useful framework used in the SPSP (see Figure 1). The
inventory became an important tool for information-sharing during SPSP consultations and il-
lustrated interesting examples of DP programs for government to include in its policy dialogues
(e.g. CTs).

The inventory was handed over to MSWRR, which took this as an opportunity to exercise its co-
ordinating role in the consultation process of the SPSP by organizing a validation meeting with
other ministries and linking the information in the inventory with that of the Aid Information
Management System in the Foreigner and Economic Relations Department (FERD), Ministry of
National Planning and Economic Development (MNPED). The inventory became a core input of
the International Labour Organization’s (ILO’s) Assessment Matrix, part of the Assessment-Based
National Dialogue that informed the development of the SPSP. Ultimately, the inventory became
a tool for partnership-building among government and DPs and sparked further and deeper dis-
cussions around social protection programs in Myanmar.

Despite these achievements, the inventory has limitations as an evidence-based tool:

•		It is a snapshot that needs constant and time-consuming updating by a dedicated body.

•	 Although it is a powerful tool to inform policy and program development, gaps in information
   are inevitable and hamper its ability to be displayed in more user-friendly forms (e.g. graphi-
   cally). It is difficult to collect detailed information through a standardized and simplified format
   from a range of heterogeneous programs. For instance, details on disaggregated geographic
   location (e.g. at township level) could enable the mapping of existing interventions to a certain
   geographic spread. But the heterogeneity of program coverage within townships and the lack
   of detailed information for all programs in the inventory could give misleading information if
   displayed graphically against population figures.

•	 Similarly, gaps in scope are certainly possible. For instance community-based social protection
   (i.e. intra-family and intra-community mechanisms of support as opposed to government or
   DP programs) is not currently captured in the inventory. Interventions relating to social vulner-
   abilities are also difficult to map.



Data sources and acknowledgements
The inventory was compiled by Mariana Infante-Villarroel (World Bank) with contributions from
MSWRR’s Department of Welfare Services, MOF’s Departments of Budget and Pensions, MOLESS’
Department of Labor and SSB, MOE’s Departments of Planning and Basic Education, MNPED’s
FERD, UNICEF, WFP, ILO, LIFT, HAI, SC, the International Organization for Migration (IOM), and
SPRRG. The inventory was handed over to MSWRR in April 2014. The information in this Note has
been updated.
                                          Inventory of social protection programs
                                                                      in Myanmar            15
It is worth highlighting the extensive use of the LIFT project database at http://www.lift-fund.org/
project-database and the SPRRG policy briefs at http://www.spprg.org (both sites last accessed on
5 March 2015).
16          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection




               'Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar' is the third note in the series Building
               Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar: the Role of Social Protection. All notes are
               available at www.worldbank.org/myanmar.




                                Myanmar Social Protection Notes Series

                                The note – ‘Building resilience, equity, and opportunity in Myanmar: The role
                                of social protection’ – provides an overview of the technical notes in the series.
                                These include:

                                1.	 Risks and vulnerabilities along the lifecycle: Role for social protection in
                                     Myanmar
                                2.	 Framework for the development of social protection systems: Lessons
                                     from international experience
                                3.	 Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar
                                4.	 The experience of public works programs in Myanmar: Lessons from a
                                     social protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                5.	 The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                     protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                6.	 Social protection for disaster risk management: Opportunities for
                                     Myanmar
                                7.	 Strengthening social security provision in Myanmar
                                8.	 Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
                                     protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                                9.	 Social protection delivery through community-driven development
                                     platforms: International experience and key considerations for Myanmar
                                10.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable: Key considerations in designing
                                     targeting systems
                                11.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                     protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                12.	 Developing scalable and transparent benefit payment systems in
                                     Myanmar




World Bank Office Yangon
57 Pyay Road, Corner of Shwe Hinthar Road,
6 1/2 Mile, Hlaing Township, Yangon
Republic of the Union of Myanmar. Tel: +95 1 654824
www.worldbank.org/myanmar
www.facebook.com/WorldBankMyanmar
