                                                                                                                    97957
                                                                                                                      NOTE
                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                       5
Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
The Role of Social Protection
The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons
from a social protection and poverty reduction perspective1



                           Cash is an appropriate instrument to provide assistance to poor
                           and vulnerable households in most contexts in Myanmar. Cash trans-
                           fers (CTs) have the potential to help poor and vulnerable households
                           meet basic needs and encourage investments in human capital ac-
                           cumulation. Building on existing programs such as the stipends pro-
                           gram and testing CTs with relatively simple design and implementa-
                           tion arrangements can be a viable option in the short term.




1.	 This Note was prepared by Mariana Infante-Villarroel (World Bank), with inputs from the Ministry of Education (MOE), the Ministry
    of Health (MOH), the World Food Programme (WFP), the Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT), Save the Children (SC), and
    members of the Cash Working Group (CWG). Comments were provided by Puja Vasudeva Dutta, Brett Ballard, Yuko Okamura, and
    Khin Aye Yee (World Bank); Inge Stokkel and Jessica Chaix (WFP); Lou Tessier (International Labour Organization: ILO); and Mathew
    Tasker (SC). The Note draws on information from field trips to Magwe, Mandalay, Ayeyarwaddy and Kachin and secondary sources
    on Rakhine, Tanintharyi and northern Shan. Any comments and questions can be addressed to ainfantevillarro@worldbank.org. The
    team is grateful to the Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement and to the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Devel-
    opment for their inputs and facilitation of field trips for the entire assessment; and to the Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social
    Security, the Ministry of Finance, and the Ministry of National Planning and Economic Development for their inputs and guidance.
    The team benefited from contributions and field support from WFP, ILO, UNOPS-LIFT, SC, HAI, ActionAid, IOM, MDRI, and several
    UN agencies and NGOs throughout the process. The team is grateful to the Rapid Social Response program and its five donors- the
    Russian Federation, Sweden, Norway, the United Kingdom and Australia- for funding this assessment.
2   Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
    The Role of Social Protection
                            The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from
                                 a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                        3

1. Overview

Well-designed and effectively implemented CTs are important tools for reducing poverty and
inequality and promoting investments in health, nutrition, and education. CTs provide assis-
tance in the form of cash or near-cash instruments (e.g. vouchers) to poor and vulnerable house-
holds, which helps satisfy consumption needs and allows for more risk-taking in productive activi-
ties and investments in human capital development.2
                                                                                 Box 1: Types of cash transfers
In Myanmar, cash-based assistance has been provided
in different contexts. The most widely used modality is                          Unconditional: Cash benefits to al-
cash for work (CFW), discussed in a separate Note.3 This                         leviate poverty and inequality with-
Note takes stock of other modalities of cash assistance                          out any conditions.
currently in use in Myanmar, namely unconditional cash
transfers (UCTs) for emergency response and conditional                          Conditional: Cash benefits subject
cash transfers (CCTs) for developing human capital.4 The                         to conditions based on program ob-
Note assesses whether – and when – cash assistance is                            jectives, such as sending children to
appropriate as part of Myanmar’s social protection poli-                         school and/or accessing health and
cies and identifies operational lessons to guide the future                      nutrition services.
design of cash-based programs



2. Appropriateness of cash assistance in Myanmar

The Note examines the following five elements in order to assess whether and when cash can
be an appropriate instrument to provide assistance in Myanmar: a) program objectives; b) local
conditions; c) program design elements (e.g. target groups, benefit levels, conditionality); d)
implementation arrangements; and e) outcomes.




2.1 Objectives
Figure 1: Social safety net spending against level of income

Disasters and humanitarian crises have been drivers of UCTs in the Border States. For example,
CFW and UCTs have been used in Rakhine as a response to Cyclone Giri (2010); in Kachin, over
50,000 internally displaced people (IDPs) received monthly cash transfers from various partners.
UCTs were also used in the Delta as a response to Cyclone Nargis (2008) and in the Dry Zone as a


2.	 See et al. (2010) and Fiszbein and Schady (2011) for more information on the impact of CTs on poverty and human development
    outcomes.
3.	 See Note on ‘The experience of public works programs in Myanmar’ for operational lessons from CFW and public work programs
    in Myanmar.
4. See Note on ‘Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar’ for an extensive review of social protection programs in Myan-
    mar.
4            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



response to the Magwe flash floods (2011), including cash assistance provided by various govern-
ment stakeholders and development partners (DPs).

UCTs for emergency response have had the objective of providing short- to medium-term relief to
affected households in the Border States, enabling food security (e.g. by complementing food
transfers) and contributing to the dignity and income security of vulnerable groups such as IDPs.
In Rakhine, non-governmental organizations (NGOs) are piloting a small-scale program that
combines CFW with a complementary UCT for people unable to work.5 The government is con-
sidering the implementation of social pensions for those over 90 years old; it has already given a
yearly allowance to those over 100 years old.

In several contexts,government and NGOs have also implemented CCTs with the longer-term ob-
jective of human capital accumulation. The most important in terms of scope and coverage is the
stipends program, implemented by MoE with the purpose of decreasing dropout and increasing
completion among poor and vulnerable students (see Annex 1).6
 Figure 1: Mother and child, Mina Camp, Kachin state




Photo- World Food Programme

5.	 SC, International Rescue Committee (IRC), Better Life Organization (BLO), and Oxfam, as part of the Tat Lan Group.
6.	 MOE’s stipend program has two modalities of implementation: 1) the ‘national program’ has been in operation since 2009/10 and is
    based on MOE’s current guidelines for implementation, covering all townships in Myanmar at a small scale and prioritizing orphans;
    2) the ‘pilot’ program (described in Annex 1) tests changes to the operational design of the program, namely, criteria to prioritize
    townships and students, conditions, and increased benefit levels.
                             The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from
                                  a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                     5
Other CCTs have focused on improving maternal and child health by conditioning benefits on the
utilization of health services, such as SC’s CCT in the Delta (2010-2011), the SC CCT pilot in Rakhine
and the maternal and child health voucher scheme (MCHVS), currently being implemented by
MoH in two townships in the Dry Zone (Bago region) (see Annex 1). These schemes are in a pilot
stage and lessons on their impact and implementation can help inform the government on how
appropriate CCTs are for Myanmar.




2.2 Local conditions

Partners implementing cash-based assistance in Myanmar have identified the following neces-
sary conditions to use cash (rather than food) in a particular location: a) availability and acces-
sibility of well-functioning markets, particularly food markets; b) preference of beneficiaries; c)
cost-efficiency compared with in-kind (food) assistance; d) availability of appropriate cash delivery
mechanisms; e) general safety and security; and f) low inflationary risks.

Although market analysis could be strengthened, current information shows conditions on func-
tional (food) markets and low inflationary risk have been met in most contexts where cash as-
sistance has been provided, even in conflict or fragile areas in the Border States such as Kachin
and Rakhine. For instance, in mid-2014 WFP started piloting an unconditional ‘food plus cash’
transfer in several IDP camps in northern Shan. Availability of bank services and food markets and
beneficiaries’ interest were the main criteria in selecting the location of the pilot. In IDP camps in
Kachin, however, beneficiaries and local stakeholders remain wary of cash assistance, largely be-
cause of security issues and perceptions of possible inappropriate uses (e.g. drinking, gambling).7
On the other hand, with the exception of those in a few isolated villages, most beneficiaries in the
Dry Zone prefer cash over food assistance and can easily access food markets. Local program im-
plementers also prefer cash to food as it is easier to handle and distribute.




2.3 Design elements

Target groups and targeting mechanisms

Given their different objectives, UCTs and CCTs have targeted different groups using different ap-
proaches. UCTs for humanitarian response target geographic areas affected by conflict and disas-
ters. These programs typically focus on areas where the most vulnerable people are concentrated,
such as IDP camps in the Border States.8




7.	 WFP (2014) found IDPs in four out of seven camps preferred to continue with food support instead of shifting to cash.
8.	 The option of poverty targeting is being investigated as part of possible future cash assistance to IDP camps.
6             Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
              The Role of Social Protection



Most CCTs in Myanmar also focus on targeted areas but also target specific groups consistent
with the long-term objective of building human capital. For example, the stipends pilot program
uses several steps to identify beneficiaries. First, it selects townships with high poverty and low
educational performance(geographic targeting). Next, it identifies schools with a greater number
of poor children within the selected townships. Lastly, it prioritizes poor and vulnerable students
in Grades 5-11 (poverty targeting). SC’s CCT includes all eligible women(pregnant women and
mothers of children under 12 months) in targeted villages regardless of poverty criteria, whereas
MCHVS prioritizes women in low-income households who cannot afford to access health services
and who live in remote areas.


Benefit levels

UCTs in the Border States have been set on the basis of complementary food rations in IDP
camps, such as in WFP’s pilot in northern Shan, where IDPs receive rice and blended food plus
MMK 6,000 in cash. CCTs have benefit levels that can help beneficiaries overcome barriers to hu-
man capital accumulation. For instance, the stipends pilot sets different benefit levels for primary
school (MMK 5,000/month), middle school (MMK 8,000/month), and high school (MMK 10,000/
month) students to reflect how much more costly it is for families to send children to school as
they grow older and to incentivize families to continue to send children to school at critical transi-
tion points (i.e. primary to middle school and middle to high school).9 SC’s pilot provides MMK
13,000/month to mothers in order to meet the nutritional needs of mother and child and contrib-
ute to travel expenses for accessing health and nutrition services. MCHVS provide vouchers for
mothers to cover transport costs to MoH health facilities for antenatal care (ANC), delivery as-
sisted by skilled birth attendants, and immunization of their children.


Conditions

Conditions apply only to CCT models. CTs can be more effective if behavioral change interven-
tions complement cash in contexts where non-economic (such as cultural) factors also play a role
in inadequate feeding practices or health-seeking behavior. It can also guide beneficiaries in how
to spend the cash (e.g. nutritious food). In the case of the stipends pilot program, selected stu-
dents receive the stipends for four consecutive years if they comply with the conditions on school
enrolment and attendance, good behavior, and performance. SC’s CCT conditions the receipt of
the transfer on attending nutrition education sessions and accessing health services such as ANC
and immunization.10 MCHVS reimburses mothers only after they access services at MoH facilities.
While the stipends program is somewhat strict in enforcing these conditions (students eventually
lose the transfer if they do not comply), SC’s CCT considers a ‘soft’ approach whereby conditions
are encouraged and monitored but transfers are not stopped if beneficiaries do not comply with
the conditions.

9.	 Both direct (tuition, school materials, transport, as middle and high schools are farther away from villages) and indirect (opportunity
    costs of children not working but going to school instead) costs increase as children get older. SC (2015b) found that both indirect
    and direct costs were responsible for some children dropping out of school, even if they were benefiting from the stipend. Dropout
    for middle and high school was extremely high in villages visited during fieldwork for this Note. Middle and high school facilities
    were several miles away from the villages visited.
10.	Targeted villages receive a more intensive nutrition component, comprising mother-to-mother support groups, peer counseling,
     intense behavior change communication and CTs to further address the causal factors of malnutrition in the target areas. There are
     30 such villages, out of which half will receive the CT and the rest serve as control.
                     The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from
                          a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                 7
It is important to note that CCTs can be effective only when services of acceptable quality are
available; otherwise, beneficiaries cannot meet conditions (or only at high costs for caregivers,
usually mothers) and cash incentives become ineffective. Since the stipends program is imple-
mented at school level (see Section 2.4), this relationship is established from the start with chil-
dren already at school. It will be important to understand whether accessibility of health services
compromises the ability of beneficiaries of maternal and child CCTs to comply with conditions or
decreases the benefits deriving from accessing services, given high opportunity costs. Moreover,
it will be important to evaluate whether health service providers can continue to provide ade-
quate services with the increasing demand the CCT scheme promotes.


Duration

UCTs for emergency and humanitarian response have typically been short-lived. For instance,
UCTs for IDPs in Kachin provided monthly transfers to beneficiaries in camps from July 2013 to
March 2014. WFP is currently piloting UCTs in northern Shan. The stipends pilot program will be
tested for four school years, with gradual increases in coverage each year under modified guide-
lines (see Annex 1); the national stipends program will continue as usual. SC’s CCT is being piloted
from August 2014 to September 2016, whereas MCHVS has recently been expanded to a second


                                                                         Photo- World Food Programme
8           Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



township. It is important to consider pilot durations in light of the lessons that can be gathered in
such an amount of time: implementation periods seem short in some cases to gather information
on impact in human capital development. Budget constraints are also factors behind short dura-
tion (UCTs in Kachin) or scale-up constraints (MCHVS).




2.4 Implementation arrangements

Stakeholders involved in implementation

Until recently, CTs in Myanmar have largely been implemented by development partners and
NGOs. Only the stipends program and MCHVS have a clear role for government. The stipends pro-
gram has an implementation structure that cuts across different levels within MoE, with school-
level committees in charge of most tasks involving beneficiaries and support provided at different
levels within MoE (see Annex 1). MCHVS involves health service providers (health assistants) who
also monitor access. Village administrators support targeting by certifying that women are poor or
vulnerable. Community village leaders and health support groups create awareness in communi-
ties about the distribution and use of the vouchers. SC’s CCT is implemented mainly by SC’s staff
while relying on Village Development Committees (VDCs)11 to support nutrition sensitization and
community mobilization and on health service providers to support health outreach activities.
UCTs in IDP camps in Kachin rely on camp management committees to assist NGOs with the veri-
fication of beneficiary lists, provision of temporary ID cards to beneficiaries exclusively for cash
distribution, and cash distribution itself.


Cash delivery mechanisms

In all CTs reviewed, project management teams distribute cash directly to beneficiaries. In the
Dry Zone, WFP and its partners along with Project Management Committees (PMC) distribute the
cash directly to CFW beneficiaries. The stipends program currently delivers cash to parents or
guardians at schools. Midwives and voucher distributors (community members recruited and
trained to identify eligible women) distribute vouchers in MCHVS and midwives or voucher dis-
tributors carry out reimbursement at the end of the month: women need to cover costs upfront.

The main reason for the reliance on direct cash distribution is low coverage and reliability of fi-
nancial services, particularly in rural areas. Only 10 percent of Myanmar’s population has access
to financial services, the majority of whom are concentrated in urban areas (WFP, 2010). An ad-
ditional reason is lack of familiarity with the banking system and low financial literacy, as studies
conducted in the Border States, such as Rakhine and Kachin, illustrate (see Annex 2). Many poten-
tial beneficiaries (e.g. IDPs) face problems of access to financial services, as they do not have ID




11.	 VDCs have often been used to implement and coordinate LIFT-supported programs and do not necessarily involve government
     structures
                              The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from
                                   a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                            9
cards and birth registration documents.12 These issues make it difficult to use financial services in
CTs in these areas at present or in the near future. Informal money transfer through the hundi
network13 seems insufficient for large-scale cash-based support. At the same time, security re-
garding large-scale cash distribution is a major concern in conflict-affect areas.


Scalability of delivery platforms

In the case of the stipends program, the urge to extend support to more school-age children
within poorer townships prompted MoE to review the implementation mechanisms and to pilot
and test a more systematic design. The early experience of the pilot stipends program indicates
that a) a combination of standardized criteria14 and community validation should be used to select
schools and students in greater need; b) a good communication strategy is crucial and needs to
involve several stakeholders at the community level; c) government structures implementing the
program need additional capacity-building to fulfill their roles effectively; and d) there may be a
need to complement the stipends with additional supply-side interventions to help offset the di-
rect and indirect costs of education.15 MCHVS also offers lessons on a) the difficulty of training
community members who are not midwives (and hence have little health knowledge) to identify
beneficiaries and distribute vouchers; b) the importance of simplifying beneficiary identification
when this is done by community members; c) the difficulties of women covering costs upfront and
then being reimbursed; and d) the need to complement the program with supply-side solutions
such as opening health centers near very remote communities, as the voucher was not enough to
motivate women to access the service in remote areas.




2.5 Outcomes of CTs

There is limited evidence on the impact of the CTs reviewed. There is little information on the
impact of or lessons from cash assistance after Cyclone Nargis. Inconclusive reviews from NGOs
highlight inflationary tendencies in local markets; others point to the role of cash in restoring mar-
kets after the disaster. It is premature to discuss the impact of CTs on food security, poverty reduc-
tion, or human capital accumulation in Myanmar given the short-term nature of most CTs and the
lack of impact evaluations of current programs.

Nevertheless, qualitative information from monitoring activities and experiences of implement-
ers provides useful clues to changes in the utilization of services and the potential difference CTs
makes to beneficiaries. Implementers of CTs in Kachin cite positive results in terms of available


12.	 Emerging camp coordination and camp management activities by certain agencies, involving camp-specific profiling or de facto
     registration processes, provide a way to overcome this problem in camps.
13.	 An informal transfer system using a mix of agents and middlemen along a cash- and trust-based word-of-mouth chain.
14.	 Socioeconomic indicators should be reviewed over time and incorporate local/community-specific characteristics to capture the
     multiple correlates of poverty.
15.	 SC (2015a) found availability and accessibility of middle and high schools remains a major bottleneck for children to continue their
     schooling. MOE is implementing multiple reforms, including eliminating primary and middle school fees, in an attempt to reduce
     the direct costs of schooling.
10              Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                The Role of Social Protection



income to buy food and pay health and education expenses (WFP, 2014).16 Available evidence on
MCHVS found increased utilization of maternal and child health services among beneficiaries,such
as ANC visits (except the first one), deliveries assisted by skilled birth attendants, immunization,
and postnatal care visits (WHO, 2014). Available information from the SC CCT implemented in the
Delta as a response to the floods (2011) suggests breast feeding increased among beneficiaries.17
Although at relatively early stages of implementation, preliminary qualitative evidence from the
stipends and the SC CCT show motivation of beneficiaries to access services. In the case of SC’s
CCT, mothers seem to spend extra money buying food, and cash seems to motivate mothers to
seek healthcare providers for antenatal care and immunization (SC, 2015a). Anecdotal evidence
suggests the stipends program so far has encouraged parents to get more involved in their chil-
dren’s education, to improve attendance, and to cover education costs such as stationery, uni-
forms, and transport with the stipend (SC, 2015b).




3.	Lessons

Cash-based assistance appears feasible in most contexts in Myanmar. Myanmar is predominant-
ly a cash economy, and managing cash is part of households’ routine activities. Poor households
seem to follow well-known patterns of increased food consumption when given cash. WFP moni-
toring shows that 70 percent of CTs is used for purchasing food. Therefore, objectives on food se-
curity can be pursued, at least partially, through cash assistance (although complementary behav-
ioral change interventions may also be required). As UCTs in Kachin and preliminary findings of
CCTs show, investments in health and education also increase when households are given extra
cash, which is an encouraging sign in terms of objectives of CTs related to human capital accumu-
lation.18 It may be possible to mitigate the inappropriate use of cash (which may not be that differ-
ent from what is happening in other countries where cash assistance is commonly provided) by
providing cash more systematically to women and through complementary behavioral interven-
tions. There is no solid evidence of inflationary risks. However, there are risks (remoteness, inse-
curity, social tensions) that can make cash less effective or even exacerbate negative local dynam-
ics, particularly in the Border States. These factors need to be assessed on a case-by-case basis.

CTs to poor and vulnerable households as a modality also seem both relevant and feasible. Inci-
dence of poverty across the country and the need to reach out-of-school children and improve
health and nutrition outcomes suggests there is scope for household transfers. In recent years,
government has started to get involved in the design and implementation of CTs in Myanmar (sti-
pends, MCHVS, and social pensions). The experience of these government programs and that of
DP-implemented CTs provides valuable operational lessons on the scalability of institutional ar-
rangements and implementation processes. Large-scale CTs can be affordable in Myanmar: simu-


16.	 Field interviews also found these perceptions among beneficiaries.
17.	 Summary results of the evaluation were shared by the SC team. That program lasted six months and targeted mothers of young
     children and mothers of children with moderate and severe acute malnutrition who received cash conditioned on exclusive breast
     feeding and access to management of acute malnutrition along with orientation on adequate feeding practices.
18. Choice of investments on health and education may be limited in the case of vouchers with a particular purpose.sectoral (health 	
     and education) CCT models.
                         The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from
                              a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                       11
lations done during the Assessment-Based National Dialogue estimated that scaling up the sti-
pends program to all poor children in school could cost as little as 0.15 percent of gross domestic
product (GDP) in 2024 (ILO, 2015).

Operational constraints for large-scale cash assistance in Myanmar remain in the short term and
make a phased approach necessary before scaling up pilot programs. Implementation through
government systems is only recently being tested, most extensively in the stipends program. In
the short term, testing functions across administrative levels, consistent with the ongoing decen-
tralization process, will be an important step in assessing and building the institutional sustain-
ability of CTs in Myanmar. The contribution of DPs and NGOs as partners in service delivery will be
critical. Rapid change in the banking sector, at least in urban areas, is expected in the future, with
initiatives like Ooredoo’s agent-based system for mobile cash delivery expected to be launched in
early 2015 (SC, 2014), although there may still be constrains to rapid expansion and scaling up of
cash payments in rural areas in the short term. The planned spread of the banking and telecom-
munications network combined with the development of robust regulations should also ease this
constraint in the medium to long term. Patchy coverage of ID cards (particularly among the rural
population) and lack of a unique national ID makes it more difficult to ensure benefits are paid to
the right persons. Poverty targeting is made difficult by the lack of recent disaggregated data on
who the poor are and where they are located. In the absence of an integrated targeting mecha-
nism, different programs have developed various tools to focus resources in specific areas or on
specific groups. Lessons are emerging on when and how household targeting can be an effective
tool to reach those in need (e.g. with clear and simple criteria).19 There is scope for improving
these mechanisms as better data become available and administrative capacity improves, and in
the long term, for harmonizing these program-specific delivery mechanisms.

Piloting CTs with relatively simple design and implementation arrangements will likely be more
appropriate in the Myanmar context, at least in the short term. Pilot UCT programs for specific
groups (such as social pensions for the elderly, as recently proposed Ministry of Social Welfare,
Relief and Resettlement) can provide a basic safety net that goes beyond short-lived emergency
response. These can also build on the experience of providing a complementary package of sup-
port through public works and CTs for those unable to work. At the same time, MOE’s stipends
program and other CCT pilots can provide evidence on impact and whether or not conditions are
appropriate. These can also provide government operational lessons for addressing the additional
challenges of introducing CCTs at scale. The stipends program in particular can provide the foun-
dation for a multi-sectoral, government-led CT directly to households.20 In the short term, CTs can
rely on relatively simplified mechanisms for identification, enrolment, and payments, while build-
ing capacity for scaling up. In particular, use of government systems can familiarize stakeholders at
various levels (central, state/region, township) with CTs as social protection and poverty reduction
tools. With improvements in household survey and administrative data, coverage of financial ser-
vice and telecommunication networks, supply of education and health services, administrative
capacity for implementation and coordination, and greater knowledge of what works and what


19. The MCHVS midterm review (WHO, 2014), for instance, found targeting criteria were complex for implementers and stigmatization
    of ‘poor’ beneficiaries was found in some cases. The qualitative assessment of the stipends program (SC, 2015b) found school and
    student selection needed to be standardized, with greater emphasis given to adapting poverty criteria at the state/region level
    and less emphasis to dropout rates for school selection.
20.	 Other countries, such as Indonesia, have built on the experience of implementing school stipends to design more complex, multi-
     sectoral (health and education) CCT models.
12         Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
           The Role of Social Protection



doesn’t in the Myanmar context, these pilot programs can provide the basis for more sophisti-
cated CT models in the future.
                   The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from
                        a social protection and poverty reduction perspective               13

References


Baird S., McIntosh, C., and Özler, B. (2010) ‘Cash or Condition? Evidence from a Cash Transfer Ex-
periment’. Policy Research Working Paper 5259. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Fiszbein, A. and Schady, N., with Ferriera, F., Grosh, M., Kelleher, N., Olinto, P. and Skoufias, E.
(2011) ‘Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty’. Washington, DC: World
Bank.

ILO (International Labour Organization) (2015) ‘Social Protection Assessment Based National Dia-
logue: Towards a nationally defined social protection floor in Myanmar’. Yangon: ILO. http://www.
social-protection.org/gimi/gess/ShowProject.action?id=2487

SC (Save the Children) (2014) ‘Minutes from Cash Working Group Meeting, July 2014’. Yangon: SC.

SC (Save the Children) (2015a) ‘Maternity Cash Transfer Pilot: First Quarter Review of the Mater-
nity Cash Transfer Programme’. Yangon: SC.

SC (Save the Children) (2015b) ‘Qualitative Assessment: Consolidated Report Myanmar School
Grant & Stipend Programme Phase 1 & 2’. Yangon: SC.

WFP (World Food Programme) (2010) ‘Cash for Change: Financial Sector Assessment – Myanmar’.
Yangon: WFP.

WFP (World Food Programme) (2014) ‘Kachin Cash Assessment Report’. Yangon: WFP.

WHO (World Health Organization) (2014)‘Mid-Term Review of Maternal and Health Voucher
Scheme’. Yangon: WHO.
14             Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
               The Role of Social Protection




Annex 1:

Examples of CT programs in Myanmar

                                 MOE                         SC                        MOH                  Convention (KBC),
                                                                                                                Shalom
Name                   Stipends pilot (school      Maternity CT pilot        MCHVS (2012)                 UCT for emergency sup-
                       years 2014/15-2017/18)      (August 2014-Septem-                                   port – IDP camps (June
                                                   ber 2016)                                              2013-March 2014)
Main objective         Increase completion         Improve health and nu-    Enhance accessibility        Provide relief and
                       rates and reduce drop-      trition of mothers and    of health services for       enhance income and
                       out rates                   children from concep-     poor mothers and their       food security of IDPs by
                                                   tion until 24 months      children                     complementing food
                                                                                                          transfers with cash as-
                                                                                                          sistance
Description/emphasis   Provision of CCTs to        Provision of CCTs to
                       poor and vulnerable         pregnant mothers and
                       students at risk of drop-   mothers of children
                       ping out                    under 12 months
Geographical scope     •	 8 townships in Yan-      15 villages in            Yedarshey and Pauk           IDP camps in Kachin
                          gon, southern Shan,      Rakhine(Myebon,           Kaung townships (Bago        and northern Shan
                          Ayeyarwaddy, and         Pauktaw, Kyaukpyu, and    region)
                          Mandalay by 2014         Minbya townships)
                       •	 Total of 40 town-
                          ships to be covered
                          by school year
                          2017/18


Target population      Poor students Grades        Pregnant mothers and      Pregnant women who           IDPs
                       5-11                        mothers of children       are poor, live in hard‐to‐
                                                   under 12 months           reach areas, and have
                                                                             never used services
                                                                             from skilled birth at-
                                                                             tendants before
Targeting criteria     •	 Geographical:            •	 Geographical:          •	 Geographical: town-       •	 Geographical: IDP
                          townships with high         villages with food        ships with low access        camps in conflict
                          poverty and low             insecurity, poor          to health services           areas
                          educational perfor-         access to health and   •	 Categorical: preg-        •	 Categorical: IDPs
                          mance; schools with         nutrition services,       nant women
                          high dropout rate           and poor infant and
                          prioritized                 young child feeding    •	 Poverty: maximum
                                                      practices, where SC       daily income of MMK
                       •	 Categorical: students                                 1,000 per household,
                          Grades 5-11                 has presence
                                                                                need to borrow for
                       •	 Poverty: poor and        •	 Categorical: preg-        travel and other es-
                          vulnerable children.        nant women and            sentials
                          Among equally poor          mothers of children
                          children, priority          under 6 months (for
                          given to orphans,           enrolment)
                          single parents, and      •	 Poverty: none (uni-
                          children with more          versal)
                          siblings from poor
                          families
                        The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from
                             a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                        15

                                   MOE                        SC                         MOH                  Convention (KBC),
                                                                                                                  Shalom
No. of beneficiaries     180,000 students           323 mothers with           1,346 (June-October        -
                         (target by 2017); 37,000   children under 1 year of   2013)
                         reached so far             age (target; 253 so far)
Benefit levels           •	 Primary level: MMK      MMK 13,000/month/          -                          MMK 6,000/person/
                            5,000/month/            mother (cash)                                         month
                           10 months
                         •	 Middle school: MMK
                            8,000/month/
                           10 months
                         •	 High school: MMK
                            10,000/month/10
                            months
                         (Cash; per school year)
Frequency of payments    Monthly                    Monthly                    Monthly                    Monthly
Conditions               •	 Enrollment in school    •	 Attending nutrition     Access health service      None
                         •	 School attendance:         education and moth-     (reimbursement for
                            85% for primary and        ers’ support group      transport and service: 4
                            middle school, 75%         sessions                ANC visits, 1 deliv-
                            for high school         •	 Accessing ANC ser-      ery, immunization; 1
                                                       vices                   voucher each)
                         •	 Pass year end exam
                                                    •	 Immunizing child
                                                       according to national
                                                       schedule
Budget                   USD 2 million (2014/15)    USD 73,000 approxi-        -                          -
                         USD 3 million (2015/16)    mately (2014-2017)
                         USD 7 million (2016/17)
                         USD 7 million (2017/18)
16           Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection




                                  MOE                           SC                        MOH                  Convention (KBC),
                                                                                                                   Shalom
Role of government in   •	 National: MOE is lead     •	 Village leaders:         •	 Health assistants:       None
implementation             agency, responsible          sensitization at the        provide and monitor
                           for implementing             community level             access
                           program at all levels     •	 Health service pro-      •	 Village administra-
                        •	 State/region:                viders: sensitization       tion: certifies women
                           coordinates with             through outreach            are poor
                           Departments of Basic
                           Education (DBEs) and
                           support townships
                        •	 Technical Working
                           Group, Department
                           of Education Planning
                           and Training: leads
                           on technical design
                           and implementation
                        •	 DBE: supports town-
                           ships in implementa-
                           tion through training,
                           monitoring, and
                           allocating budget
                        •	 Township team: se-
                           lects schools, verifies
                           student selection,
                           handles complaints,
                           transfers budget from
                           DBEs to schools, and
                           processes stipends
                           based on compliance
                        •	 School-level commit-
                           tee: communication
                           with beneficiaries
                           and general public,
                           selecting students
                           for stipends, enroll-
                           ment, monitoring,
                           payments, record-
                           keeping
Impact                  A recent qualitative         Forthcoming. Baseline       Increased access to ma-     Increased food security,
                        assessment found good        survey conducted and        ternal and child health     available income to
                        results in terms of com-     comparison will be          services, particularly      cover health and educa-
                        munity acceptance, and       made between villages       deliveries attended by      tion expenses.
                        supply-side constraints      with CCT (15) and those     skilled birth attendants,
                        to enroll more middle        with only nutrition         among beneficiaries
                        and high school stu-         interventions (15) to as-
                        dents in the program.        sess the impact of cash.
                        Additional monitoring        Qualitative evidence so
                        and evaluation activities    far shows a) mothers
                        include quantitative         spend extra money on
                        approaches through           buying food and cover-
                        conducting school and        ing health costs; b)
                        household surveys and        forgone income during
                        spot-checks                  the last trimester of
                                                     pregnancy is an issue
                                                     (this is beyond the
                                                     pilot’s objective); c)
                                                     cash motivates moth-
                                                     ers to seek healthcare
                                                     providers for ANC and
                                                     immunization
                         The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from
                              a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                      17

Annex 2:

Studies done by DPs and NGOs to inform the
implementation of CTs

Cash Emergency Preparedness (CEP) Assessment (October 2013, SC): This assessment reviewed
seven different potential payment methods against criteria including geographical coverage, secu-
rity risks, organizational experience, scale-up potential, beneficiary acceptance, ease of access for
beneficiaries, and cost. Based on this analysis, it was decided that, given a lack of penetration of
financial services in rural areas, direct cash distributions were likely to be the only mechanism
available in the first year of the project. While this is currently the only viable option that allows
for distributions in the most remote areas, it is generally a more costly process and places all risks
pertaining to the transfers on the implementing organizations.21 SC will consider the benefits of
alternative delivery mechanisms (e.g. banks, hundis, or traders) as the financial services industry
develops (especially telecommunications).

SC (Save the Children) (2013) ‘Cash Emergency Preparedness Assessment’. External Version. Yan-
gon: Save the Children.

Macro Assessment of Myanmar’s Financial Sector (2010, WFP): The objective of the macro finan-
cial assessment was to determine Myanmar’s capacity to safely absorb and efficiently transfer
large injections of cash, necessary to deliver cash and/or voucher transfers at scale. The financial
sector was assessed on the following indicators: government supervision, ease of entry, competi-
tion, safety and consumer protection, and efficiency. Compared with other South Asian countries,
Myanmar scored low. The assessment found movement of cash and/or voucher redemption using
the cash accounts and/or voucher distribution models was not scalable. The technologies (includ-
ing the mobile phone network) and financial networks that can be used for delivering cash bene-
fits in targeted geographic locations at scale were very limited to non-existent. Myanmar does not
have real time gross settlements for local transfers and there is no control over informal and dom-
inant payment systems provided by the hundis. There is the less technologically dependent deliv-
ery mechanism of physical cash distribution in use by WFP Myanmar. This mechanism remains not
scalable, owing to the lack of support infrastructure such as cash in transit insurance, guard ser-
vices, and payment agents and service providers in the targeted geographic locations. WFP will
review its options as the financial sector develops.

WFP (World Food Programme) (2010) ‘Cash for Change: Financial Sector Assessment – Myanmar’.
Yangon: WFP.

Kachin Cash Assessment (2014, WFP): This assessment investigated the appropriateness and fea-
sibility of a cash-based food security response to IDPs in Myitkyina and Waingmaw, Kachin, with
the aim of transitioning from a food-based approach. It reviewed beneficiary preference, market
access, market readiness, government’s position, and partners’ capacity. Piloting UCTs in camps


21.	 While risks are low, certain measures can be taken, such as being accompanied by respected community leaders for distributions
     and mitigating the impact of the risk of loss or theft of cash through ‘cash in transit’ insurance.
18          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



only where it is welcome by the IDPs would be a suitable option provided government’s support
can be obtained and a detailed cost/benefit analysis also supports the transition. If introduced,
direct cash distributions should be preferred to bank withdrawals at least in the short to medium
term. Cash should be handed directly to the household rather than through the mediation of the
camp management committees, and preferably to women.

WFP (World Food Programme) (2014) ‘Kachin Cash Assessment Report’. Yangon: WFP.

Food Security and Livelihood Assessment (FSLA) (2013, Action Contre la Faim, Danish Refugee
Council, Oxfam, Relief International, SC, Solidarités International): The FSLA was undertaken by
the above-mentioned NGOs in August and September 2013 in Rakhine state, in the townships of
Sittwe, Pauktaw, Rathedaung, and Myebon. The objective was to better understand the conse-
quences of the inter-communal violence that erupted in June 2012 and October 2012 on food and
livelihood security, to assess the present economic and social dynamics of communities, and to
identify gaps in humanitarian assistance. The FSLA found access to food was the main issue for the
poorest households, especially in Muslim villages and IDP camps. Cash income is also limited in
Muslim displacement areas. Households in IDP camps have not been able to protect their liveli-
hoods after displacement owing to a loss of productive assets and restrictions on movement.
Hence, practices such as selling assets or migration have been observed. The FSLA identified for
each typology of location and its respective wealth groups several potential response options.
However, lack of proper ID of beneficiaries is identified as an issue in most potential responses.

Action Contre la Faim, Danish Refugee Council, Oxfam, Relief International, SC and Solidarités In-
ternational (2013) ‘Food Security and Livelihoods Assessment, Rakhine State, Myanmar, August’.
Yangon: Action Contre la Faim, Danish Refugee Council, Oxfam, Relief International, SC, Solidarités
International.
The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from
     a social protection and poverty reduction perspective   19
20          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection




                'The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from a social protection and poverty
                reduction perspective' is the fifth note in the series Building Resilience, Equity and 	
                Opportunity in Myanmar: the Role of Social Protection. All notes are available at 		
                www.worldbank.org/myanmar.



                               Myanmar Social Protection Notes Series

                               The note – ‘Building resilience, equity, and opportunity in Myanmar: The role
                               of social protection’ – provides an overview of the technical notes in the series.
                               These include:

                               1.	 Risks and vulnerabilities along the lifecycle: Role for social protection in
                                    Myanmar
                               2.	 Framework for the development of social protection systems: Lessons
                                    from international experience
                               3.	 Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar
                               4.	 The experience of public works programs in Myanmar: Lessons from a
                                    social protection and poverty reduction perspective
                               5.	 The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                    protection and poverty reduction perspective
                               6.	 Social protection for disaster risk management: Opportunities for
                                    Myanmar
                               7.	 Strengthening social security provision in Myanmar
                               8.	 Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
                                    protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                               9.	 Social protection delivery through community-driven development
                                    platforms: International experience and key considerations for Myanmar
                               10.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable: Key considerations in designing
                                    targeting systems
                               11.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                    protection and poverty reduction perspective
                               12.	 Developing scalable and transparent benefit payment systems in
                                    Myanmar




World Bank Office Yangon
57 Pyay Road, Corner of Shwe Hinthar Road,
6 1/2 Mile, Hlaing Township, Yangon
Republic of the Union of Myanmar. Tel: +95 1 654824
www.worldbank.org/myanmar
www.facebook.com/WorldBankMyanmar
