                                                                                                                      97958
                                                                                                                       NOTE
                                                                                                                                        1
                                                                                                                                        6
Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
The Role of Social Protection
Social protection for disaster risk management:
Opportunities for Myanmar1



                           Social protection can help build people’s social and eco-
                           nomic resilience against disasters in Myanmar. Regular cash trans-
                           fers, including public works programs, can help smooth consump-
                           tion, build and maintain assets, and develop human capital to better
                           cope with natural hazards. Disaster risk management (DRM) sys-
                           tems can be linked to social protection programs to trigger a safety
                           net response in times of emergencies. Community-driven develop-
                           ment (CDD) programs could provide a useful platform for social pro-
                           tection programming to respond to disasters and build long term
                           resilience in Myanmar.




1.	 This Note has been prepared by Inge Stokkel (World Bank) with comments from Puja Vasudeva Dutta, Mariana Infante-Villarroel
    and Jehan Arulpragasam (World Bank) and from the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Asian Development
    Bank (ADB), and the World Food Programme (WFP). The team is grateful to the Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement
    and to the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development for their inputs and facilitation of field trips for the entire assess-
    ment; and to the Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social Security the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of National Planning
    and Economic Development for their inputs and guidance. The team benefited from contributions and field support from WFP, ILO,
    UNOPS-LIFT, SC, HAI, ActionAid, IOM, MDRI, and several UN agencies and NGOs throughout the process. The team is grateful to the
    Rapid Social Response program and its five donors the Russian Federation, Sweden, Norway, the United Kingdom and Australia for
    funding this assessment.
2   Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
    The Role of Social Protection
                                                Social portection for disaster risk management:
                                                                    Opportunities for Myanmar     3

1. Background

Myanmar suffers from disaster losses every year caused by a range of hazards that have high
immediate and long-lasting impacts on people, livelihoods, the local and national economy, and
the government budget. Its coastal regions are exposed to cyclones, storm surges, and tsunamis,
while major parts of the country are at risk from earthquakes and fires. Rainfall-induced flooding
is a recurring event across the country, and some parts of the country are exposed to landslides
and droughts (GoM, 2012a).2 In the past 25 years, Myanmar has suffered 32 disaster events (seis-
mic activity, epidemic, flood, landslides, and storms) affecting more than 4 million people and
causing USD 4.7 billion in damages.3 Cyclone Nargis was the worst natural disaster in the history
of Myanmar, generating a total loss of 21 percent of the country's 2007 gross domestic product
(GDP) (ASEAN, 2008). Annual expected losses are approximately USD 184.8 million, equivalent to
0.9 percent of the country’s GDP in 2008. The government spends USD 10-20 million on road re-
habilitation after floods and landslides every year.4

Disasters disproportionately affect the poor (particularly women, children, the elderly, people
with disabilities, migrants, and marginalized groups). These groups often live in places more ex-
posed to hazard risks, partly because of environmental degradation from over exploitation of land,
and have less ability to cope with and recover from disasters. Rural households with higher in-
comes have a higher ability to diversify livelihood activities to reduce risks, while informal safety
nets on which the poor depend (such as borrowing food) become stretched when shocks affect
the whole community. Environmental degradation and recurrent disasters exacerbate people’s
vulnerability. Experiences in Cyclone Nargis demonstrate that pre-existing environmental degra-
dation in the Ayeyarwaddy Delta in turn led to increased vulnerability to disasters. The cyclone
resulted in further environmental damage and increased exposure to flooding owing to erosion
and destroyed embankments, jeopardizing sustainable livelihoods. Nargis severely damaged the
ability of communities to recover on their own; they lost their productive assets, which further
exacerbated problems such as malnutrition and food insecurity, keeping them in a cycle of pov-
erty (UNEP, 2009). Recovery since Nargis has been slow and investments in long-term develop-
ment activities towards rebuilding livelihoods and resilience have been insufficient. Cash transfer
(CT) programs, implemented by development partners and non-governmental organizations
(NGOs) as part of the response, were well received but were only for a short duration (World Bank,
2014).

With a focus on social assistance, this Note investigates the role social protection can play in
increasing the capacity of poor and vulnerable households to cope with and reduce hazard risk
in Myanmar and in developing resilient households and communities. This Note is timely as it
can more explicitly explore the conceptual links between social protection and disaster risk man-
agement (DRM) described in the 2014 Myanmar Social Protection Strategic Plan (SPSP) as well as
providing input into the current development of the Rural Development Strategic Framework
(RDSF) implementation plan and the National Disaster Management (NDM) Law’s rules and regu-
lations.

2.	 See Annex 1 for hazard risks in different geographical areas of Myanmar.
3.	 Emergency Events Database (EM-DAT): http://www.emdat.be
4.	 World Bank calculations, Disaster Risk Reduction Mission, 2014.
4            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection




2. 	Overview: the role of social protection in disaster risk
	 management

Social protection has an important role to play in DRM. Hazards become disasters when people
have limited ability to withstand and cope, with poverty a lead cause. DRM is a systematic pro-
cess of using legal and policy frameworks and skills and capacities to design and implement strate-
gies and policies to reduce the adverse impacts of natural hazards and the possibility of disaster.
This includes disaster risk reduction (DRR) and increasing household and community resilience, as
well as disaster preparedness, response, and recovery practices.5

Social protection comprises policies, programs, and delivery systems that help individuals and
societies manage risk and volatility and protect them from poverty and destitution, through
instruments that improve resilience, equity, and opportunity.6 It offers a holistic approach to di-
sasters that can help break the negative cycle of impact in the short, medium, and long term. So-
cial protection can complement efforts to develop long-term household economic and social resil-
ience, reduce disaster risk, and help households cope with and recover from disasters (see Figure
1). By reducing vulnerability, it can also contribute to reducing hazard impacts on the local and
national economy.

Figure 1: Disaster risk cycle and the role of social protection




Source: Developed by Mariana Infante-Villarroel and Inge Stokkel, derived from content in Burton (2012).




5.	 Adapted from the DRM definitions of the UN International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR) (http://www.unisdr.org/we/
    inform/terminology) and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) (https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/special-reports/srex/
    SREX-Annex_Glossary.pdf).
6.	 From World Bank definition of social protection (World Bank, 2012a).
                                   Social portection for disaster risk management:
                                                       Opportunities for Myanmar                 5

3. Lessons from international experience

The international experiences discussed here demonstrate that building social protection pro-
grams and delivery mechanisms could help Myanmar better protect its people against disasters
(through risk reduction, preparedness and rapid response) and build long-term social and eco-
nomic resilience. This can be achieved by building on existing platforms (such as CDD) and through
effective coordination between the different government stakeholders.




3.1 Policy, coordination, and financing

The program examples in the next section (‘Social protection programs to assist in DRM’) dem-
onstrate that coordination between the social protection and DRM sectors can help reduce the
impact of natural hazards. Ethiopia’s Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP) is linked to DRM sys-
tems such as hazard risk mapping and early warning systems (EWSs), which has helped with early
response and reduced, even avoided, disaster losses. In Indonesia, the existing PNPM network of
facilitators and volunteers has enabled local governments to quickly assess community needs and
rehabilitate infrastructure. In the Philippines, the existing network of implementers of the Panta-
wid Pamilyang Pilipino Program (Pantawid Pamilya) conditional cash transfer (CCT) program and
coordination systems between all levels of government have enabled quick response.

Social protection programs can provide a common platform for pooling development partner
(DP) funds to respond to disaster. This is demonstrated by PSNP, where the Risk Financing Mech-
anism (RFM) ensured financial commitments from donors were put in place before any crises oc-
curred. In 2008, in response to increasing food prices and the failure of the belg rains, the govern-
ment used the RFM to provide additional transfers to 4.43 million existing PSNP beneficiaries and
1.5 million individuals who had not previously participated but who has been negatively affected
by the crisis. The RFM was again used in 2009 to provide additional transfers to 6.4 million PSNP
participants (World Bank, 2012b). In the Philippines, the government used Pantawid Pamilya to
channel donor funding for emergency response efforts when Cyclone Haiyan hit.




3.2 Social protection programs to assist in DRM

Social transfer programs can provide multi-year and predictable assistance that can help people
accumulate assets to buffer disaster losses and can reduce the long-term economic impact of
disasters.

Ethiopia’s PSNP is an example of how an ad hoc emergency response can be transformed into a
comprehensive, sustainable, and scalable social protection and DRM program that is closely
linked to an EWS. The reforms have helped reduce response time from eight to two months and
reduced the need for emergency response and human losses.
6            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



The PSNP consists of cash-for-work projects to improve environmental assets (60 percent of
projects in soil and water conservation); unconditional food/cash transfers for the poorest 10
percent; an insurance-for-work scheme in a particularly disaster-prone area; a contingency bud-
get to respond to sudden emergency needs; and the RFM for use when the contingency fund is
insufficient. PSNP provides long-term support to chronically food-insecure rural households to
help them cope with shocks, reduce disaster risk through asset creation and rehabilitation of their
natural environment, and build household resilience. The financing mechanisms allow the pro-
gram to scale up to also provide assistance to risk-prone households when necessary. PSNP’s long-
term support has helped reverse the trend of deteriorating livelihoods despite climatic shocks.
Timely and predictable assistance has enabled households to manage risk more effectively and
avoid negative coping strategies and food insecurity.

   Box 1: Why CDD platforms are useful in disasters

   a.	 Social funds operate at community level and can respond to local needs, use local knowledge, and
       be scaled up as early response measures against hazard.
   b.	 Social funds are decentralized, which makes them flexible to adapt programs to meet local needs
       (including target group and transfer size).
   c.	 Social funds have a focus on community capacity-building, which is essential for building effective
       management of and response to natural hazards.
   d.	 They can respond immediately to shock or provide longer-term support, hence complementing
       the need to bridge the short-medium-long-term approach to disaster management that is fre-
       quently absent.
   e.	 Monitoring and evaluation systems are built into social funds.
   Source: Pelham et al. (2006).


In other countries also, cash transfers are increasingly being used as part of disaster responses. In
the Philippines, the government with donor assistance scaled up its existing Pantawid Pamilya
CCT program and used the same delivery mechanisms to channel food and cash transfers to af-
fected household in the program and to identify households for cash-for-work (CFW) and cash-for-
asset-rebuilding. The program was modified to make unconditional transfers available to help
support disaster-affected families.

In Pakistan, the government established a new CT program when the 2010 floods affected one-
third of the country and nearly 10 percent of the population. The Floods Emergency CT Program
provided unconditional cash transfers (UCTs) to flood-affected families to promote early recovery
and to jump-start the economy.

Social protection instruments for DRM and response have also been used as part of community-
driven development (CDD) programs.7 As they are already established in government systems,
CDD programs can rapidly access and disburse resources at scale to affected areas, even when fi-
nanced externally by donors (Pelham, 2006). For example, following the Pakistan earthquake, the
Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund was able to set up disaster relief centers and provide support in

7.	 See Note on ‘Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms: International experience and key con-
    siderations for Myanmar’ for further information on the opportunities and constraints of social protection implementation through
    CDD.
                                               Social portection for disaster risk management:
                                                                   Opportunities for Myanmar                                     7
2,000 communities within one day, and USD 220 million in CTs was delivered to households (ibid.).8
Indonesia’s PNPMMandiri CDD program was used to provide UCTs to the poorest and most-affect-
ed households as part of response and recovery efforts after the 2004 tsunami in Aceh and other
disaster events between 2005 and 2010. The CDD program accelerated community economic re-
covery, with funds spent locally to purchase replacement goods. It also provided employment
opportunities through clearing rubble and rebuilding community infrastructure in CFW programs9
(Annex 3 presents more information on PNPM).

All examples discussed above included a CFW component. CFW is a common social protection
instrument used for DRR and recovery. Cash/food-for-work (C/FFW) programs help build and
diversify assets and livelihoods by providing an income during the lean season. The assets built
can help reduce disaster risk.10 A review of all cash responses following the 2004 tsunami showed
there were significant benefits from CFW projects for the rehabilitation of communities as well as
for psychosocial recovery. Cash was used for food and non-food needs but also for paying off debts
and livelihood recovery. CFW projects did not have an inflationary effect on local food prices and
labor markets were generally not disrupted. CFW was found to have a positive impact on tradi-
tional systems of community support. A weakness inherent in the design of CFW projects is that
they exclude households with little or no labor capacity; complementary support for labor-poor
households has been provided in some contexts (e.g. Ethiopia’s PSNP) (Adams, 2007).




3.3	 Delivery systems

The examples above demonstrate that having basic social protection systems in place before
disaster strikes can reduce emergency response time and disaster losses. Existing delivery mech-
anisms can help scale up (Ethiopia, Philippines) or introduce new programs (Pakistan, Indonesia).


Identification and payment systems

Existing identification and payment mechanisms help reach many people quickly when disaster
strikes. In the Philippines, the database of the National Household Targeting System for Poverty
Reduction (NHTS-PR) was used to disburse cash and food quickly and helped with identifying
households that could be enrolled for a range of rehabilitation programs, such as CFW and cash-
for-asset-rebuilding. In Pakistan, it was possible to disburse cash quickly (with 97 percent of house-
holds able to withdraw cash within 48 hours). There were sufficient human resources on the
ground and a national poverty registry and a debit card payment system were already in place.



8.	 Further information on regional use of social funds is available at the World Bank:http://go.worldbank.org/HBZ7191990
9.	 Other disasters included the North Sumatra and Aceh earthquake in March 2005, the Java earthquake in May 2006, the Java tsu-
    nami in July 2006; and the Mount Merapi eruption in October 2010 (ADB, n.d.).
10.	Hazard-proof infrastructure could include strengthening embankments, roads, bridges, or gullies, but also health clinics or class-
    rooms. Land conservation and rehabilitation work could include tree planting (or mangrove planting to protect coastal areas),
    bunds, area catchments, and small irrigation.
8            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



Targeting

In the aftermath of a disaster, poor and non-poor households require assistance. A risk is that
many non-poor but risk-prone households are not included in often poverty-targeted transfer
programs.11 Reaching all affected households can be achieved by scaling up existing programs to
cover all affected households. The PSNP demonstrates that, with appropriate, pre-committed fi-
nancing models in place, it is possible to scale up to also include risk-prone households. PNPM in
Indonesia raised the grant ceilings and allocated more funding to affected communities, including
for UCTs to the poorest and most affected households. New villages entered the program as they
were also affected by the tsunami. In the Philippines, Pantawid Pamilya was expanded to include
disaster-affected households that were not previously included. Programs were scaled down again
and became more targeted to the poorest and most affected households in the recovery phase.

Where programs are not yet in place, systems can be developed. As demonstrated by the Paki-
stan program, no existing mechanism was in place to reach flood-affected households. In the first
phase, households were geographically targeted; in the second, the program was scaled down and
targeted to households based on a housing damage indicator. The beneficiary list was then checked
against the national poverty database to exclude the well-off (Johnson, 2012).

System flexibility

Flexibility is crucial for effective disaster response through social protection programs. In Ethio-
pia’s PSNP, this flexibility to quickly expand and contract its program is already built in, with con-
tingency plans in place. PNPM modified its operations manual to accelerate planning and widen
the menu of projects to respond to emergency.12 The usual participatory social analysis approach
also allowed for faster damage and loss assessments. Coordination and administration systems
were strengthened through additional staffing to handle the scaling-up of operations.




4. Current SP and DRM policy and program initiatives in
   Myanmar
4.1 Policy, coordination, and financing

DRM and social protection legal and policy framework

Myanmar has taken serious steps towards reducing the impact of natural hazards, including
through the development of legal and policy frameworks. With the government’s responsibility
to protect its people there is an increasing acknowledgement that social protection can play a role
in DRM as part of long-term development programs. Table 1 summarizes social protection and
DRM linkages in relevant government documents. Building resilience and long-term protection
against natural hazards is a common theme that provides opportunities for integrating social pro-
tection instruments in DRM activities and vice versa.
11.	 In many low- and middle-income countries, the poverty line is set low to reduce the cost of poverty reduction programmes.
12.	 The declaration of a state of emergency now triggers these new procedures.
                                          Social portection for disaster risk management:
                                                              Opportunities for Myanmar                                           9

 Table 1: Social protection references and linkages in DRM legal and policy frameworks

         Legal/policy framework               Social protection–DRM linkages                Integrating social protection in DRM
 NDM Law (2013)                          •	 One objective is to ‘provide health,          The Law does not specify how long-term
                                            education, social and livelihood pro-         risk should be reduced and resilience
                                            grams in order to bring about better          built, nor how vulnerable groups should
                                            living conditions for disaster victims’       be prioritized. Rules and regulations are
                                         •	 Cash assistance is mentioned as one           in development, and this is an opportu-
                                            of the potential rehabilitation and           nity to include a more coherent strategy
                                            reconstruction activities                     of piloting relevant social protection pro-
                                                                                          grams linked to using available delivery
                                         •	 It calls for measures to provide              platforms (such as CDD)
                                            long-term protection against natural
                                            disasters
                                         •	 Priority should be given to protect
                                            children, older people, people with
                                            disabilities and women (especially
                                            pregnant women and mothers)
 Myanmar Action Plan for Disaster Risk   •	 The objective is to make Myanmar              MAPDRR will be updated in 2015, fol-
 Reduction                                  safer and more resilient against natural      lowing endorsement of the Sendai global
 (MAPDRR)                                   hazards, in order to protect lives, liveli-   framework for DRR. This also provides
                                            hoods, and developmental gains, in            opportunities to include social protection
                                            line with the global Hyogo Framework          investments. This could include PWPs to
                                            for Action (HFA) and the Association          build hazard-resilient infrastructure or
                                            of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN)           a sustainable CT program that increases
                                            Agreement on Disaster Management              human development and livelihood
                                            and Emergency Response (AADMER)               diversification
                                         •	 The plan outlines a range of interven-
                                            tions and includes the provision of
                                            public works programs (PWPs) to in-
                                            crease livelihoods in vulnerable areas
                                            and to strengthen the preparedness
                                            and resilience of communities
 Myanmar National Adaptation Program     •	 It identifies priority activities for         PWPs, long-term CTs to help promote
 of Action (NAPA)                           Myanmar to adapt to climate change            livelihood diversification
                                            impacts by building/enhancing
                                            resilience of vulnerable communities.
                                            These activities focus on key climate
                                            infrastructure and livelihood diversifi-
                                            cation
 RDSF                                    •	 One of its missions is the mitigation         The implementation plan could detail
                                            of natural disasters and creation of          how social protection instruments could
                                            resilient communities                         assist in building disaster resilience. An
                                         •	 It mentions the role of social protec-        opportunity could be to include social
                                            tion in reducing socio-political and          protection measures in the Department
                                            ecological risks and livelihood vulner-       of Rural Development’s (DRD’s) CDD
                                            ability                                       program

                                         •	 It calls for poverty reduction measures,
                                            effective EWSs, skills development
                                            training, and community savings and
                                            insurance schemes



In December 2014 the government endorsed which complements the DRM and rural develop-
ment policies in building resilience against shocks by addressing the social and economic vulner-
abilities of the poor and vulnerable. Myanmar's vision for social protection is of an inclusive, eq-
uitable, and sustainable system. It aims to improve ‘livelihoods of poor families and communities
before disasters arise, by smoothing consumption over the year to address seasonal or weather-
related nutrition shortfalls, by building the capacity to deliver cash benefits where needed, and by
10          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



supporting public employment programs that mitigate community risks to disasters’ (GoM, 2014:
16). It calls for integrated DRM and social protection programming to increase local capacity to
cope and recover from shocks and potential disasters. It suggests PWPs to contribute to environ-
mental conservation, build disaster-proof infrastructure, and increase the resilience of communi-
ties to disasters (GoM, 2014).

The Relief and Resettlement Department (RRD), with support from the Asian Development
Bank (ADB), is in the early stages of developing a national framework for community disaster
resilience. The framework will provide a common understanding on strengthening community
disaster resilience in Myanmar and set the national direction in this regard. Social protection could
be part of this framework. RRD has also taken steps towards pre-disaster recovery planning as part
of Myanmar’s commitments under the AADMER work program. In addition, RRD is developing the
ASEAN Recovery Planning Reference Guide with support from the UN Development Programme
(UNDP). Social protection could be linked and incorporated into the recovery planning framework
of the government.


DRM institutional arrangements and links with social protection arrangements (See Annex 2)

The National Natural Disaster Preparedness Central Committee (NNDPCC), under the chairman-
ship of the second vice-president, was established in 2013 and replaced the Myanmar Disaster
Preparedness Agency. Its task is to ensure disaster preparedness and to promote coordination
and quick and effective disaster relief and response activities. It has 36 members, including 19
union ministers and all state and region chief ministers. Under the NNDPCC sits the National Natu-
ral Disaster Preparedness Management Working Committee (NNDPMWC), chaired by the union
minister of social welfare, relief and resettlement, which supervises the implementation of disas-
ter management activities and coordinates any activities of the NNDPCC (GoM, 2013b). Ten work-
ing committees support the NNDPMWC.

NDM Law calls for the formation of a National Natural Disaster Management Committee (NND-
MC) to be chaired by a vice president and be responsible for all aspects of disaster management.
An inter-ministerial working committee will be in place to implement decisions by the NNDMC. It
is as yet uncertain wither the NNDMC will supersede the NDPCC after the NDM Law rules and
regulations have been finalized. Funding for the NNDMC would come out of the Ministry of Social
Welfare, Relief and Resettlement (MSWRR) budget.

Disaster preparedness working committees also exist in regions and states and at district, town-
ship, and village tract level. They each have subcommittees (the number and nature varies among
regions and states) to implement the activities of the working committee (GoM, 2012a). The role
of the state and region working committees (chaired by the chief minister) is to monitor potential
and imminent disasters, implement responses, ensure systemic provision of food and relief items
and rehabilitation materials to victims, and manage the state/region natural disaster management
fund (GoM, 2013a). Responsibilities would need to come with adequate decentralized budgets.

The roles and responsibilities of all relevant ministries for disaster preparedness, response, and
rehabilitation are outlined in the 2009 Standing Order on Natural Disaster Management in
Myanmar. MSWRR coordinates disaster response and preparedness and the Ministry of Home
Affairs facilitates communications at subnational level. The Department for Hydrology and Meteo-
                                            Social protection for disaster risk management:
                                                                Opportunities for Myanmar                                  11
rology is responsible for EWSs. MSWRR in collaboration with other government agencies and DPs
and civil society organizations will update the Standing Order once the rules of the NDM Law have
been approved.

A range of government agencies are implementing or developing social protection programs,
such as the Ministries of Health, Education, Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development, Social
Welfare, Finance, and Labor and the Social Security Board. The Department of Social Welfare of
MSWRR is responsible for coordinating social protection. The minister of social welfare chairs the
Social Protection and DRR Sector Working Group to ensure effective coordination at the sector
level and to promote development effectiveness in Myanmar. Under the Sector Working Group sit
the Social Protection and DRR Sub-Sector Working Groups. To date, there are no linkages between
the two sub-groups.

Having the coordination function of social protection and DRM under one ministry provides an
opportunity for a coordinated approach to disaster preparedness and response, as well as build-
ing long-term household economic and social resilience against hazards. On the other hand, with
both DRM and social protection being cross-sectoral issues, there is a risk that cross-ministerial
coordination and cooperation will not be effective. While all social protection programs, imple-
mented by a range of ministries, can contribute to household resilience, including in times of di-
sasters, the DRD and MSWRR programs provide the most logical platforms for incorporating DRM
elements. At present, the Ministry of Home Affairs (through the General Administration Depart-
ment) has the widespread presence on the ground and provides the link to community and town-
ship levels. Effective coordination will require ministries/departments to be encouraged to oper-
ate outside their sectoral silos, build technical capacity, and provide financial resources for disaster
management and social protection at both national and subnational level. Further decentraliza-
tion and strong political support are required to effectively implement the different policies.


DRM financing

A national contingency fund of approximately USD 116 million (MMK 100 billion) is managed by
the President’s Office. The RRD HFA Progress Report mentions that the RRD budget allocation
(USD 2.9 million in 2012-2013) and the Fire Services Department’s budget (USD 14.3 million in
2012-2013) could also be considered a budget for DRR and emergency response.13 While it is chal-
lenging to capture all DRR budget and expenditure, RRD reports that the combined disaster man-
agement funds represent 0.85 percent of the national budget (RRD, 2012). States and regions also
receive an annual budget allocation for development projects based on priority needs, with in-
vestment in DRR and emergency response at the discretion of the state/region government. There
is no clear budget for recovery activities at township level in the current union budget, or for risk
assessments at national and regional level.

Current disaster funds are insufficient to cover recurrent losses and the government remains
exposed to more extreme events, relying entirely on international donor assistance for re-
sponse, relief, and recovery. For the Cyclone Nargis response, a quarter of funds were public
funds, with the rest funded from bilateral and multilateral contributions. There is, however, no

13.	 1.7 percent of RRD’s budget goes to DRR, which includes awareness-raising, capacity-building and strengthening policy and insti-
     tutional capacities, and inter-agency and regional cooperation for DRR; 61 percent is for response efforts.
12              Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                The Role of Social Protection



mechanism in place for pooling resources through common platforms, such as the PSNP RFM in
Ethiopia, through which donors can (pre-)commit funds. Public assets are largely uninsured, and
there is no strategy or policy framework in place to actively manage the financial impact of natural
disasters. A better understanding of the underlying risks and a comprehensive strategy with ap-
propriate disaster risk financing and insurance products could help increase the ability of national
and subnational governments to respond quickly, and would enable timely access and effective
use of reconstruction and recovery funding. DPs and the private sector have had early discussions
with the government on risk financing options in Myanmar. An RFM would also offer the opportu-
nity to rapidly finance the implementation of a pre-planned early response social protection pro-
gram.




4.2 Social protection programs to assist in DRM

Myanmar has undertaken positive steps to increase social protection provision, which provides
opportunities to develop sustainable and adequate measures to help protect its most vulnera-
ble people against hazards. The RRD HFA Progress Report acknowledges that, to date, ‘consider-
ations on resilience of risk prone households and communities to natural and man-made disasters
in the schemes are not enough’ (RRD, 2012: 24). While the government has coordinated emer-
gency operations, it has limited experience in implementing CT programs and C/FFW programs.
RRD has provided cash grants to families that have lost family members in disasters (MMK 100,000
(USD 100) for an adult and MMK 50,000 (USD 50) for a child under 12 years old). The government
also provided cash assistance to disaster-affected populations after the Magwe flash floods, when
cash was delivered to flood-affected households through officials.14

CDD programs are potential platforms to incorporate social protection measures in Myanmar to
contribute to building resilience and DRM. The DRD has two community funds worth exploring as
possible avenues for social protection for DRM at scale: the Mya Sein Yaung (MSY; also known as
Evergreen Village Development Project) (2014-2016) and the National Community Driven Devel-
opment Project (NCDDP) (2012-2019).15 While neither of these has incorporated explicit social
protection schemes in its operations at the present time, both have improving resilience of rural
livelihoods to disasters within their objectives.

The MSY has the objective of reducing poverty in rural areas by creating job opportunities,
achieving food security, increasing productivity, and improving the resilience of rural livelihoods
to disasters. The project provides loans to villages for village-level revolving funds. Projects that
can be financed include solar energy, livestock-rearing, fishery and farming, agricultural business,
and other businesses.

14.	 The government ran emergency operations to thousands of disaster-affected people after Cyclone Nargis in 2008, Cyclone Giri in
     2011, the Tarlay earthquake in 2011, and the Magwe flash floods in 2011, involving a wide range of departments and DPs. On 23
     October 2011, the vice-president and president visited temporary camps in affected areas and provided assistance in cash and
     in kind worth USD 273,000 and USD 250,425, respectively. See http://reliefweb.int/report/myanmar/providing-food-and-shelter-
     flood-victims-should-be-top -priority-vice-president-dr-sai. See Note on ‘The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar' for further
     information on CTs in Myanmar.
15.	 Further information on these schemes can be found in the Note on ‘Social protection delivery through community-driven develop-
     ment platforms’.
                                            Social protection for disaster risk management:
                                                                Opportunities for Myanmar                                 13
The NCDDP16 has the objective of delivering key infrastructure and services through community-
block grants. The program also aims to build government’s capacity to respond promptly and ef-
fectively to crises or emergencies. An emergency contingency response component allows for
rapid reallocation of grants to provide preparedness and rapid response to disaster as needed.
During the first implementation cycle in three townships, the NCDDP financed 357 projects aimed
at increasing access to and use of basic infrastructure and services, including rehabilitating and
expanding school buildings, health centers, water supplies, roads, footpaths, jetties, and bridges.
These CDD platforms could be used to build basic hazard-resilient community infrastructure
through labor-intensive PWPs, which will also provide an income for food-insecure households.

Further analysis is required of both programs to see if these decentralized planning and financ-
ing systems could be used for social protection delivery to assist the most vulnerable people in
the community and to be scaled up as part of rapid disaster response efforts.

DP activities focus largely on national and community DRR capacity-building, community educa-
tion on DRM, and community-based DRR activities (through community grants). Social protec-
tion programs could complement these efforts by building household resilience. The Tat Lan pro-
gram is a disaster community recovery program that builds on emergency response and contributes
to equitably and sustainably improving the livelihoods of Cyclone Giri-affected communities. It
includes social protection instruments such as CFW and a pilot maternity CT. DRM could have
been more explicitly considered in the program to increase communities’ capacity to cope with
future shocks (e.g. apply ‘build back better’ principles in CFW projects).

The Building Resilience against Climate Extremes and Disasters program aims to build commu-
nity resilience to climate extremes.17 The objective is to enhance adaptive capacity and support
individuals, households, and groups to better protect their assets and access financial services. CTs
are not included in this program.

Several DPs have implemented C/FFW programs18 after Cyclone Nargis and some are still ongo-
ing. While these programs were initiated as part of recovery efforts to contribute to community
and household resilience, DRR can be more explicitly mainstreamed. For example, it will be worth-
while to explore options for applying the standards for (re)-building hazard-proof infrastructure as
part of C/FFW programs in hazard-prone areas. This does not seem to be standard practice at the
moment.

The World Food Programme (WFP) through its cooperating partners (Save the Children (SC) and
CARE International) implemented a cash-for-food pilot in Yangon division, where markets were
functioning, four weeks after Cyclone Nargis hit. SC supported 63,000 beneficiaries in five town-
ships, in communities where at least 50 percent of the homes were completely or partially dam-
aged. The weekly UCT covered the cost of a basic food basket. Lessons from this short pilot were
a) set up systems and structures in advance of emergencies to enable rapid response; b) assess the


16.	 The NCDDP is a USD86.3 million program, supported by the World Bank, that will cover 640 village tracts in 15 townships (one in
     each state/region), with a gradual rollout that started in Chin state, Tanintharyi division, and Shan state.
17.	 The project is funded by the UK Department for International Development (DFID) and led by Plan International, with the UN
     Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), BBC Media, ActionAid, World Vision, and the Myanmar Environment Institute as
     implementing partners.
18.	 See the Note on ‘The experience of public works programs in Myanmar’ for further details on CFW programs in Myanmar.
14              Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                The Role of Social Protection



need of beneficiaries and respond with appropriate programs; and c) ensure funding follows pro-
gram purpose, rather than program implementation being constrained by funding limitations
(Rees, n.d.).




4.3 Delivery systems

The international examples demonstrate that existing social protection identification, enroll-
ment, and payment systems can assist in more effective disaster management. In Myanmar,
these social protection and DRM mechanisms require significant investments and integration to
enable maximum impact of social protection programs in DRM.


Poverty and vulnerability data for identifiation

Comprehensive poverty and vulnerability data collection in Myanmar could be strenghtened to
ensure the effective identification of the poor and vulnerable. While the Census will provide new
data, additional mapping at all levels is required to anticipate the negative impacts of disasters in
different parts of the country and on different population groups, including the poor. This includes
comprehensive hazard risk and poverty vulnerability mapping at national scale. Multi Hazard Risk
Assessments have been conducted in Rakhine state and Delta region.19 The Ministry of Livestock,
Fisheries and Rural Development with support from WFP has conducted food security assess-
ments in the Dry Zone; in Bago, Yangon, and Ayeyarwaddy regions; and in Shan, Kachin, and Chin
states and Sagaing region with the intention being to cover the whole country.20 The assessments
inform food security patterns across Myanmar and provide estimated poverty levels. They can
support the design of poverty alleviation strategies and programs for different livelihood groups.

RRD has taken critical steps to improve the systemic collection of data on disaster losses and
damages. Supported by UNDP and the UN Human Settlements Programme (UN-Habitat), it is cur-
rently creating a database to capture losses and damages from past disasters and put in place
systems to continue data recording. This will result in the Myanmar Disaster Loss and Damage
Database, Desinventar. A comprehensive database will help us better understand disaster risk and
contribute to more targeted action at national and subnational levels.21




19.	 The assessment was funded by UNDP and implemented by the Asian Disaster Preparedness Center and the Myanmar Engineering
     Society.
20.	 Food security was assessed based on the availability of food, access to food (income levels, diets, and hunger levels), utilization
     (access to water), and stability factors (food gap, coping mechanisms). The results are available here: http://www.fsinmyanmar.
     net/publications/itemlist/category/5-food-security-and-nutrition
21.	 http://www.mm.undp.org/content/myanmar/en/home/presscenter/articles/2014/10/07/new-database-to-help-myanmar-bet-
     ter-assess-loss-and-damage-risks-from-disasters/
                                 Social protection for disaster risk management:
                                                     Opportunities for Myanmar              15
Targeting

When disaster strikes, all people in the area will be affected to some degree and assistance can
be geographically targeted. This was the lesson from WFP’s CT pilot following Cyclone Nargis,
which required poverty targeting owing to limited financial resources but found most people
needed support. In the medium- to long-term recovery phase targeting is more feasible and can
be applied, if required, to the households who need it most to support livelihood recovery and
resilience-building.

Poverty, vulnerability, and hazard mapping can help with targeting social protection initiatives
that assist with resilience-building. In addition, EWSs can help with geographical targeting efforts
by providing accurate predictions of where a natural hazard will occur and enable early response.
Current cyclone and flooding EWSs in Myanmar do not generate sufficient data to be able to ac-
curately predict the precise geographical impact of incoming weather systems. There is also po-
tential to improve information and communication systems to provide effective early warning in-
formation to local communities and relevant national-level agencies for a quick response to
potential hazards (ASEAN, 2008).


Payment systems

Myanmar has not yet developed a system through which cash could be delivered to households
at scale in a safe and transparent manner. With the expansion of the financial and telecom sec-
tors and associated regulatory frameworks, opportunities will arise to establish mechanisms to
transfer benefits to households nationwide. These mechanisms can then also be used to reach
disaster-affected households quickly as part of disaster response efforts.




5.	 Conclusions and considerations for social protection for
	 DRM

Investments in disaster prevention, preparation, early intervention, and long-term resilience-
building, including through social protection, has economic benefits for the country. Social pro-
tection can play a role in better risk coping during response and early recovery, reducing disaster
risk, and building household resilience in Myanmar. Building household resilience against hazards
could be more mainstreamed into DRM and social protection programming to reduce natural haz-
ard exposure and vulnerability. The following policy, program, and delivery system considerations
emerge:
16          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection




5.1 	Policy, institutional arrangement, and financing
	    considerations

•	 With the development of the RDSF and the SPSP, which establish the role households trans-
   fers can play in DRM, the government can more specifically consider what social transfer in-
   vestments and implementation arrangements are most effective, feasible, and appropriate to
   help build community and household economic and social resilience against disasters in a
   coordinated way.
•	 NDM Law rules and regulations: The rules and regulations that are currently being drafted
   could specifically outline how special vulnerable groups in Myanmar will be supported and
   protected against natural hazards, including through social transfers that provide a regular
   and predictable income to manage risks and shocks and help diversify their livelihoods.
•	 The forthcoming Community Resilience Framework will help guide future investment in com-
   munity-based resilience programs and could consider including social protection instruments
   as part of the framework.
•	 Behavioral change: Better coordination and institutional arrangements can help facilitate the
   establishment of a prevention rather than response culture in DRM. However, this is possible
   only with political will. It also requires a shift of focus by government and DPs from donor as-
   sistance and public appeals for disaster relief to publicizing situations where disasters are
   avoided through early intervention. Donors play an important role in communicating that un-
   acceptable impacts of natural disasters can be avoided.
•	 Disaster risk financing and insurance: An assessment of disaster-related contingent liabilities
   can guide the development of a comprehensive disaster risk financing and insurance strategy.
   International practice shows such a strategy can help governments address their financial and
   fiscal risks and guide strategic investments in prevention, preparation, and recovery from the
   impacts of disasters. The assessment and strategy should be complemented by capacity-build-
   ing. In the medium to long term, the Ministry of Finance could look at ways to establish a
   system for risk layering, which uses different financing instruments for different-level inter-
   ventions. A well-designed system helps the government meet urgent post-disaster funding
   needs without resorting to major budget reallocations or external borrowing. Myanmar can
   also further explore opportunities through ASEAN for greater cooperation at regional level on
   DRM, including on regional disaster risk pooling/financing and EWSs.
•	 Institutional arrangements: Clarification on communication and coordination structures be-
   tween the different DRM committees and agencies is necessary to make sure the structure is
   effective. Overlap of responsibilities needs to be minimized and relevant committees need
   true authority to deliver on their mandate. In addition, with its presence on the ground and its
   responsibility for disaster response, it could be worthwhile to engage the Ministry of Home
   Affairs in more specific social protection discussions, particularly around the feasibility of
   identification and implementation arrangements of social transfer programs.
•	 Ministerial cooperation: Cooperation between relevant ministries/departments should be
   promoted not only at senior and policy level but also at implementation level. For example,
   social protection, poverty reduction, and disaster management are all trying to achieve the
                                Social protection for disaster risk management:
                                                    Opportunities for Myanmar            17
    common goal of reducing vulnerability. Tackling underlying vulnerabilities of households and
    communities requires a multi-disciplinary approach.




5.2 Program considerations

Cash transfers (including public works)

•	 The use of CTs can be increased as part of disaster response, where appropriate, to increase
   the purchasing power of households and enable quicker recovery and reduced long-term eco-
   nomic impact of disasters on households and communities. This can be done in combination
   with in-kind transfers in early recovery and be scaled up as local markets are recovering.
•	 CTs delivered by government to date have been ad hoc. Establishing predetermined process-
   es and procedures for how the government can provide cash assistance to disaster-affected
   households can accelerate assistance and increase transparency and accountability towards
   people and increase the social contract with the people of Myanmar.
•	 In the long term, Myanmar could consider integrating social protection and DRM through the
   design of a CT program that is a flexible and scalable program that can be activated by EWS
   triggers to reduce the economic impact of disasters on households. The program should be
   linked not only to the EWS but also to an identification or management information system to
   reach more people quickly when needed. Designs should have a plan in place on how it will be
   funded (e.g. through contingency funds or an RFM), how to scale up a program (in coverage,
   benefit level, and/or type of assistance), which departments will be involved, how communi-
   cation will flow, and how payment systems would work. This approach can also enable harmo-
   nization of DP funding in times of disaster.
•	 Public works have proven to be an effective approach to risk mitigation and to helping reha-
   bilitate community assets, while also contributing to household recovery. Existing DP-led C/
   FFW programs could increase their focus on DRR, particularly in hazard-prone areas. This
   should also include investigating the feasibility of constructing hazard-proof infrastructure
   through labor-intensive PWPs. An understanding of the hazard risk in the community will help
   define how public works activities can help reduce hazards and prevent disasters. Alternative
   support would be useful to assist labor-poor households.


Community-driven development platforms

•	 Community ownership for disaster recovery should be encouraged through community plan-
   ning and reconstruction. Communities know their own vulnerabilities and are best placed to
   identify solutions. Social protection can complement community efforts by increasing house-
   hold economic recovery.
18             Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
               The Role of Social Protection



•	 Options could be explored to use existing systems or programs for social protection to assist
   in rapid disaster response. Two such programs could be the MSY or the NCDDP implemented
   by the DRD. Both these have systems in place to channel funding from national to local levels
   that could be an effective approach to accelerate sustainable recovery efforts after disasters.
•	 The CDD approach could also provide a platform for the incorporation of social protection
   components to build long-term resilience.22 The opportunity to integrate, for example, a la-
   bor-intensive public works component with a DRM focus in existing CDD programs should be
   further explored.


Insurance

Weather index-based insurance: Over 70 percent of the population is rural. (Subsidized) Agricul-
tural insurance mechanisms could be explored to reduce disaster risk for subsistence farmers. This
would, however, not assist the high proportion of landless households (between 25 and 50 per-
cent of the population) and the most vulnerable households in Myanmar. Other risk-based insur-
ance schemes could be considered as a response to risks identified in multi-hazard risk assess-
ments.


Delivery system considerations

•	 Investments in delivery mechanisms, such as beneficiary identification, geographical target-
   ing, and payment systems, are crucial to advance the social protection agenda, let alone to
   enable effective linkages with DRM systems such as EWSs. Early responses, including through
   social protection instruments, can be triggered by an effective EWS, which will reduce avoid-
   able losses (a dollar invested in early warning systems can save USD 2-14 of avoided losses
   (Rogers and Tsirkunov, 2010)).
•	 Data collection: Increased investments are needed for systematic data collection on vulnera-
   bility and poverty that can complement and be overlaid with geographic hazard risk and cata-
   strophic risk modeling. Understanding the vulnerabilities and risks of different population
   groups will help maximize the DRM impact of social protection interventions.
•	 Private sector partnerships: The private sector could play an important role in DRM and social
   protection program implementation. For example, mobile phone technology can be used to
   send CT payments, as well as to send early warning or DRM education messages. The private
   sector can also play a key role in risk financing and insurance of public or household assets.




22. See Note on ‘Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms’ for more information on this.
                                Social protection for disaster risk management:
                                                    Opportunities for Myanmar             19

References


Adams, L. (2007) ‘Learning from Cash Responses to the Tsunami’. HPG Background Paper. London:
ODI.

ADB (Asian Development Bank) (n.d.) ‘The Indonesian Program Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyara-
kat Mandiri: Lessons for the Philippine Disaster Risk Management’. Supplementary Document 7.
Manila: ADB.

ASEAN (Association of South-East Asian Nations) (2008) ‘Post-Nargis Joint Assessment’. Bangkok:
ASEAN.

Burton, C. (2012) ‘Social Protection for Disaster and Climate Risk Management: The Design and
Implementation of Effective Social Safety Nets’. PowerPoint presentations, 3-14 December. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank.

CFE-DMHA (Center for Excellence in Disaster Management and Humanitarian Assistance) (2014)
‘Myanmar Disaster Management Reference Handbook’. Honolulu: CFE-DMHA.

GoM (Government of Myanmar) (2012a) ‘Myanmar Action Plan on Disaster Risk Reduction’. Nay-
pyidaw: GoM.

GoM (Government of Myanmar) (2012b) ‘Myanmar’s National Adaptation Programme of Action
(NAPA) to Climate Change’. Naypyidaw: GoM.

GoM (Government of Myanmar) (2013a) ‘National Natural Disaster Management Law’. Naypy-
idaw: GoM.

GoM (Government of Myanmar) (2013b) ‘Without Racial, Religious Discrimination, Relief Works
Are to Be Carried Out: Life-Saving Is a Must: President’. The New Light of Myanmar, XXI(29). Nay-
pyidaw: GoM.

GoM (Government of Myanmar) (2014) ‘Social Protection Strategic Plan’. Naypyidaw: GoM.

GoM (Government of Myanmar) (2009) ‘Standing Order on Natural Disaster Management in
Myanmar’. Naypyidaw: GoM.

HCT (Humanitarian Country Team) (2014) ‘Emergency Response Preparedness Plan Myanmar’.
Draft. Yangon: HCT.

ILO (International Labour Organization) (n.d.) ‘Innovations in Public Employment Programmes
(PEP) Spectrum from Public Works to EGS. Case Study: Ethiopia’. Geneva: ILO.

Johnson, K. (2012) ‘Social Protection in Disaster Response. 2010 Floods Emergency Cash Transfer
Program’. PowerPoint presentation. Washington, DC: World Bank.
20          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



Pelham, L., Clay, E. and Braunholz, T. (2011) ‘Natural Disasters: What Is the Role for Social Safety
Nets?’ Washington, DC: World Bank.

PNPM (n.d.) ‘CDD Financing and Budgeting: The Case of PNPM in Indonesia’. Jakarta: PNPM.

Rees, A. (n.d.) ‘Start Stutter Stop –Learning from an Innovative Emergency Food Assistance Cash
Transfer Programme in Yangon Division’. Yangon: Save the Children Myanmar.

Rogers, D. and Tsirkunov, V. (2010) ‘Costs and Benefits of Early Warning Systems’. Paper for UNIS-
DR Global Assessment Report of Disaster Risk Reduction.

RRD (Relief and Resettlement Department) (2012) ‘National Progress Report on the Implementa-
tion of the Hyogo Framework for Action (2011-2013) – Interim’. Yangon: RRD.

Sumarto, S. (2015) ‘Indonesia’s Unified Database (UDB): Rationalising a Fragmented System’. Ja-
karta: TNP2K.

Villar, F.R. (2013) ‘The Philippine Social Protection Framework and Strategy: An Overview’. 12th
National Convention on Statistics, Mandaluyong City, 1-2 October.

UNEP (UN Environment Programme) (2009) Learning from Cyclone Nargis – Investing in the Envi-
ronment for Livelihoods and Disaster Risk Reduction’. Geneva: UNEP.

World Bank (2012a) ‘World Bank 2012-2022 Social Protection and Labor Strategy, Resilience, Eq-
uity and Opportunity’. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank (2012b) ‘Affordability and Financing of Social Protection Systems’. Africa Social Protec-
tion Policy Brief. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank (2014) ‘Post-Nargis Social Impacts Monitoring, Round 4’. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank and GFDRR (Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery) (2013) ‘Ethiopia’s
Productive Safety Net Program (PSNP): Integrating Disaster and Climate Risk Management’. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank and GFDRR.
                                         Social protection for disaster risk management:
                                                             Opportunities for Myanmar                                     21

Annex 1:

Geographical vulnerability to extreme weather events in
Myanmar
 Extreme weather event                                     Vulnerable areas and regions/states
 Drought                 Central Dry Zone – Sagaing, Mandalay, and Magwe regions, particularly agricultural land in these areas
 Cyclones/strong winds   Coastal regions – Rakhine, Ayeyarwaddy, and Yangon regions/states
 Intense rain            Tanintharyi, Yangon, Rakhine, Ayeyarwaddy, and Mon states/regions. These areas have the longest
                         exposure to the south-west monsoon flower. Lower Myanmar as well as north-western areas will also
                         be affected
 Floods/storm surges     All lowland and flat regions as well as rivers and associated valleys and basins. Areas in close proximity
                         to the Ayeyarwaddy, Chindwin, Sittaung, and Thanlwin river systems and coastal areas are particularly
                         at risk of storm surges, hydrological floods, flash floods, and river bank overflow associated with snow-
                         melt

 Extreme high tempera-   Relatively flat regions in the central Dry Zone, e.g. Mandalay and Magwe
 tures

 Sea level rises         Coastal zones, especially areas interspersed with tidal waterways, e.g. the Ayeyarwaddy Delta. In cer-
                         tain areas, it is thought that low-lying coastal areas may face permanent inundation

Source: GoM (2012b).
22             Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
               The Role of Social Protection




Annex 2:

Management and coordination of disaster preparedness
in Myanmar
                                 National Disaster Preparedness Central Committee (NDPCC)

                       Chair: 	      vice president II
                       Vice-chair: 	 union minister of social welfare, relief and resettlement and union 	
                       	             minister of home affairs
                       Secretary: 	 director-general of Relief and Resettlement Department
                       Members: 	 17 union ministers, chief ministers from affected state/region


    National Disaster Preparedness Management Working                   State/Region Disaster Preparedness Management Working
                   Committee (NDPMWC)                                                    Committee (RDPMWC)*

 Chair: 	         union minister of social welfare, relief and         Chair: 	          chief minister
                  resettlement                                         Secretary: 	      social affairs minister
 Vice-chair: 	    deputy minister of social welfare, relief and        Joint secretary: 	secretary of state government
                  resettlement and deputy minister of home             Members: 	        7 ministers from security and border af-
                  affairs                                                                fairs, finance and revenue, agriculture and
 Secretary: 	     director-general of Relief and Resettlement                            livestock, forest and minerals, planning
                  Department                                                             and economy, transport, and electrical and
 Joint secretary:	director-general of General Administration                             industrial ministries
                  Department
 Members: 	       deputy ministers of information and educa-           Note: * At state/region level, ministries have no consistent
                  tion ministries and chairs of 10 sub-commit-         number or name. Committee composition may thus differ
                  tees; state/region minister of security and          from one state/region to another
                  border affairs




 	 1. 	 Information Sub-Committee                                      	 1. 	 Information Sub-Committee
 		     Union deputy minister of information                           		 State minister of social affairs
 	 2. 	 Hotline Sub-Committee                                          	 2. 	 Hotline Sub-Committee
 		     Union deputy minister of communication and                     		 State minister of transport
 		 information technology                                             	 3. 	 Search and Rescue Sub-Committee
 	 3. 	 Search and Rescue Sub-Committee                                		 State minister of security and border affairs
 		     Union deputy minister of home affairs                          	 4. 	 Collection of Preliminary Damage News and Emergency 	
 	 4. 	 Collection of Preliminary Damage News and Emergency 	              	 Aid Sub-Committee
     	 Aid Sub-Committee                                               		 State minister of planning and economic development
 		     Union deputy minister of commerce                              	 5. 	 Confirmation of Damage and Loss Sub-Committee
 	 5. 	 Confirmation of Damage and Loss Sub-Committee                  		 State minister of finance and revenue
 		     Union deputy minister of national planning and                 	 6. 	 Transport and Route Clearance Sub-Committee
 		 economic development                                               		 State minister of transport
 	 6. 	 Transport and Route Clearance Sub-Committee                    	 7. 	 Disaster Risk Reduction and Building of Emergency 	
 		     Union deputy minister of railways                                  	 Tents Sub-Committee
 	 7. 	 Disaster Risk Reduction and Building of Emergency 	            		 State minister of development affairs
     	 Tents Sub-Committee                                             	 8. 	 Health Care Sub-Committee
 		     Union deputy minister of social welfare, relief and 	          		 State minister of social affairs
     	 resettlement                                                    	 9. 	 Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Sub-Committee
 	 8. 	 Health Care Sub-Committee                                      		 State minister of transport
  		 Union deputy minister of health                                   	10. 	 Security Sub-Committee
 	 9. 	 Rehabilitation and Reconstruction Sub-Committee                		 State minister of security and border affairs
  		 Union deputy minister of border affairs
 	10. 	 Security Sub-Committee
 		     Union deputy minister of border affairs
 Source: HCT (2014).
                                         Social protection for disaster risk management:
                                                             Opportunities for Myanmar                                  23

Annex 3:

International examples of social protection programs for
DRM

 Type of function        Function          Ethiopia PSNP       Philippines Panta-      Pakistan CDCP         Indonesia PNPM
                                                                  wid Pamilya                                    Mandiri
Policy develop-    Policy develop-       The Productive        Social assistance     Floods emergency       Legal basis for
ment and financing ment, legal           Safety Net Program    and human devel-      cash transfer pro-     this Commu-
                   framework, and        provides cash and     opment program        gram agreement         nity Empowerment
                   coordination          food transfers to     to break intergen-    between federal        Poverty Allevia-
                                         prevent long-term     erational poverty     and provincial gov-    tion Development
                                         consequences of       cycle, managed        ernments. This CT      Program: Act 22
                                         short-term food       by Department of      has been included      of 1999 with Act
                                         inaccessibility;      Social Welfare and    as a model for early   32 of 2004 on
                                         encourage house-      Development in        recovery in the        regional govern-
                                         holds to engage       partnership with      National Disaster      ment; Government
                                         in production and     the Departments of    Response Action        Regulations 72
                                         investment; and       Education, Health,    Plan approved by       and 73 of 2005
                                         promote market        and Interior and      the prime minister     concerning village
                                         development by in-    Local Government                             government; and
                                         creasing household    and in coordination                          Presidential Regu-
                                         purchasing power      with local govern-                           lation 54 of 2005
                                                               ment units                                   on Poverty Allevia-
                                                                                                            tion Coordination
                                                                                                            Team
                    Budgeting and        Ministry of Finance   Operating budget      Federal and provin-    Funds flow direct
                    financial manage-    and Economic          is PHP15.4 billion    cial governments       from National
                    ment                 Development           in 2015                                      Treasury Office
                                         oversees financial                                                 to community
                                         management and                                                     accounts at sub-
                                         disburses funds to                                                 district level. Donor
                                         relevant ministries                                                contributions
                                         and regions                                                        are administered
                                                                                                            through PNPM
                                                                                                            Support Facility
                    Sources of funding   Government bud-       Government            Phase 1: co-           2011: USD1.5 bil-
                                         get with contribu-    budget with some      financed by federal    lion, most of which
                                         tions from WFP,       funding from ADB,     and provincial gov-    funded by national
                                         Canada, Nether-       World Bank, and       ernments               and local govern-
                                         lands, European       Australia             Phase 2: gov-          ments, and some
                                         Union, Ireland,                             ernment with           donor funding
                                         Sweden, US, UK,                             World Bank, UK
                                         Denmark, and                                Department for
                                         World Bank                                  International De-
                                                                                     velopment (DFID),
                                                                                     USAID, Italy
24           Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection




 Type of function         Function           Ethiopia PSNP        Philippines Panta-       Pakistan CDCP        Indonesia PNPM
                                                                     wid Pamilya                                    Mandiri
Program design      Design and imple-      Ministry of Agri-      Department of          Early recovery UCTs   Projects are
                    mentation stan-        culture’s Disaster     Social Welfare         for flood-affected    planned and
                    dards, including       Risk Management        and Develop-           households with       determined by the
                    social protection      and Food Security      ment (DSWD)            design and            community. PNPM
                    and DRM elements       Sector managed         National Project       implementation        systems were used
                                           program, along         Management Of-         determined in         to channel funds
                                           with regional          fice (NPMO) and        federal–provincial    to disaster-affected
                                           governments. The       sub-national offices   agreements            communities,
                                           Early Warning and      managed day-to-                              including for UCTs
                                           Response Director-     day operations.                              to the poorest
                                           ate is responsible     The management                               and most affected
                                           for the EWS that       information system                           households
                                           informs the PSNP       (MIS) was used to
                                           RFM and for the        transfer UCTs to
                                           transport and          beneficiaries in af-
                                           monitoring of grain    fected households;
                                                                  the database was
                                                                  expanded and used
                                                                  to target other
                                                                  recovery activities
                                                                  such as CFW
                    Roll-out and scale-    Covers 8 regions,      The CCT operates in    Phase 1: cash         In 2009, PNPM
                    up processes           319 districts, and     all 17 regions, cov-   disbursed to 1.69     was rolled out in
                                           more than 7.6          ering 79 provinces,    million families      33 provinces, 465
                                           million beneficia-     143 cities, and        within 6 months       districts, 6,408
                                           ries. Fully scalable   1,484 municipali-      Phase 2: at least 1   sub-districts, and
                                           to meet transient      ties. The program      million households    80,000 villages
                                           food insecurity.       covers 4.4 million
                                           Access to 20% ad-      households
                                           ditional resources
                                           as contingency
                                           fund to expand
                                           coverage or extend
                                           duration
                    Eligibility criteria   •	 Geographi-          Residents of poor-     Households with       Geographi-
                                              cal targeting:      est municipalities,    flood damaged         cal targeting of
                                              food-insecure,      based on 2003          houses plus dis-      districts with high
                                              drought-prone       small area esti-       abled and female-     poverty; low level
                                              districts           mates. Households      headed households     of basic services
                                           •	 Community-          that live at or be-                          and fiscal capacity;
                                              based targeting:    low the provincial                           and disadvantaged
                                              households          poverty line; that                           villages
                                              that have more      have children 0-18
                                              than a 3-month      and/or have preg-
                                              annual food gap;    nant women at the
                                              households that     time of assessment;
                                              have suddenly       that agree to meet
                                              become vulner-      the conditions
                                              able as a result
                                              of loss of assets
                                          Social protection for disaster risk management:
                                                              Opportunities for Myanmar                                     25

 Type of function        Function           Ethiopia PSNP         Philippines Panta-       Pakistan CDCP         Indonesia PNPM
                                                                     wid Pamilya                                     Mandiri
Delivery sub-       Beneficiary identi-   Geographical and        Beneficiaries tar-     Phase 1: geographi-    Typically no indi-
systems             fication              community-based         geted through the      cal targeted to        vidual households
                                          targeting facilitated   NHTS-PR                affected areas and     targeted. When
                                          by Community                                   using biometric        PNPM systems
                                          Food Security Task                             verification of        were used for UCTs
                                          Force (CFSTF)                                  identity               after disasters, the
                                                                                         Phase 2: household     poorest and most
                                                                                         identification using   disaster-affected
                                                                                         housing damage         households were
                                                                                         indicator and          targeted through
                                                                                         through the na-        community target-
                                                                                         tional poverty data-   ing processes
                                                                                         base to exclude the
                                                                                         well off
                    Enrolment and         Annual target-          Conditions are at-     Enrolled using com-    N/A
                    compliance (for       ing before start        tendance of health     puterized national
                    CCTs)                 of program and          check-ups and          identity card with
                                          retargeting after 3     assisted birth for     biometric identi-
                                          months                  pregnant women         fication at Watan
                                                                  and children aged      Card Facilitation
                                                                  0-5; deworming of      Centers (WCFCs)
                                                                  children 6-14; 85%
                                                                  school attendance;
                                                                  and attendance of
                                                                  family development
                                                                  sessions
                    Asset creation (for   Public works are        N/A                    N/A                    Community social
                    PWPs)                 planned using                                                         mapping and par-
                                          participatory                                                         ticipatory planning
                                          watershed plan-                                                       with support from
                                          ning approach and                                                     PNPM facilitators
                                          follow environ-
                                          mental and social
                                          guidelines
                    Payments and          Monthly food and/       •	 Health grant: PHP   3x PKR 20,000          Funds flow from
                    transactions          or cash, up to 6           500 household/      (approximately         the collective sub-
                                          months/year (9             month               USD 123) 3 months      district accounts to
                                          months in pastoral      •	 Education grant:    apart through debit    village commit-
                                          areas) OR un-              PHP 300 child/      Watan card after       tees for project
                                          conditional cash/          month for 10        biometric verifica-    implementation.
                                          food for labor-            months (maxi-       tion. The debit        The money is
                                          poor households.           mum 3 children      card can be used at    sent in tranches
                                          Median payments            per household       point of sales with-   of 40-40-20%. An
                                          to households              are covered)        drawal machines        activity financial
                                          are around USD                                 at the WCFC and at     management team,
                                          200 per house-          •	 Payments are        any ATM                consisting of village
                                          hold over 5 years          made through                               residents, handles
                                          (about 10-40% of           the Land Bank                              the collective
                                          annual basic food          or Glob G-Cash                             account. Disburse-
                                          needs). Payments           remittance trans-                          ment at village
                                          are made through           actions and rural                          level requires sign-
                                          cashiers in key            banks                                      off by government
                                          locations                                                             officials, minimum
                                                                                                                4 signatories on
                                                                                                                bank accounts
26              Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                The Role of Social Protection




  Type of function          Function            Ethiopia PSNP       Philippines Panta-        Pakistan CDCP         Indonesia PNPM
                                                                       wid Pamilya                                      Mandiri
                       Grievance and re-     Independent ward       Complaint report-       Appeals can be reg-    Complaints are
                       dress mechanisms      appeal committees      ing mechanisms          istered at the WCFC    handled by the
                       (GRMs)                manage griev-          include text hot line   by presenting a        PNPM facilitator
                                             ances and they         using the DSWD          valid computerized     and elevated to
                                             are brought to the     SMS platform,           national ID card.      PNPM Complaints
                                             ward council if nec-   email, and social       Recommendations        Handling Units
                                             essary or elevated     media. The GRM is       are provided by the    from sub-district
                                             higher                 part of the MIS and     district administra-   government up,
                                                                    captures, resolves,     tion for final ap-     managed by PNPM
                                                                    and analyzes            proval by provincial   Oversight Com-
                                                                    grievances from         level. Changes are     mittee
                                                                    beneficiaries and       then made in the
                                                                    non-beneficiaries       MIS
                       Management in-        There is no com-       A comprehensive         National Poverty       PNPM Oversight
                       formation systems     prehensive MIS in      MIS is managed by       Registry managed       Committee, Coor-
                       (MISs)                place yet. PSNP        NPMO and includes       by National            dinating Ministry
                                             also has district-     household informa-      Database and Reg-      for Social Affairs,
                                             level computerized     tion, registration,     istration Authority    manages the MIS
                                             payroll systems for    updates, compli-        (NADRA)
                                             cash/food distribu-    ance verification
                                             tions                  system, payments,
                                                                    and GRM
                       Monitoring            Monitoring             Monitoring and          MIS managed            Full village meet-
                                             conducted and          evaluation consists     by NADRA will          ings to account for
                                             recorded manually      of regular supervi-     provide targeting,     funds used and
                                             through single sys-    sion by DSWD and        enrolment, pay-        physical progress.
                                             tem for the Food       the World Bank          ment, grievance        Financial audits
                                             Security Program       and biannual spot       redress, and funds     conducted by the
                                             (includes PSNP). An    checks by a third-      flow information.      Financial and De-
                                             information center     party                   Quarterly donor        velopment Super-
                                             within the Food Se-                            supervision mis-       visory Agency and
                                             curity Coordination                            sions; third party     the Regional Su-
                                             Directorate collects                           spot checks and        pervisory Agency.
                                             real-time data from                            audits                 Also government
                                             sample districts on                                                   and independent
                                             status of transfers                                                   monitoring
                                             and food prices
                       Evaluation            Regional house-        Quantitative Impact     Impact evaluation      Independent
                                             hold surveys and       Evaluation by           commissioned by        evaluations; PNPM
                                             community-level        DSWD and qualita-       donors                 Support Facility
                                             impact evalua-         tive studies
                                             tions conducted
                                             every two years, in
                                             addition to inde-
                                             pendent reviews,
                                             surveys and evalu-
                                             ations
                       Communication,        The CFSTF manages      Municipal focal         By NADRA through       PNPM facilitators
                       outreach, and/or      community mobili-      points manage           SMS, website,          at village level, vil-
                       community mobi-       zation for planning    communications          WCFCs, district        lage notice boards
                       lization              exercises. Program     and outreach. Each      administration, me-
                                             information is         group of ben-           dia, local authori-
                                             posted across the      eficiaries selects      ties, and NGOs/
                                             community              a parent leader as      community-based
                                                                    representative to       organizations
                                                                    communicate to
                                                                    the focal point


Sources: Ethiopia – ILO (n.d.),World Bank and GFDRR (2013); Philippines – http://pantawid.dswd.gov.ph/; Pakistan – http://cdcp.
nadra.gov.pk/introduction.jsp; Indonesia – ADB (n.d.), PNPM (n.d.), Sumarto (2015), Villar (2013).
Social protection for disaster risk management:
                    Opportunities for Myanmar     27
28          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection




          'Social protection for disaster risk management: Opportunities for Myanmar' is the sixth note in the
          series Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar: the Role of Social Protection. All
          notes are available at www.worldbank.org/myanmar.




                                Myanmar Social Protection Notes Series

                                The note – ‘Building resilience, equity, and opportunity in Myanmar: The role
                                of social protection’ – provides an overview of the technical notes in the series.
                                These include:

                                1.	 Risks and vulnerabilities along the lifecycle: Role for social protection in
                                     Myanmar
                                2.	 Framework for the development of social protection systems: Lessons
                                     from international experience
                                3.	 Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar
                                4.	 The experience of public works programs in Myanmar: Lessons from a
                                     social protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                5.	 The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                     protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                6.	 Social protection for disaster risk management: Opportunities for
                                     Myanmar
                                7.	 Strengthening social security provision in Myanmar
                                8.	 Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
                                     protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                                9.	 Social protection delivery through community-driven development
                                     platforms: International experience and key considerations for Myanmar
                                10.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable: Key considerations in designing
                                     targeting systems
                                11.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                     protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                12.	 Developing scalable and transparent benefit payment systems in
                                     Myanmar




World Bank Office Yangon
57 Pyay Road, Corner of Shwe Hinthar Road,
6 1/2 Mile, Hlaing Township, Yangon
Republic of the Union of Myanmar. Tel: +95 1 654824
www.worldbank.org/myanmar
www.facebook.com/WorldBankMyanmar
