                                                                                                                   97961
                                                                                                                      NOTE
                                                                                                                                       1
                                                                                                                                       8
Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
The Role of Social Protection
Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of
social protection programs:
Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar1



                           Defining appropriate institutional and financing arrangements
                           is crucial to achieve sustainable social protection in Myanmar. This
                           will require setting up overarching coordination mechanisms, with
                           strong political leadership at the union level complemented by a
                           more prominent role for region/state governments and local-level
                           structures in social protection programming, financing, and deliv-
                           ery. This will lead to an effective and sustainable social protection
                           system that addresses local priorities and increases accountability
                           to citizens.




1. This Note was prepared by Mariana Infante-Villarroel (World Bank) with comments and inputs from Puja Vasudeva Dutta, Khin Aye
   Yee, Carlos Galian, Inge Stokkel, and Khim Ma Ma Sew (World Bank) and Lou Tessier (International Labour Organization (ILO)). The
   Note benefited from discussions with the Myanmar Development Resource Institute (MDRI) team. Any comments and questions
   can be addressed to ainfantevillarro@worldbank.org. The team is grateful to the Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement
   and to the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development for their inputs and facilitation of field trips for the entire assess-
   ment; and to the Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social Security, the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of National Planning
   and Economic Development for their inputs and guidance. The team benefited from contributions and field support from WFP, ILO,
   UNOPS-LIFT, SC, HAI, ActionAid, IOM, MDRI, and several UN agencies and NGOs throughout the process. The team is grateful to the
   Rapid Social Response program and its five donors the Russian Federation, Sweden, Norway, the United Kingdom and Australia for
   funding this assessment.
2   Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
    The Role of Social Protection
                 Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
               protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                                              3

1. Introduction

In order to be able to respond effectively to the needs of beneficiaries, social protection systems
aim to harmonize approaches at three levels: policy, program, and delivery. Policy development
and coordination require functions that a) allow for overall alignment of social protection provi-
sion with high-level development objectives; b) ensure coherent implementation functions across
government levels and mandates, thus facilitating inter-institutional coordination; and c) mobilize
sustainable and predictable resources for social protection provision at all three levels. Program
design and coordination require functions that identify the type of instruments (programs) need-
ed to respond to social protection needs and that harmonize and improve the design of existing
programs or create new ones to fill gaps. Delivery systems to implement social protection pro-
grams include beneficiary identification and enrollment, transactions (e.g. benefit payments and
reimbursement), communication and outreach, grievance and redress, record-keeping and infor-
mation management, and monitoring and evaluation (M&E).


Figure 1: Three levels of engagement of social protection systems2




Source: World Bank (2012).




2.	 For more information on social protection systems (objectives, components, programs, and results) see the Note on ‘Framework for
    the development of social protection systems’.
4           Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



Myanmar’s institutional architecture for social protection provision is being shaped by its cur-
rent reform process: from military rule to democratic governance, from armed conflict to peace,
and from a centrally controlled and closed economy to one that can end poverty and promote
inclusive growth (World Bank, 2014). The objectives of achieving people-centered development
and democratic accountability are opening up opportunities to strengthen the role of government
in service delivery. At the same time, the government’s capacity to deliver social programs and
services can be strained by persistent gaps in the current institutional and financial architecture.
The government will need to address these issues at various levels in the process of building a
coherent social protection system.

This Note analyzes how and where (at what level of government) best to finance, manage, and
deliver social protection in Myanmar, following the principle of ‘finance follows function’ to
ensure resources for effective service delivery at all levels of functional assignment.3 See Annex
1 for a conceptual framework. The Note assesses current functions for social protection provision
in Myanmar and provides recommendations for enhanced coordination and delivery of social pro-
tection policies and programs. International examples can help Myanmar identify arrangements
to increase the effectiveness of social protection provision.




2.	 Current institutional arrangements for social protection
	 provision in Myanmar
2.1	 Policy development and coordination

Overarching policy frameworks identify poverty reduction as a central objective in Myanmar’s
development agenda and suggest the use of social protection to help achieve it. The long-term
National Comprehensive Development Plan (NCDP) identifies promoting human development
and poverty reduction as one of its strategic objectives. This should be achieved through increased
equity and improved access to services, employment opportunities, and citizen participation and
through focused activities in the areas of social welfare, education for all, health coverage, and
food security. The Framework for Economic and Social Reform (FESR) identifies social protection
as a necessary component of Myanmar’s reform process. Several social protection instruments,
such as social security provisions, stipends and other types of cash transfers (CTs), and public
works programs (PWPs) are explicitly mentioned as having the potential to break intergenera-
tional cycles of poverty and are in need of sufficient resource mobilization to take them to scale
(Planning Commission, 2013).

Despite the enabling policy environment at the higher level, SP policies are being formulated in
parallel processes across different ministries. For instance, the Rural Development Strategic
Framework (RDSF) and the Social Protection Strategic Plan (SPSP) were both drafted in 2014 and
address the question of social assistance as a poverty reduction tool through a multi-sectoral ap-

3.	 World Bank (2015). This Note does not cover detailed implementation arrangements; more on these can be found in the Notes on
    ‘The Experience of cash transfers in Myanmar’ and ‘The experience of public works programs in Myanmar’.
                  Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
                protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                                                     5
proach. The roles and responsibilities for coordination, design, and delivery of social assistance
under these frameworks are still being articulated. Sectoral policies in education and health con-
tinue to guide elements of social assistance provision, such as demand-side approaches to univer-
sal health coverage and education for all, whereas social welfare services fall under the Ministry
of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement (MSWRR). In terms of social security provision, current
programs covering private formal workers and civil servants are guided by separate sets of laws
and regulations to be followed by the Ministry of Finance (MOF) for pensions and by the Social
Security Board (SSB), Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social Security (MOLESS), for social secu-
rity (see Annex 2).

There is not yet an overarching institution that provides coherent guidance and coordination.
Multiple multi-stakeholder committees, such as sector Technical Working Groups, support policy
development and inter-ministerial coordination for various policies and programs that relate to
social protection. An overarching body that could articulate social protection provision beyond
ministerial mandates as part of Myanmar’s high-level poverty reduction and development agenda
is yet to emerge.




2.2 Program design

Myanmar’s level of decentralization and the pace of its reforms currently translate into highly
centralized structures for social protection provision that reflect broader patterns of social ser-
vice delivery.4 Annex 2 illustrates how social protection programs (the school stipends pilot pro-
gram,5 the maternal and child health voucher scheme (MCHVS), pensions, and SSB schemes) are
being designed and implemented. Decisions on budget allocation, program design, and roles and
responsibilities for implementation are highly centralized at the union level (i.e. these are decon-
centrated functions).6 Input from region/state governments into program design to reflect local
needs is for the most part limited or non-existent.7 For instance, in the school stipends pilot, al-
though state/region education officers (S/REOs) are involved in consultations for township selec-
tion, state/region governments are not yet actively involved. Township offices play a key role (see
next section) in supporting implementation in the stipends, MCHVS, and SSB schemes. However,
they have limited capacity to influence or gather feedback on design and standards; training and
information-sharing on program coordination are mostly top-down processes.


4.	 Social sectors are part of Schedule 1 of the Constitution and therefore remain highly centralized, as the authority to issue legislation
    and undertake planning processes remains with the union government. For more information on Myanmar’s institutional structure
    at union, region/state, and local level, refer to Nixon et al. (2013) and the World Bank (2015).
5.	 The Ministry of Education’s (MOE’s) stipend program has two modalities of implementation: a) the ‘national program’ has been
    in operation since 2009/10 and is based on MOE’s current guidelines for implementation, covering all townships in Myanmar at a
    small scale and prioritizing orphans; and b) the ‘pilot’ program (described in Annex 1) tests changes to the operational design of the
    program – namely, criteria to prioritize townships and students, conditions, and increased benefit levels.
6.	 Deconcentrated, delegated, and devolved functions reflect different levels of discretion in decision-making processes, with decon-
    centrated being the more centralized channel, typically via a single ministry; devolved functions give near full discretion to local
    governments and decision-making bodies, along with discretionary resources. More information can be found in Annex 1.
7.	 Region/states governments have little or no coordination with deconcentrated structures of union-level ministries, while region/
    state departments exist, sometimes in addition to union-level ministries, creating an ambiguous sector landscape at region/state
    level. More information can be found in Nixon et al. (2013).
6         Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
          The Role of Social Protection



Different solutions have emerged to address capacity constraints in program design and imple-
mentation in these programs – solutions that depend on available human and technical re-
sources. In the SSB schemes, for example, a higher-level ministerial structure – the SSB head office
– supports township-level implementers in implementation processes. In other programs, non-
government stakeholders such as development partners (DPs) and non-governmental organiza-
tions (NGOs) support government in developing or revising operational guidelines or setting up
pilot programs (e.g. the stipends program, the MCHVS). Centralizing information for planning and
programming purposes is not yet a common practice. The government is taking steps in the direc-
tion of strengthening operational capacity within ministries by selecting and training permanent
secretaries and by enhancing delivery systems.




2.3 Delivery systems

Townships represent the lowest official administrative divisions of the union at which central
government offices exist, and thus become the most important subnational structure in the
delivery of social protection programs. Deconcentrated ministerial structures such as SSB town-
ship officers and inspectors and township education officers (TEOs) are paramount in social pro-
tection delivery, particularly beneficiary selection and enrollment, benefit payments and reim-
bursement, and grievance and redress. Region/state levels have some supervisory and supportive
roles but district-level structures have a very limited role in social protection delivery, except for in
processing pension applications of low-ranking civil servants. Local elected bodies such as village
                 Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
               protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                             7
and village tract administrators have no formal role in program implementation, although they are
sometimes informed about program implementation in their villages or consulted about potential
beneficiaries, as in the MCHVS (see discussion on identification below).

The General Administration Department (GAD) is an important stakeholder at local level but its
involvement with current service delivery is minimal. The GAD has a long history of functions
related to collecting demographic data and managing resources – the latter being scaled down –
and new functions related to public administration of local governments, including of region/
states. For instance, township administrators are GAD officials and the GAD appoints village tract
clerks. The GAD has also served as member and coordinator of social activities (e.g. partnership
with MSWRR on disaster risk and articulation with DPs’ social programs) (Kyi Pyar Chit Saw and
Arnold, 2014). Its role in decision-making at township level is less prominent, with the appearance
of assorted planning committees that share decisions among a wider number of stakeholders, al-
though the coordination of such structures is still a major GAD function.

A minimal but increasingly important form of subnational government exists at the local level
but so far has a limited role in the implementation of social protection programs. Elected village
administrators (VAs) and village tract administrators (VTAs) are supported by appointed village
tract clerks and could more actively support some of the delivery functions described above.8
VTAs have no active role in the programs analyzed, although VAs have a role in beneficiary identi-
fication in the MCHVS. As townships are not composed of elected officials and as such are not
primarily accountable to citizens, strengthening the village tract and village levels to support social
protection delivery can promote accountability to citizens.


Identification

National identification exists in Myanmar but not all beneficiaries of social protection programs
have it. Myanmar has a national identification system called the National Registration Card or
Citizenship Scrutiny Card (CSC), determined in the 1982 Citizenship Law but first issued in 1989. All
citizens of Myanmar are entitled to a national ID card from the aged of 10; however, only 69.3
percent of those over 10 years of age possess one, with coverage being particularly patchy in rural
areas (GoM, 2015) and among vulnerable groups such as IDPs, migrants and ethnic minorities. The
Ministry of Immigration and Population is responsible for issuing ID cards and has offices in all
townships. Beneficiaries who have a CSC use it as proof of ID to enroll in social protection pro-
grams; alternative ID mechanisms are used for those that do not have it (e.g. household list/book
from village administrators). The SSB at union level issues smart cards for beneficiary identification
in SSB schemes; the Myanmar Economic Bank (MEB) issues e-pension cards to individual pension-
ers in the civil service pensions scheme.


Enrollment, verification of eligibility, and compliance

Currently, social assistance programs verify eligibility and enroll beneficiaries at local level.
School heads and teachers have an important role in identifying beneficiaries of the stipends pro-
gram, with TEOs verifying selection, although the level of engagement of school and township

8.	 Ward and Village Tract Administration Law of 2012, as described in Kyi Pyar Chit Saw and Arnold (2014).
8            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



committees in these activities has so far been limited. The MCHVS sometimes uses village leaders/
administrators to help identify women are eligible and recruits village stakeholders as voucher
distributors (midwives and other trusted members in remote areas), who are also in charge of
reimbursement.

Compliance with conditions in the stipends program and the MCHVS is supported by structures
in relative proximity to the beneficiary. As with enrollment, the level of engagement of school
committees in supporting compliance monitoring in the stipends program has so far been limited,
with school heads taking greater responsibility. Health centers (administrative and medical staff)
support verification of access for voucher reimbursement in the MCHVS.

The civil service pensions scheme uses local structures to start the enrollment process, though
authorization happens at union level. Civil servants are required to apply at the administrative
unit of his or her department. Those working at local level process their retirement request at the
district or township offices of their respective ministries.9 MOF’s Pensions Department at union
level verifies eligibility based on these applications and enrolls the pensioner.

SSB township officers are responsible for the registration of companies and workers. Employers
need to register their companies with township SSB officers and workers need to register individu-
ally in order to receive their smart cards, issued by the SSB at union level. Employers deposit both
worker and employer contributions monthly at the SSB office.


Transactions (including benefit payments and reimbursement)

Responsibilities vary for benefit payments and reimbursements to beneficiaries of SSB schemes.
In the case of SSB schemes, the primary responsibility rests with the SSB township offices, which
are also responsible for beneficiary enrollment. This can generate a potential conflict of interests,
although mechanisms are often in place to provide some oversight of payment processes. For in-
stance, SSB township officers are responsible for paying cash benefits directly to beneficiaries, al-
though this is based on medical information provided by SSB health facilities and township inspec-
tors verify payments are made appropriately.10 SSB township officers are also responsible for
decisions with respect to the provision of free healthcare at SSB facilities or reimbursement for
use of other facilities, as long as claimed amounts fall below a specified threshold. For higher
amounts, the medical board at union level approves reimbursements. In the case of the civil ser-
vice pensions scheme, however, payments are made through a third party – MEB.

Payment of social assistance benefits is mostly the responsibility of service providers below
township level and often imposes an additional unfunded burden. Given limited human resourc-
es at local level, school heads need to collect stipends funds at the township office, incurring time
and transport costs and risks. The same happens to midwives and voucher distributors, who need
to collect funds at health facilities. However, direct payments are currently the most viable option
in poor and remote areas, given the underdeveloped financial and mobile payment sector in
Myanmar. With the rapid development of the financial and telecommunications market in the

9.	  There are between 2,000 and 3,000 administrative units processing these pension applications; the entire retirement-to-pension
     process takes almost an entire year.
10.	 In some instances, the employer pays the workers’ benefit in advance and claims reimbursement from the SSB.
                Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
              protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                                          9
country, there is the potential for a gradual transition to electronic payment systems for current
and future social protection transfers, once adequate legal and regulatory frameworks are in
place.11 It would be interesting to assess the effectiveness of delivering cash benefits via MEB in
social assistance programs, with MSWRR’s social pension potentially piloting this payment mecha-
nism in the near future (Ramkissoon, 2015).


Grievance and redress

The township level emerges once again as a key level of service delivery by being the focal point
for grievances and redresses, with some cases elevated to union level. Grievance and redress
systems are only starting to emerge in Myanmar. School and township committees are responsible
for addressing any feedback and complaints during beneficiary selection processes in the stipends
program. The Ministry of Education (MOE) central office makes available a telephone number for
further feedback. Grievance and redress is in practice a township-level function for the SSB
scheme; an Appeals Tribunal (union level) exists but this has not yet received complaints.


Record-keeping and management information systems (MIS)

Systems for record-keeping and information management are largely paper-based and imple-
mented locally. Individual-level information on beneficiaries remains at the facility (school or
health clinic) or township level; the union level has access only to aggregate indicators, making
tracking of beneficiaries difficult. The stipends program distributes paper-based forms; schools
submit these to TEOs, who then consolidate and submit them to S/REOs and union level. The Min-
istry of Health (MOH) and the World Health Organization (WHO) at union level compile monitor-
ing data on the MCHVS collected manually by voucher distributors (VDs), health care providers,
health center management agencies (administrative data), and lady health visitors (LHV).

Better process definition and IT system development will be required for information systems
that facilitate effective record-keeping and produce useful information for management and
reporting purposes; however, some improvements are evident already with recent initiatives
towards automation. For instance, MEB has implemented an e-pension database that issues e-
pension cards to eligible pensioners, lowering the number of visits to the bank branch from two
visits to one. The SSB is currently piloting a new computerized information system (implementa-
tion started in April 2014) that encompasses the main insurance management functions (i.e. reg-
istration, contribution collection, claim, verification of the beneficiary’s identity at the point of
service, management of the beneficiary’s medical records) as well as some general management
functions (accounting, human resources, and stock management) (ILO and MDRI, 2015). These
seem useful steps in the direction of obtaining disaggregated information that can facilitate pro-
gram monitoring and enhance service delivery to beneficiaries.




11.	 For more details on payment systems, see the Note on ‘Developing scalable and transparent benefit payment systems in Myan-
     mar’.
10          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



Monitoring and evaluation

Internal monitoring of processes is often conducted by higher levels, whereas monitoring of
service provision is carried out by stakeholders close to beneficiaries. For instance,union-level
SSB officers are in charge of the internal auditing of SSB schemes, whereas township-level inspec-
tors carry out monitoring of timely delivery of services and reimbursements. The M&E Working
Group leads on M&E activities of the stipends program and MOE’s union-level departments un-
dertake monitoring activities, whereas school committees and TEOs remain critical in monitoring
payments. Health care providers and midwives monitor activities of the MCHVS, albeit with lim-
ited feedback loops into program decision-making processes.

External monitoring is supported by DPs and NGOs in the stipends program and the MCHVS to
help facilitate implementation and scale up activities. The stipends program has benefited from
a recent qualitative assessment (process monitoring) and spot-checks by Save the Children with
World Bank technical support, which have brought to attention the importance of keeping a focus
on targeting vulnerable children in the transition grades (5-6) and if possible as early as grade 4,
and the need to further standardize procedures (such as training) and clarify roles (such as those
of school and township committees). Similarly, WHO field officers support monitoring activities of
the MCHVS to help avoid bottlenecks in implementation.

Program evaluations, particularly impact evaluations, are scarce in Myanmar, although process
evaluations are growing in number thanks to collaboration with DPs and academia. MOE will
undertake a quantitative survey (school survey and household survey) with World Bank technical
support. The Health Intervention and Technology Assessment Program (HITAP) conducted a mid-
term review of the MCHVS in 2014, and the International Labour Organization (ILO) and the World
Bank have supported an operational assessment of the SSB schemes and civil service pensions,
respectively.


Communication and outreach

Several local stakeholders, particularly implementers, carry out communication, outreach, and
awareness-raising functions. Township-level officers create awareness (and also monitor enroll-
ment in the case of inspectors) on the SSB schemes by visiting companies and providing informa-
tion on enrollment and services through mobile enrollment units (ILO and MDRI, 2015). Hospitals
also provide medical tours to factories for outpatient services and health education. Community
members, schools, health care providers, and other local stakeholders are in charge of providing
information on the MCHVS and the stipends program, with mixed results in terms of accuracy of
information but generally good results in terms of awareness-rising. Payment events (e.g. of sti-
pends) and other contacts between service providers and beneficiaries (e.g. voucher distribution)
have been identified as potential opportunities to enhance messages on adequate health-seeking
behavior and the benefits of schooling and to provide clear program information.
              Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
            protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                                             11

2.4 Role of non-state actors in social protection provision

Development partners, non-governmental organizations, and community-based organizations

DPs, NGOs, and CBOs have been actively involved in social assistance provision; their role can
change to that of supporting structure of particular activities in the context of government-led
social protection provision. DPs have provided social protection directly,with a substantially high-
er budget and beneficiary coverage compared with government provision,12 building up a wealth
of knowledge that can support government in the technical design and implementation of pro-
grams. DPs can also mobilize technical resources to support MIS and M&E system development,
as well as impact and process evaluations. NGOs and CBOs have been actively involved in deliver-
ing social assistance and social services, often in partnership with government stakeholders such
as MSWRR. Supporting roles for NGOs and CBOs can include collaboration on grievance and re-
dress mechanisms, monitoring, and communication and outreach activities, as has been done in
other countries (see Annex 3). In all cases, support needs to be framed within government-led
priorities and programs, with decision-making processes ultimately falling in government hands.
Opportunities for partnership in service delivery can enhance specific delivery mechanisms with-
out relying solely on these agencies to deliver services and risk undermining government owner-
ship.


Non-state actors in conflict-affected areas
Ethnic conflicts in Myanmar have generated a system of social service delivery in conflict-affect-
ed areas that is parallel to that of state actors; the peace agreement will pave the way for think-
ing on how to close delivery gaps in these areas. Delivery systems include political and adminis-
trative structures of previously armed groups and associated networks of service providers and
social organizations (Jolliffe, 2014). Given the complexity of these arrangements and the distinc-
tive regional features they have taken, thinking on how to articulate parallel service delivery struc-
tures in a social protection system can be mostly a task for subnational structures. Ideally, region/
state governments, as well as stakeholders who can identify roles and responsibilities for govern-
ment and non-government actors that suit local contexts and contribute to rebuilding social cohe-
sion, should lead the process of stakeholder consultation.

Social protection programs can be an important component in building social cohesion through
promoting dialogue around service delivery roles. Dialogue around service delivery can help de-
crease the anxiety of communities uncertain about new roles of government and non-government
actors, and assist government in building a social contract that promotes long-lasting reconcilia-
tion. Non-state systems will continue to operate, at least in the short term (Jolliffe, 2014), thus
initial stages can focus on establishing institutional arrangements that a) build on existing founda-
tions for service delivery that minimize disruption in provision, support a smooth transition, and
avoid reigniting grievances; and b) recognize the need for locally adapted approaches to service
delivery.13

12.	 For more information on DP support see Note on Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar.
13.	 Social protection programs can address the needs of particularly vulnerable groups such as conflict-affected communities and ex-
     combatants. More on these programs can be found in the Note on ‘Framework for the development of social protection systems:
     Lessons from international experience’.
12              Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                The Role of Social Protection




3.	 Financing functions for social protection
	 implementation and sources of funding14

Functions for service provision need to be adequately funded (see Annex 1). Unfunded functions
can hamper the quality of service provision and significantly constrain implementation and scale-
up processes. Financial, human, and physical resources should follow the assignment of a function
for service delivery to run smoothly (‘finance follows function’).

Despite a deconcentrated architecture of most social protection programs, which should facili-
tate the vertical flow of funds, in some cases respective ministries do not provide funding to
cover a specific functional assignment. For instance, township-level teams implementing the sti-
pends program lack specific resources and mandates to hire additional staff for administrative
support.15 A similar issue arises in the implementation of the MCHVS, with health assistants in
health care facilities taking on an additional workload as a result of filling out monitoring forms for
the MCHVS without receiving additional support staff to take care of extra responsibilities; a re-
view of the program recommends hiring a full-time manager to support current implementation
but also, importantly, to facilitate taking the program to scale (WHO, 2014).




3.1 Union level

Union-level government has been the main source of funding for publicly led social protection
provision through vertical transfers for deconcentrated functions and benefit delivery. Annex 2
shows how the social budget in MOF is the main source for main social protection programs such
as stipends and pensions. DPs and other non-state actors have also been involved in funding social
protection, particularly social assistance programs.16


Subnational level

There are opportunities to explore financing social protection functions out of intergovernmen-
tal transfers to region/states (Nixon and Joelene, 2014; World Bank, 2015). The share of union
expenditures on intergovernmental transfers increased from 0.6 percent of gross domestic prod-


14.	 The only government-implemented contributory programs in Myanmar to date are the SSB schemes, financed out of the social
     budget and contributions from employers and employees. Further analysis on proposed reforms and financing options of the SSS
     and civil service pensions scheme can be found in the Note on ‘Strengthening social security provision in Myanmar’.
15.	 Some township teams have found alternative arrangements between team members but some have transferred some of the costs
     to beneficiaries or have compromised their involvement with program implementation. For instance, beneficiaries of the stipends
     program in a couple of schools have been charged for transport and photocopy costs, whereas some township teams report having
     shared program implementation tasks more evenly (SC, 2015).
16.	 More information on government and DP spending on social protection can be found in the Note on ‘Inventory of social protection
     programs in Myanmar’.
              Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
            protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                                                 13

Figure 2: Deconcentrated and devolved financing channels at region/state level and below




Source: Nixon and Joelene (2014).


uct (GDP) in 2011/12 to 2.3 percent in 2014/15, equivalent to 14.6 percent of the 2014/15 gen-
eral (union) budget, signaling the increasing importance of these intergovernmental transfers and
the potential to finance locally relevant initiatives.

Three types of intergovernmental transfers could potentially finance social protection functions:
grants and loans to region/state governments; the Poverty Reduction Fund (PRF); and the Con-
stituency Fund (CF). Grants and loans to region/state governments support region/state budgets
and complement tax and non-tax revenues. However, their potential to finance social protection
functions is limited given current accountability relations and budgeting processes covering previ-
ous budget deficits rather than local needs.17




17.	 The ability of states and regions to meet local needs is currently low, as autonomy over local spending is limited and account-
     ability relations of budget and finance officers at region/states is upward to union ministries rather than to local constituencies.
     In addition, grants and loans finance deficits incurred by region/states with additional resources in the next budget cycle, which
     can generate the wrong incentives for service provision and could reinforce historical trends to over- or under-spend. The latter
     means optimal outcomes in achieving equitable financing across region/states (e.g. those with higher poverty rates receive more
     resources than richer ones) is not encouraged.
14              Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                The Role of Social Protection



In addition to state/region budget support, there are various separately budgeted funds, of
which the two most important ones are the PRF and the CF. Although they account for just 5
percent of total transfers to region/states in 2014/15, the CF and particularly the PRF include in-
teresting features that can provide better incentives from a perspective of social protection fi-
nancing.

The PRF accounted for around MMK50 billion in 2014/15 and was allocated according to pov-
erty rates and presence of ethnic minorities in states and regions. This translated into MMK 15
billion each for Rakhine and Kachin states, MMK 5 billion for Chin state, MMK 4 billion for Shan
state, and MMK 2 billion for Kayin state, with the remaining budget divided equally among the
other states and regions (World Bank, 2015; interviews with Budget Office, Yangon region). In
previous years, equalization was used to allocate resources (MMK 1 billion per region/state except
Chin, which received MMK 2 billion), showing an important increase in resources but also the in-
tention to associate funds more closely with poverty reduction objectives and evidence-based fi-
nancing. There are no specific criteria to guide the investment of the PRF at region/state level but
chief ministers are advised to use the fund for rural development and poverty alleviation mea-
sures. The process for allocating funds to each township is also now decided by the region/state
government. Some states and regions have kept the equalization principle; others use criteria
such as population, poverty, or project size.

The CF, also known as the Township Development Fund, allocates some MMK 33 billion equally
across townships, with each township receiving MMK 100 million. Representatives of both union
and state/region hluttaws18 are allowed to select township development activities in their con-
stituencies to a maximum of MMK 5 million per project. Township Development Support Commit-
tees (TDSCs) and Township Management Committees coordinate project activities, drawing on
proposals from village planning processes.

There are opportunities for social protection financing at state/region level in the medium term,
particularly through the PRF. First, strengthening further the system of evidence-based resource
allocation of the PRF, not only across regions/states but also within region/states across town-
ships, could maximize its poverty reduction potential. Second, increasing the autonomy of region/
states to spend intergovernmental transfers can translate into locally relevant projects. The role of
TDSCs is an important one in ensuring village-level infrastructure needs are funded and imple-
mentation and oversight is conducted transparently. Third, the PRF’s guidelines can be expanded
to incorporate ‘soft’ infrastructure for poverty reduction purposes and to include specific guide-
lines on potential social protection programs that could strengthen the poverty reduction objec-
tive of the fund beyond the currently understood scope on infrastructure development. For in-
stance, transfers and social welfare service provision could be discussed in the context of poverty
reduction investments to be made eligible for financing under this modality in the medium term.




18.	 A council or assembly, historically a council of ministers, now denotes legislative bodies at national and state/region level (Nixon
     et al., 2013).
              Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
            protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                                           15

3.2	 Community-driven development platforms

CDD platforms are already financing rural development activities at local level. Delegated and
devolved functions for the implementation of the RDSF are being financed through conditional
grants from the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development (MLFRD) to villages and
village tracts and provide a model and even a platform to articulate social protection provision
around these structures.19 Annex 2 outlines functions for the National Community-Driven Devel-
opment Project (NCDDP), where village tracts are the main level of planning, payment processing,
and support provision for communities undertaking infrastructure development with project
grants directly transferred to village tracts. The Mya Sein Yaung (MSY; also known as Evergreen
Village Development Project) transfers resources from MLFRD to finance villages’ revolving funds.
From a decentralization perspective, delivery of social protection programs can support further
strengthening of these structures by shaping their service delivery role.

Embedding social protection schemes as part of CDD platforms in Myanmar can be an appropri-
ate short-and medium-term option for social protection financing. Current experience with gov-
ernment CDD models, particularly the NCDDP, can facilitate the gradual transition from DP-led
social protection provision to a more sustainable institutional architecture. Building government
capacity at local level would need significant efforts through a learning-by-doing approach on
roles of government and non-government actors, as well as enhancing coordination across local
stakeholders, empowering communities, and promoting local accountability. The NCDDP can help
build these foundations for social protection delivery in a phased manner while channeling re-
sources directly to beneficiary communities for social protection provision. In addition, CDD plat-
forms have incorporated elements of evidence-based budget allocation that can encourage more
effective poverty reduction outcomes.




3.3 Development partners

DPs can also help co-finance government programs through government platforms that facili-
tate harmonization and provide an opportunity for institutional and financial sustainability of
social protection delivery. Programs such as the stipends and the NCDDP have facilitated pooling
resources from various DPs to supplement the government budget. The stipends program chan-
nels resources from the World Bank and the government of Australia whereas the NCDDP pools
resources from the World Bank, the government of Italy, and the Japan Trust Fund for Social De-
velopment.




19.	 For more information on CDD approaches in Myanmar and the scope of social protection interventions within them see the Note
     on ‘Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms: International experience and key considerations
     for Myanmar’.
16          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection




4.	 Assessing institutional and financing arrangements for
	 social protection provision in Myanmar

Myanmar can enhance certain aspects of its institutional and financing architecture to make
social protection more responsive and efficient. Social protection systems need coordinated and
well-funded functions at policy, program, and delivery level. Recent policy developments in the
country bring opportunities to enhance coordination, program design, and delivery mechanisms,
including the potential to include local structures more actively in service delivery.


4.1 Policy and program coordination and financing

An overarching coordinating structure that has the mandate to coordinate the allocation of
functions and resources for social protection can contribute to developing an effective social
protection system. Centralized policy development and implementation can be significantly en-
hanced by stronger inter-ministerial coordination arrangements that avoid duplication and pro-
mote comprehensive and sustainable coverage. Fiscal sustainability is a foundation for effective
social protection systems by ensuring beneficiaries are covered in a predictable and adequate
manner. Evidence-based financing has recently started with initiatives like the PRF; this should be
further strengthened and championed by the coordinating structure for social protection provi-
sion.

The social protection coordination structure should also provide guidelines on coordination
mechanisms between union, regions and states, and local stakeholders for social protection
implementation. While the pace of decentralization is uncertain and makes a long-term analysis
of ideal functional allocation for social protection provision difficult, opportunities to link these
discussions can be promoted. Functional assignment as part of the decentralization reform is be-
ing discussed in Myanmar, but there is no single body responsible for designing and articulating
decentralization policy (World Bank, 2015). Aligning discussions on functional assignment for so-
cial protection with the decentralization reform should be pursued.

New programs are being considered under the SPSP, the potential fiscal implications of which
need to be carefully evaluated in relation to ongoing initiatives by various sectors. Building on
existing program and delivery systems can facilitate the expansion of functions and coverage in a
sustainable manner (e.g. additional benefits and coverage for maternal and child health through
an expanded/modified platform of the MCHVS and MOH; for school-age children through sti-
pends and MOE) in order to ensure efficiency of service delivery and avoid fragmentation and
duplication. Taking existing systems as the basis for promoting a coherent approach to expansion
can facilitate assessment of the need for and feasibility of creating additional programs and sys-
tems to fill remaining gaps. Increasing support to government programs instead of establishing
parallel delivery structures should be pursued in the short and medium term to support the transi-
tion to government-led social assistance provision. Pooling DP resources for single-program imple-
mentation can help the government coordinate provision and maximize the technical support DPs
can provide at particular stages and for particular functions of service delivery.
           Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
         protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                   17
Tapping into financial resources from township-level funds such as the PRF can be a medium-
term objective. Additional government resources that promote the service delivery role of state/
region governments and that could finance delegated and devolved functions at local level can
strengthen accountability to citizens and underpin a long-term vision of government service deliv-
ery and empowered communities. To this end, clear guidelines for PRF investments that promote
social protection as a poverty reduction tool and that facilitate decision-making at local level for
investments other than infrastructure would be necessary. Consolidating resources for local-level
development around the PRF, as well as consolidating township-level committees to avoid dupli-
cating functions, would help build clarity on township-level coordinating structures and better
define the scope of technical support townships can provide to community decision-making pro-
cesses.




4.2 Roles in service delivery: ministerial structures and
	 region/state governments

Current deconcentrated implementation of social protection needs to be further strengthened
to continue to promote responsive and accountable service delivery. Current social protection
provision is centralized in deconcentrated ministerial structures, reflecting Myanmar’s level of
development. Analyzing current ministerial functions for social protection provision and ensuring
these are adequately funded can already improve the way social protection is delivered. Involve-
ment of DPs in such processes as support to piloting delivery functions in the MCHVS and stipends
programs can be replicated and expanded to other programs (e.g. social pensions) and in further
areas (e.g. specific delivery systems) to improve current and future practices. Deconcentrated
functions have the weakness of generating internal accountability to vertical ministries rather
than to citizens; adding strong multi-stakeholder committees (such as school and township com-
mittees in the stipends program) or articulating oversight functions into existing ones through
clear roles and mechanisms to influence program performance can help address this issue.

In the short term, capacity constraints mean several functions are assigned to the same stake-
holders (e.g. school heads and health care providers); separating roles would be advisable in the
medium term. Besides selecting students and having regular academic functions, school heads
and teachers are also in charge of paying stipends to parents as an additional (unfunded) function.
The same is the case for midwives and VDs. In the medium term, payments through third parties
(e.g. banks) and greater support for program functions such as enrollment can ease the burden
current implementation arrangements place on service providers.

Two key subnational stakeholders are paramount when thinking about current technical capac-
ity at local level: township-level officers and the GAD. Townships already perform a number of
often-unfunded delivery functions. Supporting technically and financially the role of township of-
ficers in service delivery could be a short-term priority for the respective sectoral ministries (MOE,
MOH and SSB). The GAD is already an important stakeholder at local level; building on its technical
functions but ensuring support to the redefinition of its relationship with local communities
around service delivery can support the institutional-strengthening of ministries and subnational
units. For instance the GAD could support the groundwork of functional, centrally developed IT,
18          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



MIS, and M&E systems by performing monitoring functions at subnational level that help gather
accurate and timely information about program implementation to inform program design and
implementation.

Region/state governments, and not only deconcentrated ministerial structures, could be in-
volved more actively in program design and implementation with the help of clear guidelines on
decision-making processes and local inputs needed to inform program standards. Models such
as the NCDDP (Annex 2) and India’s Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee
Scheme (MGNREGS; Annex 3) provide examples on how this has been done for infrastructure
development programs. For instance, the NCDDP includes multi-stakeholder consultations orga-
nized by region/state governments to support geographic targeting procedures (also in Annex 1);
these lessons are valuable for other programs as well. The involvement of region/state govern-
ments can strengthen the relevance of programs to local context and could support reconciliation
and articulation of service delivery roles in conflict-affected contexts.




4.3	 Roles in service delivery: communities and local
	 stakeholders

Testing social protection provision through CDD structures can support the capacity develop-
ment of subnational stakeholders and promote accountability in service delivery. A more prom-
inent role for subnational structures can create space to adapt program design and standards to
serve citizens in a way that is more tailored to different needs across region/states. Financing lo-
cally relevant programs can be done through existing mechanisms such as the NCDDP that pro-
mote devolved decision-making and accountability to citizens, following lessons from Indonesia’s
PNPM Generasi (see Annex 3). Resources currently flowing to village tract level could pave the way
to strengthening these and village-level structures to build a responsive and accountable service
delivery platform for social protection in the medium term.

In the medium term, the role of subnational structures in social protection delivery has the po-
tential to be significantly strengthened to increase accountability to citizens. Districts, villages,
and village tracts have a very limited role in actual program implementation. Districts, unlike town-
ships, do not have specific functions for service delivery, thus their role may need to be explored
based on the coordination needs arising between township and regional/state level. Villages and
village tracts have important roles to play in ensuring communication and accountability to citi-
zens, thus learning from social protection implemented through CDD platforms can help identify
practical ways in which subnational structures can support implementation.
           Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
         protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                  19

4.4	 Roles in service delivery: non-state actors

DPs, the private sector, NGOs, and CBOs have an important role to play in helping government
establish basic delivery systems and administrative capacity. DPs can support government in
evidence-based budgeting (e.g. PRF allocation) through gathering additional evidence to inform
policy decisions at even lower levels of government (e.g. townships) in a systematic way. DPs,
NGOs, and private firms can help strengthen identification processes, develop MIS, IT, and M&E
systems, and provide technical support to program implementation at various levels. NGOs and
CBOs can support grievance and redress mechanisms, monitoring, and communication and out-
reach at local level. The role of non-state actors in previously conflict-affected areas will need to
be articulated with local-level leadership.



5.	 Short-term recommendations to strengthen institu-
tional and financing arrangements for social protection
provision in Myanmar

Institutional and financing arrangements should support the achievement of a strategic vision
for sustainable social protection provision. Setting up an overarching coordination mechanism
for social protection needs to be an immediate priority for the government, given its ambitious
poverty reduction objectives that call for the expansion and enhanced effectiveness of approach-
es in various fronts. Achieving effective coordination arrangements requires strong political lead-
ership at the union level. In this context, Indonesia’s model of linking social protection to poverty
reduction objectives, financing, and strategic direction is relevant for Myanmar. For instance, In-
donesia’s National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty Reduction (TNP2K), chaired by the vice-
president, coordinates poverty reduction policies at the national level and provides technical ad-
vice to multiple programs in light of poverty reduction objectives (see Annex 3).

Pooling DP resources for single-program implementation can enhance coordination; this should
be the preferred mechanism to channel non-state funds for social protection provision. Pro-
grams such as the stipends and the NCDDP have allowed pooling resources from several DPs to
supplement the government budget. This facilitates government coordination on service delivery
provision and maximizes the technical support DPs can provide at particular stages and for par-
ticular functions of service delivery.

Testing social protection provision through the NCDDP can be explored in the near future. The
NCDDP provides the opportunity for coordinated financing for social protection through an exist-
ing government platform. The NCDDP allows testing locally relevant social protection programs
and has the potential to strengthen local capacity and accountability for service delivery. The in-
volvement of state/region governments in the identification of areas to be served and the use of
evidence to inform these decisions are features that can reinforce locally relevant and evidence-
based budgeting processes.
20          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



Fiscal sustainability should underpin implementation of social protection programs through
ministerial structures. Building on existing program and delivery systems of ministerial structures
can facilitate the expansion of functions and coverage in a sustainable manner. Platforms provided
by the stipends program or the MCHVS can promote efficiency of service delivery and avoid frag-
mentation and duplication. Taking existing systems as the basis to promote a coherent approach
to expansion can facilitate assessment of the need for and feasibility of creating additional pro-
grams and systems to fill remaining gaps. Strengthening current service delivery functions at all
levels of ministries involved in social protection provision can be an affordable short-term priority.
           Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
         protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                 21

References


ADB (Asian Development Bank) (n.d.) ‘The Indonesian Program Nasional Pemberdayaan Masyara-
kat Mandiri: Lessons for the Philippine Disaster Risk Management’. Supplementary Document 7.
Manila: ADB.

Febriany, V., Toyamah, N., Sodo, J., and Sri Budiyati (2011) ‘Qualitative Impact Study for PNPM
Generasi and PKH on the Provision and the Utilization of Maternal and Child Health Services and
Basic Education Services in the Provinces of West Java and East Nusa Tenggara’. Research Report.
Jakarta: SMERU Institute.

GoM (Government of Myanmar) (2014) ‘National Community Driven Development Project. Op-
erations Manual’. Naypyidaw: GoM.

GoM (Government of Myanmar) (2015) 'The 2014 Myanmar Population and Housing Census: The
Union Report'. Census Report Volume 2. Naypyidaw: GoM.

Grosh, M., el Ninno, C., Tesliuc, E., and Ouerghi, A. (2008) ‘For Protection and Promotion. The De-
sign and Implementation of Effective Safety Nets’. Washington, DC: World Bank.

ILO (International Labour Organization) and MDRI (Myanmar Development Resource Initiative)
(2015) ‘Evaluation of Social Security Board Operations’. Yangon: ILO and MDRI.

IPC-IG (International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth) and TNP2K (National Team for the Accel-
eration of Poverty Reduction) (2013) ‘Program Keluarga Harapan (PKH): Indonesian Conditional
Cash Transfer Programme’. Brasilia and Jakarta: IPC-IG and TNP2K.

Jolliffe, K. (2014) ‘Ethnic Conflict and Social Services in Myanmar’s Contested Regions’. Yangon:
The Asia Foundation.

Kyi Pyar Chit Sawand Arnold, M. (2014) ‘Administering the State in Myanmar: An Overview of the
General Administrative Department’. Subnational Governance in Myanmar Discussion Paper Se-
ries, Discussion Paper 6. Yangon: The Asia Foundation and MDRD-CESD.

Nixon, H. and Joelene, C. (2014) ‘Fiscal Decentralization in Myanmar: Towards a Roadmap for Re-
form’. Yangon: MDRI and The Asia Foundation.

Nixon, H., Joelene, C., Kyi Pyar Chit Saw, Thet Aung Lynn, and Arnold, M. (2013) ‘State and Region
Governments in Myanmar’. Yangon: MDRI and The Asia Foundation.

Planning Commission (2013) ‘Framework for Economic and Social Reform’. Naypyidaw: GoM.

PNPM (n.d.) ‘CDD Financing and Budgeting: The Case of PNPM in Indonesia’. Jakarta: PNPM.

Ramkissoon, S. (2015) ‘Technical Options to Implement a Universal Social Pension in Myanmar’.
Draft Feasibility Study Report for HAI and MSWRR.
22         Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
           The Role of Social Protection



SC (Save the Children) (2015) ‘Qualitative Assessment: Consolidated Report Myanmar School
Grant & Stipend Programme Phase 1 & 2’. Yangon: SC.

Sumarto, S.(2015) ‘Indonesia’s Unified Database (UDB): Rationalising a Fragmented System’. Ja-
karta: TNP2K.

UNDP (UN Development Programme) and UNCDF (UN Capital Development Fund) (2011) ‘Local
Government and Social Protection: Making Service Delivery Available for the Most Vulnerable’.
New York: UNDP and UNCDF.

Villar, F.R. (2013) ‘The Philippine Social Protection Framework and Strategy: An Overview’. 12th
National Convention on Statistics, Mandaluyong City, 1-2 October.

WHO (World Health Organization) (2014)‘Mid-Term Review of Maternal and Health Voucher
Scheme’. Yangon: WHO.

World Bank (2011) ‘Social Protection for a Changing India: Volume II’. New Delhi: World Bank.

World Bank (2012) ‘Social Protection Strategy 2012-2022’. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank (2014) ‘Myanmar Ending Poverty and Boosting Shared Prosperity in a Time of Transi-
tion: Systematic Country Diagnostic’. Yangon: World Bank.

World Bank (2015) ‘Myanmar Public Expenditure Review’. Yangon: World Bank.
              Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
            protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                                              23

Annex 1:

Framework for implementation and financing of social
protection systems

Functions and financing

Social protection systems need functions performed at different levels of government: central,
regional/state, and local. Functional assignment of social protection functions is linked to the
extent of decentralization pursued by governments but should also follow principles of func-
tional assignment that can help achieve efficient, transparent, and responsive service delivery
(see Box A1). Given the different degrees of decentralization and the specific challenges countries
face in terms of governance and capacity, there is no single blueprint for functions of social protec-
tion systems,although patterns can be identified in systems across various countries (see Annex 3).

   Box A1: Principles for functional assignment

   1.	 The subsidiarity principle states that what the lowest level can undertake efficiently should be
       kept at that level. If an activity cannot be performed at any lower level, it should be assigned to a
       higher (more central) level.
   2.	 The responsiveness principle states that lower tiers of governments are closer to the populations
       they serve, and therefore should be more responsive to their needs.
   3.	 If the activity under consideration displays economies of scale, more centralized provision is more
       efficient.
   4.	 If the activity under consideration displays externalities (if an activity in one area affects another
       area), it should be assigned to higher levels of government.
   5.	 If equity is a priority for the activity under consideration, centralized provision may be better. Con-
       versely, if people in each state and region have different requirements and preferences regarding
       that activity, lower levels could better address these variations.
   6.	 If the activity under consideration involves a great deal of discretion in decision-making, it should
       be assigned to a lower level of government.
   7.	 If the activity involves significant technical expertise, assignment to a higher level of government
       may be most suitable.
   Source: World Bank (2015).

Policy development is typically a central government function. Central governments can provide
an overarching vision to social protection provision by a) identifying the development objectives
social protection can help achieve (e.g. poverty reduction, human capital development) and de-
veloping a legal and institutional framework to pursue them (see Indonesia’s TNP2K); b) dealing
with equity concerns between geographic areas; c) coordinating different ministries involved in
social protection provision; d) ensuring government resources (human, physical, financial) are suf-
ficient to implement programs in an effective and predictable manner; and e) providing or facilitat-
ing technical support to lower levels of government).20

20.	 Region/states can perform some of these functions where regional disparities in requirements and preferences, strong techni-
     cal capacity, and a high degree of fiscal decentralization allow for social protection provision to be coherently coordinated and
     financed at a lower level (e.g. India).
24                Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                  The Role of Social Protection



Program design may involve several levels of government and stakeholder involvement. Central
government is responsible for identifying the types of instruments that better respond to social
protection needs and ensuring program design responds to the needs the program is set to ad-
dress, the latter often jointly with regional stakeholders. This involves setting standards for pro-
gram implementation, such as minimum benefit levels, eligibility criteria, and processes and pro-
cedures (e.g. drafting operations manuals (OMs)). Central governments are also better positioned
to assess the externalities programs can bring to national and regional contexts. Region/state
governments can help adapt the design to the context and often compile information at regional
level to support implementation and scale-up processes. For instance, the OM of India’s MGN-
REGS was drafted by the central Ministry of Rural Development (MRD), unbundling activities and
assigning responsibilities for program implementation that provided clear guidelines for state-
level OMs.

Similarly to program design, setting up delivery sub-systems includes functions such as designing
and developing the actual systems and managing processes and information flows. Therefore, set-
ting up delivery systems is typically performed at central level. Developing MISs, payment systems
through third parties (e.g. financial institutions), or M&E systems requiring monitoring frame-
works and impact evaluations involves central-level decision-making processes such as procuring
the technical expertise to develop the systems.

Table 1 : Deconcentrated, delegated and devolved service delivery
    Aspect of service             Deconcentrated                       Delegated                           Devolved
        delivery
 Source and receiver of   Ministry delegates to its own   Ministry/agency to local authorities   State/agency to local authori-
 authority                branches                        or parastatal/semi-independent         ties
                                                          bodies
 Funding                  Ministry to its own branches    From assigning entity to local         Local levels raise/receive
                          (not showing in local govern-   authority (showing in local govern-    resources through revenues or
                          ment's budget)                  ment's budget)                         block grants
 Implementation           Limited by ministry's regula-   Constrained by policy, procedures,     High degree of discretion but
 discretion               tions, procedures, standards,   and standards set by assigning         somewhat limited by national
                          and instructions                agency but some level of discretion    standards
                                                          in implementation
 Reporting and            To ministry headquarters        To assigning entity and local coun-    Primarily to citizens through
 accountability                                           cil/citizens                           local councils; vertical ac-
                                                                                                 countability still present in
                                                                                                 early stages of decentraliza-
                                                                                                 tion
Source: Adapted from UNDP and UNCDF (2011).


While setting up delivery sub-systems is usually done at central level, program implementation
through delivery sub-systems is mostly, though not exclusively, a local task. Intermediate levels of
subnational administration such as districts and townships can provide technical support to local
levels in undertaking beneficiary identification and registration, beneficiary support through griev-
ance and redress mechanisms, communication campaigns, and collection of program information
to feed MIS and M&E systems.

Whereas government should provide overall leadership and coordination at all levels, DPs, the
private sector, and other non-governmental actors (NGOs, CBOs, academia, research institutes,
and think-tanks) can perform specific activities within social protection functions. Technical sup-
              Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
            protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar                                                 25
port is an area where DP expertise can support government at various levels. DPs and NGOs of-
ten support program design since they can mobilize specialized expertise to inform these pro-
cesses. Independent bodies such as academia, research institutes, and DPs can undertake impact
evaluations of social protection programs, which are instrumental to inform program revision and
scale-up processes. Indonesia’s PKH and PNPM Generasi as well as India’s MGNREGS have bene-
fited from external impact evaluations by DPs and academia that have contributed to govern-
ment’s own efforts to improve program performance.

Functional assignment for social assistance implementation should be accompanied by suffi-
cient funding to implement such mandates, following the principle of ‘finance follows function’
(World Bank, 2015). There are different ways in which functions can be assigned and funded at
various levels of government; they can be deconcentrated, delegated, or devolved, translating
into different degrees of discretion for implementation, different options for financing mecha-
nisms, and different types of accountability relations.

Social protection programs can be implemented through a mix of deconcentrated, delegated,
and devolved functions. For instance, India’s MGNREGS transfers significant resources from MRD
to local governments (the panchayat, which includes district, block, and village levels) following a
functional assignment that gives local governments discretion on project identification as well as
several responsibilities in asset creation, employment processes, and project monitoring, follow-
ing central- and state-level standards. Transfer programs can also delegate to local governments
decisions on the type of transfer (cash or inkind), the type of and need for conditions, and the
degree of enforcement based on local capacity (UNDP and UNCDF, 2011).

CDD programs include planning and decision-making processes that would otherwise take place
at central level, such as choosing schemes to implement out of a menu of options and adapting
eligibility criteria to local needs.21 Therefore, CDD models can be used to finance delegated and
devolved functions from central ministries or agencies to local governments or CBOs. Perfor-
mance-based financing mechanisms and community facilitators of local decision-making process-
es have been used in programs such as Indonesia’s PNPM Generasi to incentivize locally relevant
investments that better achieve expected results.


Sources of funding22

Overall, central governments are better placed to reliably finance the implementation of non-
contributory, social assistance programs. They can mobilize larger resources for safety nets com-
pared with regional or local governments, particularly if the latter have few sources of revenue
(Grosh et al., 2008). Central governments can also address issues of regional disparities by redis-
tributing resources to the areas that need them the most. Lastly, central governments can make
funding available in a counter-cyclical manner (e.g. in times of crises or economic slowdown),
precisely when social protection provision is needed the most.


21.	 More information on CDD programs can be found in the Note on ‘Social protection delivery through community-driven develop-
     ment platforms’.
22.	 Contributory social security programs are (partly) financed through contributions from employers and workers, thus are subject to
     inter-temporal fluctuations in the number of contributors and actual beneficiaries, salaries, contribution rates, and other factors.
     Social security financing is analyzed in the Note on ‘Strengthening social security provision in Myanmar’.
26              Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                The Role of Social Protection



Depending on the degree of political and fiscal decentralization, decisions on intergovernmental
transfer can be informed by bottom-up planning, and region/states governments can top up
central funding for specific programs or introduce additional funding for more locally relevant
programs. For instance, state governments provide complementary funding under MGNREGS to
finance 25 percent of non-wage costs (World Bank, 2011). Bottom-up planning has informed cen-
tral-level transfers for MGNREGS implementation, avoiding a ‘quota’ system since spending is de-
termined by demand for work at local level.23

DPs can support central and regional governments in financing social assistance through mecha-
nisms that aim to avoid fragmentation of service provision. Governments can provide platforms
to pool resources from several DPs for single programs, which can support a coordinated approach
to service delivery and ensure functions at different levels of government are coherently and pre-
dictably funded. For instance, PNPM Generasi is funded through a combination of funds from the
government of Indonesia and from DPs that pool resources jointly in the PNPM Support Facility.


Accountability

Governance in social protection can be defined as the set of incentives and accountability rela-
tionships that define how providers are held accountable for their ability to deliver services with
quality, efficiency, and transparency (WB, 2012). Accountability is thus generated from imple-
menters to citizens (external) and within implementing levels (internal). Table A1 identifies the
type of accountability generated by different functional assignment and financing arrangements.
The more decentralized the arrangements, the more accountability is generated from government
to citizens. Internal accountability is also important to ensure quality service delivery and varies
according to the degree of concentration of functions in single entities.

Local leaders and locally elected governments can be assessed (and elected/re-elected) based
on the quality of service delivery and thus have a relatively strong incentive to perform well on
this front. Belonging to the community they serve meansthey bear social pressure to deliver well
to their community. CDD models are an example of how to make these incentives part of the gov-
ernance structure, albeit with the associated risk of elite capture in highly discretionary models.24
Internal accountability and/or external monitoring are necessary to prevent misappropriation of
resources by local stakeholders, particularly when there is a relatively high degree of discretion.
Social audits can complement accountability to citizens and support quality service delivery as in
the case of India’s MGNREGS.




23.	 This is a rights-based program where the state needs to guarantee funds for the provision of 100 days of work annually; however,
     a mismatch between insufficient supply of infrastructure projects and excessive demand for work persists.
24.	 Note on ‘Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms’.
Annex 2:
Example of institutional arrangements of social protection programs in Myanmar
 Type of function        Function         Stipends program (MOE; pilot          MCHVS (MOH)                  NCCPD (MLFRD)               Civil service pensions          Social security (SSB)
                                                  of enhanced                                                                                     (MOF)
                                                implementation
                                                 arrangements)
Policy development   Policy develop-      Steering committee: FESR.        Central-level coordinating   RDSF. Central-level coor-      Parliament: Civil Service      Parliament: Social Security
and financing        ment, legal          Central-level coordinating       agency: MOH                  dinating agency: MLFRD.        Rules and Regulations in       Act, 1954; Social Security
                     framework, and       agency: MOE. Support from                                     Foreign Aid Management         1920 and reformed by the       Law, 2012. Central-level
                     coordination         Technical Working Group that                                  Working Committee sup-         Civil Service Law (2013)       coordinating agency: SSB,
                                          includes MOE, President’s Of-                                 ports MLFRD as steering        and the Civil Service Rules    chaired by MOLESS and
                                          fice, and MOF                                                 committee                      (2014). Central-level coor-    including board members
                                                                                                                                       dinating agency: MOH           from MOF, MOH, MSWRR,
                                                                                                                                                                      and others
                     Budgeting and        MOE (central); mostly de-        MOH (central); mostly        Department of Rural De-        MOF (central); decon-          a) Operations: SSB; decon-
                     financial manage-    concentrated functions and       deconcentrated functions     velopment (DRD) (central)      centrated functions for        centrated functions and
                     ment                 financing. Township-level        and financing. Midwives,     transfers funds directly to    verification but centralized   financing;
                                          quotas for program implemen-     LHVs, and hospital           village tract forums based     financial management for       b) benefits: contribu-
                                          tation. TEOs transfer funds to   management agency in         on village tract-level plan-   payments through MEB           tions paid monthly by
                                          schools, which pay to benefi-    charge of local financial    ning. Village tract forums                                    company managers based
                                          ciary parents                    management                   form finance sub-com-                                         on employees’ salary (2%
                                                                                                        mittees to manage the                                         from employers, 2% from
                                                                                                        block grant and transfer                                      employees, plus 1% addi-
                                                                                                        resources to village sup-                                     tional from employers for
                                                                                                        port committees to cover                                      injury fund; full implemen-
                                                                                                        project implementation.                                       tation of 2012 Law will
                                                                                                        DRD staff at township                                         take total contributions to
                                                                                                        level responsible for                                         13%). Autonomous finan-
                                                                                                        financial management                                          cial management by SSB
                                                                                                        support (accounting) and                                      (in the past, contributions
                                                                                                        information disclosure                                        flowed back to MOF)
                     Sources of funding   General budget; social budget;   General budget; social       General budget; MLFRD          General budget; social         a) General budget; social
                                          allocation to MOE. Support       budget; allocation to        budget. Support from           budget; allocation to MOF      budget; allocation to SSB
                                          from government of Australia     MOH. Support from            World Bank, governments        pensions and gratuities        (for operational costs such
                                                                                                                                                                                                    protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social




                                          and World Bank                   WHO/GAVI Alliance            of Italy and Japan                                            as salaries);
                                                                                                                                                                      b) contributions from
                                                                                                                                                                      affiliates
                                                                                                                                                                                                    27
 Type of function        Function          Stipends program (MOE; pilot           MCHVS (MOH)                 NCCPD (MLFRD)                Civil service pensions          Social security (SSB)
                                                   of enhanced                                                                                      (MOF)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      28

                                                 implementation
                                                  arrangements)
Program design      Design and             Operational guidelines devel-    Operational guidelines       OM developed by MLFRD          Department of Pensions,         SSB (central)
                    implementation         oped by MOE (central level),     developed by MOH (cen-       (central)                      MOF (central), respon-
                    standards              with technical support from      tral level) with technical                                  sible for overall program
                                           World Bank                       support from HITAP                                          architecture. Beneficiary
                                                                                                                                        and employer (respec-
                                                                                                                                        tive ministry/government
                                                                                                                                        entity) calculate benefit
                                                                                                                                        level (township, district,
                                                                                                                                        or region/state). Central
                                                                                                                                        or region/state level MOF
                                                                                                                                        verifies calculation
                    Set-up and scale-      TEO teams responsible for        Department of Health         Project Secretariat at         Department of Pensions,         SSB operational arm: cen-
                    up processes           rolling out implementing         (MOH, central); health       DRD, MLFRD (central).          MOF (central); Department       tral-level team and field
                                           functions and supporting         centers (voucher distribu-   Project Secretariat is         of Pensions, MOF (states/       offices, 977 townships,
                                           and coordinating with school     tion to midwives at local    assigned several DRD           regions), Supervision Units     several medical centers
                                                                                                                                                                                                      The Role of Social Protection




                                           heads and committees. S/         level). Technical support    staff and shall recruit con-   1 and 2 and Calculation
                                           REOs hold consultations for      from WHO township            sultants as necessary for      Unit
                                           township selection, approve      officer to help setup and    implementation of proj-
                                           stipend students, and monitor    monitor processes and        ect. DRD staff at township
                                           implementation of programs,      coordinate between local     level provide technical
                                           including visits to TEOs, pro-   and central stakeholders     support to village tract
                                           ducing reports/statistics, and                                in project planning and
                                           addressing complaints. MOE                                    execution and help with
                                           will review national program                                  inter-ministerial coordina-
                                           based on results from piloting                                tion. NGOs and firms
                                           enhanced implementation                                       assist township officers
                                           arrangements
                    Eligibility criteria   MOE (central level), with        MOH (central) as per         DRD (central) with help        Ministries where                Parliament: Social Security
                                           technical support from Techni-   operational guidelines;      from Ministry of National      civil servants have worked.     Act, 1954;Social Security
                                                                                                                                                                                                      Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:




                                           cal Working Group and World      further identification of    Planning select criteria       District-level supervisors of   Law, 2012. Enterprises
                                           Bank                             poor pregnant women          for township selection         future pensioners approve       with more than 5 em-
                                                                            via hospital equity fund     based on poverty data.         retirement for low-rank         ployees need to register
                                                                            questionnaire                Consultation with region/      civil servants. Region/state    with SSB. Students and
                                                                                                         state governments              supervisory level approves      enterprises with fewer
                                                                                                                                        for medium rank and             than 5 employees can join
                                                                                                                                        director-generals for high-     voluntarily
                                                                                                                                        rank future pensioners
Type of function       Function           Stipends program (MOE; pilot         MCHVS (MOH)                 NCCPD (MLFRD)                Civil service pensions        Social security (SSB)
                                                  of enhanced                                                                                    (MOF)
                                                implementation
                                                 arrangements)
Delivery sub-      Beneficiary identi-   Schools in township commit-        Midwives and VDs       Chief ministry of region/state     Future pensioner and         SSB issued smart cards
systems            fication              tees select schools in need and    with support from      shortlists three townships based   supervisor (township,        with personal information,
                                         allocate quota. School commit-     village leaders who    on consultation. Foreign Aid       district, region/state or    photo, and fingerprints
                                         tees select students in need,      attest women are       Management Working Commit-         central depending on rank)   with a unique social secu-
                                         township committees verify. In     poor                   tee selects final townships        prepare case files with      rity number
                                         practice, little/varied involve-                                                             documentation such as ID,
                                         ment of non-education commit-                                                                photo, and service book.
                                         tee members (parents, NGOs)                                                                  MEB issues e-pension card
                   Enrollment and        School committees enroll           Enrollment: midwives   Village support committees         Calculation Unit, Pension    •	 Enrollment: com-
                   compliance (for       beneficiaries and monitor com-     and VDs. Compliance:   with support from village tracts   Department (central), or        pany registers with SSB
                   conditional cash      pliance. Varied involvement of     verified at health     implement subprojects and          pension staff at state and      township officer, states
                   transfers (CCTs))     non-education members; usu-        center                 organize the necessary labor       regional level                  no. of workers, and
                                         ally school heads take charge of                                                                                             collects contributions.
                                         activities                                                                                                                   Workers register with
                                                                                                                                                                      township officer and re-
                                                                                                                                                                      ceive cards in a month
                                                                                                                                                                   •	 Compliance/verification
                                                                                                                                                                      of eligibility: a) medical
                                                                                                                                                                      treatment: verified
                                                                                                                                                                      at SSB facilities or by
                                                                                                                                                                      township SSB officer
                                                                                                                                                                      if needs referral. Free
                                                                                                                                                                      treatment in SSB facili-
                                                                                                                                                                      ties. Reimbursements
                                                                                                                                                                      for medicine, diagnos-
                                                                                                                                                                      tics, and treatment
                                                                                                                                                                      (outside SSB facilities)
                                                                                                                                                                      go to township SSB
                                                                                                                                                                      officers (less than MMK
                                                                                                                                                                      30,000) or central level
                                                                                                                                                                      where medical board
                                                                                                                                                                      check eligibility; b) cash
                                                                                                                                                                      benefits: SSB clinics re-
                                                                                                                                                                                                   protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social




                                                                                                                                                                      fer patient to township
                                                                                                                                                                      office which approves it
                                                                                                                                                                                                   29
Type of function       Function         Stipends program (MOE; pilot       MCHVS (MOH)                  NCCPD (MLFRD)                     Civil service pensions        Social security (SSB)
                                                of enhanced                                                                                        (MOF)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  30

                                              implementation
                                               arrangements)
                   Asset creation   -                                  -                        Village tract forums responsible      -                             -
                   (for PWPs)                                                                   for development of subproject
                                                                                                plans, receiving project funds,
                                                                                                and implementing subprojects.
                                                                                                Technical and administrative
                                                                                                support to village tract forums
                                                                                                will be provided by community
                                                                                                facilitators appointed under the
                                                                                                project and by DRD township-
                                                                                                level staff
                   Payments,        Direct payment and record-         Voucher distribution     Village tract level receives funds,   Calculation unit at central   Cash benefits: direct pay-
                   services, and    keeping by school heads to         and reimbursement:       disburses, and transfers to           or region/state level         ments by SSB township
                   transactions     teachers and then to parents;      most commonly            village support committees for        processes pensions, con-      officer. In some instances,
                                    TEO processes payments and         midwives and other       program implementation                solidates payment books,      employer pays the work-
                                    transfer resources to schools      trained community                                              and sends them to MEB.        ers’ benefit in advance and
                                                                                                                                                                                                  The Role of Social Protection




                                                                       members; per-                                                  MEB pays into pensioners’     claims reimbursement to
                                                                       form both voucher                                              accounts. Township bank       the SSB. Services: 40 gov-
                                                                       distribution and reim-                                         branches send informa-        ernment enterprise clinics,
                                                                       bursement functions.                                           tion to state/region MOF      3 workers’ hospitals, and
                                                                       Record-keeping by                                              pensions department on        92 SSB clinics provide
                                                                       midwives and LHVs                                              total monthly payment,        free health care services
                                                                                                                                      list of new pensioners (and   to insured workers and
                                                                                                                                      their amount), and total      are linked to the SSB for
                                                                                                                                      pensioners                    medical supplies. Hospitals
                                                                                                                                                                    also provide medical tours
                                                                                                                                                                    to factories for outpatient
                                                                                                                                                                    service and health educa-
                                                                                                                                                                    tion
                   Grievance and    School committees and town-        -                        Grievance sub-committees at           -                             Appeals Tribunal (no
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:




                   redress mecha-   ship committees are responsible                             village tract level; township DRD                                   appeals made yet). Most
                   nisms            for addressing any feedback                                 officer ensures filed grievances                                    complaints handled at
                                    and complaints during selection                             are responded to. Support from                                      township level
                                    process. The program has a                                  NGOs/consultants at local
                                    telephone number (MOE central                               level. Central-level follow-up as
                                    office)                                                     needed. Captured in MIS
 Type of function         Function      Stipends program (MOE; pilot         MCHVS (MOH)                   NCCPD (MLFRD)                 Civil service pensions         Social security (SSB)
                                                of enhanced                                                                                       (MOF)
                                              implementation
                                               arrangements)
                    MIS                Reporting forms are submit-        MOH and WHO com-         Central level: design and compil-   Supervision units (central)   SSB (central) updates
                                       ted from schools to TEOs, and      pile at central level;   ing by DRD with support from        prepare reports by type of    and compiles database
                                       consolidated and submitted to      VDs, health care pro-    NGO/firm. DRD township level:       pension (compensation,        monthly based on registra-
                                       S/REOs and central level. Paper-   viders, health center    enters data                         survivors, etc.), category    tion and contribution
                                       based, deployment of data          management agen-                                             (civil servant, state-owned   information collected at
                                       entry is underway                  cies (administrative),                                       enterprise, political), and   township level
                                                                          and LHVs fill forms to                                       states and regions. No
                                                                          gather information at                                        disaggregated information
                                                                          local level                                                  on individual pensions
                                                                                                                                       paid to old pensioners.
                                                                                                                                       Manual data and basic
                                                                                                                                       excel systems. Will update
                                                                                                                                       IT systems in the near
                                                                                                                                       future
                    Monitoring         •	 Internal: school committees,    VDs, health care pro-    Central level: DRD M&E and          Director and deputy           Internal auditing unit for
                                          TEOs, S/REOs, Department of     viders, health center    finance officers; auditor general   director of Supervision       internal processes. SSB
                                          Basic Education and Depart-     administrative staff,                                        Unit travel to update local   (central) monitors number
                                          ment of Education Planning      WHO field officers                                           staff on new rules and        of registered companies
                                          and Training. M&E Working                                                                    regulations. MOF officers     and workers. Township
                                          Group leads in M&E activities                                                                (central) do spot-checks      inspectors check company
                                       •	 External: qualitative assess-                                                                on local-level records        information on workers
                                          ment (process monitoring)                                                                                                  and companies not paying
                                          and spot-checks by Save the                                                                                                contributions, verify cash
                                          Children (SC) with World                                                                                                   benefits paid, and seek
                                          Bank technical support                                                                                                     companies that should be
                                                                                                                                                                     registered
                    Evaluation         Quantitative survey (school sur-   HITAP technical          DRD township office organizes       No unit is in charge of       ILO assessment
                                       vey and household survey) with     support (mid-term        annual multi-stakeholder review     analyzing monitoring
                                       World Bank technical support       review)                  at township level                   information
                    Communication,    School committees handle com-       VDs; messages mostly     Knowledge market place: annual      No unit is in charge of       SSB township staff: mobile
                    outreach, and/    munication with beneficiaries       on financial benefit;    knowledge exchange between          communication                 units and inspectors
                    or community      and general public. Township        messages on health       communities. NGOs/commu-                                          visit companies and create
                    mobilization      committees communicate              benefits could be        nity facilitators help communi-                                   awareness
                                                                                                                                                                                                  protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social




                                      program information to school       strengthened             ties plan, decide, and execute
                                      committees. In practice, mis-                                subprojects so communication
                                      communication still an issue; ad                             and mobilization is part of
                                      hoc community outreach and                                   program implementation, public
                                      communication strategies with                                disclosure of project documents
                                                                                                                                                                                                  31




                                      mixed results                                                to communities
Source: GoM (2014); ILO and MDRI (2015); SC (2015); WHO (2014).
Annex 3:
                                                                                                                                                                                           32

International examples of institutional arrangements for social protection provision

      Type of function             Function            Unified Database (Indonesia,         PKH (Indonesia, CCT)          PNPM Generasi (Indonesia,           MGREGS (India, PWP)
                                                             targeting system)                                            community empowerment
                                                                                                                                 program)
Policy development and   Policy development, legal     TNP2K, chaired by vice-pres-     Law 11/2009 on Social Wel-        Law 11/2009 on Social Wel-       Parliament: Rural Employ-
financing                framework, and coordination   ident, coordinates poverty       fare. Presidential Instruction    fare; Presidential Instruction   ment Guarantee Act (2005);
                                                       reduction policies at national   3/2010 on Socially Just De-       3/2010 on Socially Just De-      rights-based and guaranteed
                                                       level and provides technical     velopment Program. TNP2K,         velopment Program; Decree        by law. Central-level coordi-
                                                       advice                           chaired by vice-president, co-    of the Coordinating Minister     nating agency: MRD
                                                                                        ordinates poverty reduction       for Social Welfare 25/2007 on
                                                                                        policies at national level and    Guideline of PNPM Mandiri
                                                                                        provides technical advice
                         Budgeting and financial       TNP2K                            Ministry of Social Affairs au-    Direct block grant transfers     Principle of bottom-up plan-
                                                                                                                                                                                           The Role of Social Protection




                         management                                                     thorizes payments, Treasury       from Treasury Office to com-     ning with villages developing
                                                                                        Office within Ministry of         munity account at sub-district   plans and budgets based on
                                                                                        Finance disburses funds to        level. Performance-based         estimated man-days of work
                                                                                        central office of the post sys-   financing to incentivize re-     demanded in the course of
                                                                                        tem for payment execution.        sults. To decide on allocation   the year. Budget not subject
                                                                                        TNP2K tops up and fills gaps      of funds within a village,       to quotas. Bottom-up plan-
                                                                                        if needed                         trained facilitators help each   ning is supposed to inform
                                                                                                                          village elect an 11-member       MRD’s budget allocation to
                                                                                                                          management team as well as       states and then to districts,
                                                                                                                          select local facilitators and    although difficulties of this
                                                                                                                          volunteers. Following com-       principle in practice
                                                                                                                          munity planning processes,
                                                                                                                          elected team makes final
                                                                                                                          budget allocation
                                                                                                                                                                                           Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:




                         Sources of funding            Ministry of Finance, TNP2K,      Ministry of Finance, TNP2K        Ministry of Finance, multi-      Central level provides major-
                                                       Poverty Reduction Support                                          donor PNPM Support Facility      ity of funds (90%); states
                                                       Facility (PRSF)                                                                                     complement by covering
                                                                                                                                                           quarter of non-wage costs.
                                                                                                                                                           Act mandates that 60% of
                                                                                                                                                           total costs should be labor
                                                                                                                                                           costs. States to provide
                                                                                                                                                           unemployment allowance
                                                                                                                                                           if they fail to provide work
                                                                                                                                                           within 15 days of demand
      Type of function               Function         Unified Database (Indonesia,       PKH (Indonesia, CCT)         PNPM Generasi (Indonesia,            MGREGS (India, PWP)
                                                            targeting system)                                         community empowerment
                                                                                                                             program)
Program design           Design and implementation    Bureau of Statistics (BPS)     Ministry of Planning led         Directorate-General for Vil-     Central (MRD) drafted OM.
                         standards                                                   design process, Ministry of      lage and Community Empow-        States drafted their state-
                                                                                     Social Affairs is implementing   erment, Ministry of Home         specific versions based on
                                                                                     agency                           Affairs (PMD), designed          MRD guidelines with clearly
                                                                                                                      program and set standards.       detailed roles and responsi-
                                                                                                                      Communities with PNPM            bilities across functions for
                                                                                                                      facilitators identify projects   program implementation
                                                                                                                      to improve education and
                                                                                                                      health indicators
                         Set-up and scale-up pro-     BPS                            District, sub-district and       PMD                              State governments (strong
                         cesses                                                      village PKH staff and PKH                                         variation in readiness across
                                                                                     facilitators                                                      states). Dedicated staff
                                                                                                                                                       should be hired at panchayat
                                                                                                                                                       level for program implemen-
                                                                                                                                                       tation. Communities have a
                                                                                                                                                       role in participatory planning
                         Eligibility criteria         TNP2K. Central level           Using Unified Database (see      PMD: communities with            Parliament: Act states all
                                                      determines criteria for        column 1), poor households       poor results on maternal and     households are eligible and
                                                      proxy means testing (PMT)      selected with children aged      child health and education.      that a third of beneficiaries
                                                      of households potentially      0-15 or less than 18 years       Vulnerable groups most           should be women. Self-selec-
                                                      eligible for anti-poverty      but who have not completed       benefiting are poor women        tion in practice
                                                      programs                       basic education, or pregnant/    and children. 8 provinces,
                                                                                     lactating mothers                290 kecamatan, and 2,892 vil-
                                                                                                                      lages (2012)
Delivery sub-systems     Beneficiary identification   Local leaders inform BPS       PKH ID card/national ID card     Communities with support         States are capturing informa-
                                                      enumerators about potential                                     from PNPM facilitators           tion on Unique Identification
                                                      households that could meet                                                                       (UID) in program enrollment
                                                      PMT
                         Enrollment and compliance    -                              Enrollment automatic             For complementary feeding        Village-level officers in charge
                         (for CCTs)                                                  for households meeting           and household education          of enrollment and manage-
                                                                                     demographic requirements         or health financial support,     ment of workers at worksite.
                                                                                     and PMT criteria. Health and     the community with sup-          Support from district level
                                                                                     education service providers      port from PNPM facilitators      (all local levels, Panchayat Raj
                                                                                                                                                                                          protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                                                                                                                                                                                            Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social




                                                                                     support beneficiary monitor-     identifies poor households       institutions)
                                                                                     ing and recording compliance     with small and school-aged
                                                                                     with conditions; provincial      children, and pregnant and
                                                                                     and district/municipality        lactating mothers
                                                                                     levels support local opera-
                                                                                     tions and ensure availability
                                                                                                                                                                                          33




                                                                                     of supply-side services
Type of function             Function          Unified Database (Indonesia,        PKH (Indonesia, CCT)           PNPM Generasi (Indonesia,          MGREGS (India, PWP)
                                                     targeting system)                                            community empowerment
                                                                                                                                                                                     34

                                                                                                                         program)
                   Asset creation (for PWPs)   -                               -                                  Community social mapping       Local governments (Pan-
                                                                                                                  and participatory planning     chayati Raj; districts, blocks,
                                                                                                                  with support from PNPM         and villages) support com-
                                                                                                                  facilitators                   munities in project identifica-
                                                                                                                                                 tion. Village level mandated
                                                                                                                                                 to undertake at least 50% of
                                                                                                                                                 projects. Remaining projects
                                                                                                                                                 also identified at sub-state
                                                                                                                                                 level (block and district level).
                                                                                                                                                 Variation across states (e.g. in
                                                                                                                                                 Tamil Nadu 100% of projects
                                                                                                                                                 done by villages). Communi-
                                                                                                                                                 ties: annual participatory
                                                                                                                                                 planning exercise to decide
                                                                                                                                                 on list of projects
                   Payments and transactions   -                               Central and regional offices       Disbursement requires sign-    Cash payments through
                                                                                                                                                                                     The Role of Social Protection




                                                                               of Indonesian postal service       off by government officials    banks and post offices.
                                                                                                                  and minimum of 4 signatories   Accounts usually opened in
                                                                                                                  on bank accounts               name of woman in household
                                                                                                                                                 (e.g. Andhra Pradesh). Direct
                                                                                                                                                 cash payments to beneficia-
                                                                                                                                                 ries still present when bank/
                                                                                                                                                 post office network presence
                                                                                                                                                 and capacity is limited
                   Grievance and redress       TNP2K, but a functioning        PKH facilitators at sub-district   PNPM Complaints Handling       Reporting one level higher
                   mechanisms                  system still needs to be        level, PKH complaints man-         Units from sub-district up,    than the person responsible
                                               developed                       ager at district level             managed by PNPM Oversight      for implementation
                                                                                                                  Committee
                   MIS                         TNP2K, but no formal institu-   PKH administrators at district     PNPM Oversight Committee,      Central level: compile state-
                                                                                                                                                                                     Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:




                                               tional home yet                 level maintain MIS                 Coordinating Ministry for      level information. State-level:
                                                                                                                  Social Affairs                 development of web-based,
                                                                                                                                                 local-language, MIS in most
                                                                                                                                                 states. Local-level data entry
                                                                                                                                                 on employment and assets
                                                                                                                                                 created
        Type of function                       Function           Unified Database (Indonesia,         PKH (Indonesia, CCT)         PNPM Generasi (Indonesia,        MGREGS (India, PWP)
                                                                        targeting system)                                           community empowerment
                                                                                                                                           program)
                                  Monitoring                      TNP2K                            District/municipality levels    Village meetings to account    Overall program monitor-
                                                                                                                                   for funds used and monitor-    ing: field staff reporting
                                                                                                                                   ing of physical progress.      to central-level ministry.
                                                                                                                                   Performance-based financing    Project supervision: local
                                                                                                                                   schemes based on monitor-      government. Social audits:
                                                                                                                                   ing results                    communities
                                  Evaluation                      TNP2K with support from          Impact evaluations by Bap-      Including by PNPM Support      State-level evaluations by
                                                                  the PRSF                         penas (2009), World Bank        Facility, World Bank, SMERU    development partners and
                                                                                                   (2010)                                                         academia
                                  Communication, outreach,        Local leaders and enumera-       Ministry of Communications      PNPM facilitators, including   Strong civil society role in
                                  and/or community mobiliza-      tors                             and Information Technology      through village and project    advocating right to work and
                                  tion                                                             supports program communi-       information boards             information, contributed to
                                                                                                   cation campaigns                                               awareness (e.g. in Rajasthan)

Source: Indonesia – ADB (n.d.), Febriany et al. (2011), IPC-IG and TNP2K (2013), PNPM (n.d.), Sumarto (2015), Villar (2013); India – World Bank (2011).
                                                                                                                                                                                                  protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
                                                                                                                                                                                                  35
36          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection




          'Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social protection programs: Towards
          effective service delivery in Myanmar' is the eighth note in the series Building Resilience, Equity and
          Opportunity in Myanmar: the Role of Social Protection. All notes are available at www.worldbank.
          org/myanmar.




                                 Myanmar Social Protection Notes Series

                                 The note – ‘Building resilience, equity, and opportunity in Myanmar: The role
                                 of social protection’ – provides an overview of the technical notes in the series.
                                 These include:

                                 1.	 Risks and vulnerabilities along the lifecycle: Role for social protection in
                                      Myanmar
                                 2.	 Framework for the development of social protection systems: Lessons
                                      from international experience
                                 3.	 Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar
                                 4.	 The experience of public works programs in Myanmar: Lessons from a
                                      social protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                 5.	 The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                      protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                 6.	 Social protection for disaster risk management: Opportunities for
                                      Myanmar
                                 7.	 Strengthening social security provision in Myanmar
                                 8.	 Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
                                      protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                                 9.	 Social protection delivery through community-driven development
                                      platforms: International experience and key considerations for Myanmar
                                 10.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable: Key considerations in designing
                                      targeting systems
                                 11.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                      protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                 12.	 Developing scalable and transparent benefit payment systems in
                                      Myanmar




World Bank Office Yangon
57 Pyay Road, Corner of Shwe Hinthar Road,
6 1/2 Mile, Hlaing Township, Yangon
Republic of the Union of Myanmar. Tel: +95 1 654824
www.worldbank.org/myanmar
www.facebook.com/WorldBankMyanmar
