                                                                                                         97969


                                               Political Champions
        Partnership for stimulating insurance penetration in lower income countries

                                 Initial Market Surveys: Summary Note


Executive Summary

After the last Champions’ meeting in April, an expert-level group consisting of donors, insurers and
international financial institutions was formed to act on the decision to undertake joint work to scale up
disaster risk insurance1 in lower income countries. Seven countries were selected: Bangladesh, Ghana,
Haiti, Kenya, Senegal, Tanzania and Vietnam. The World Bank/Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery (GDFRR) led in preparing country scoping studieswith inputs from the group. These were
summarized in a set of country notes.
From the country scoping studies, the expert-level group proposes that Kenya, Bangladesh and Senegal
are selected for the next phase. This will involve confirming the interest and commitment of the
governments to engage in this initiative and undertaking field visits to conduct more detailed, in-country
assessment to identify opportunities for scaling up insurance in support of building resilience.
Each assessment will result in a recommended programme of investment to stimulate insurance scale
up. This will include recommendations on how to improve the coordination of existing efforts, how to fill
gaps (such as continued investment in market infrastructure), how to scale up pilot initiatives and how
to better link insurance solutions to existing financial products (such as credit) and social protection
programmes. By early 2014, the assessments will be completed. By April 2014, the recommended
programme of investment for each country will be presented to the donor and insurance community
involved in this Political Champions’ initiative for their consideration and commitment of support.
Decision Point:The Champions are being asked to review and endorse the proposals: 1). to undertake in-
depth assessments in Kenya, Bangladesh and Senegal; and 2). to hold a meeting of key donors and
insurers by April 2014 to consider recommended programmes of investment.

Background

Over the past 20 years, natural disaster losses have been steadily climbing in both advanced and
developing countries. Disaster-related economic losses exceeded US$400 billion in 2011, the highest
ever recorded in history. The Great East Japan Earthquake alone resulted in more than US$210 billion in
damages. Insured losses of over US$55 billion (out of US$140 billion total natural disaster losses) made
2012 another record year for the insurance industry. The upward trend in natural disaster losses is
exacerbated by growing urbanization, environmental degradation, and expected increases in the
frequency and severity of hydro-meteorological events resulting from climate change. Developing
countries are particularly vulnerable as they cannot keep pace with the rapidly growing asset bases at
    1
      Disaster risk insurance refers to agricultural (crop and livestock) and other property related insurance at the
retail (i.e. enterprise and household) level, where losses are caused by natural events. The particular interest is to
expand access to risk management instruments in resilience deficit areas.


                                                       Page 1 of 7
risk and do not have adequate resources to dedicate to reducing exposure or responding effectively to
an emergency.
Insurance offers opportunities to transfer catastrophe risks to private investors but remains largely
under-utilized in developing countries. Disaster risk insurance markets2 remain largely under-
developedin developing countries, so forcing governments and the households to retain most of the
losses post disaster. The main reasons of low catastrophe insurance penetration are multiple: limited
risk data infrastructure, lack of insurance production systems (e.g., underwriting, product design and
pricing, claims settlement), limited delivery channels, weak or missing regulatory frameworks, low
consumer awareness, etc.
Many governments increasingly recognize the need for comprehensive disaster risk management
strategies, including well-developed catastrophe risk insurance markets, to achieve sustainable
development. In 2012, Finance Ministers from the G20 and APEC highlighted the importance of financial
resilience against disasters, and the Sendai Dialogue at the IMF-World Bank Group Annual Meetings
demonstrated commitment to the topic at the highest levels. The 2014 World Development Report
states that risk management, including disaster risk financing and insurance, can be a powerful
instrument for development. The European Commission produced in 2013 a Green Paper on the
insurance of natural and man-made disasters, posing a series of questions concerning the adequacy and
availability of appropriate disaster insurance and how to improve the market for disaster insurance.
The Political Champions Group for Disaster Resilience in April 2013 introduced a new initiative for a
stronger partnership between the public sector and the private sector to increase disaster resilience of
vulnerable populations using market-mediated insurance solutions.              An expert-level group,
includingrepresentatives of DFID, USAID, WB, ILO, GIZ, SECO, European Commission, Swiss Re, Munich
Re, Willis and Allianzwas established to support this work. Their first task wasto identify a list of
countries to conduct initial market assessment,based on pre-defined criteria3. See Table 1 below. Seven
countries were selected: Bangladesh, Ghana, Haiti, Kenya, Senegal, Tanzania, and Vietnam. .




2
  In this note, disaster risk insurance encompasses property catastrophe risk (micro-)insurance (e.g., for private
dwellings) and agricultural (crop and livestock) insurance where losses are caused by widespread adverse natural
events.
3
 The following eligibility criteria were: Exposure to natural disasters;Existence of some risk market infrastructure
(including data infrastructure), or at least clear possibility to develop it; Strong interest/commitment of the
government, as most programs build on PPP; Strong interest from the domestic insurance industry, financial
institutions and international reinsurance industry, with a clear champion(s); Linkages with the DRM or agricultural
risk management agenda; Leverage with existing initiatives/projects, where there is proof of concept; Growing
interest or demand for insurance, which in time would allow meaningful market volumes; At least half of the
selected countries are low income countries; benefits of insurance will assist, directly or indirectly, some of the
more vulnerable people or regions of a country.



                                                     Page 2 of 7
Table 1. Initial Market Assessment - List of Selected Countries
                             WB country       WorldRiskIndex2                 Non-life
                          classification1                                  insurance
                                                                      penetration (% GDP)3
    Bangladesh                    LIC                17.45                     0.25%
                                                         %
    Ghana                        LMIC                9.35%                      0.58%
    Haiti                         LIC                11.45                      0.34%
                                                         %
    Kenya                         LIC                7.82%                      2.02%
    Senegal                      LMIC                11.76                      0.81%
                                                         %
    Tanzania                      LIC                8.64%                      0.63%
    Vietnam                      LMIC                11.21                      0.78%
                                                         %

(1) World Bank country classification. LIC: Low Income Countries; LMIC: lower Middle Income Countries.
(2) World Risk Report 2011. The WorldRiskIndex indicates the probability that a country will be affected by a
disaster by combining exposure to natural hazards, susceptibility (as a function of public infrastructure, housing
conditions, nutrition and the general economic framework), coping capacities (as a function of governance,
disaster preparedness and early warning, medical services, social and economic security), and adaptive capacities
to future natural events and climate change. The 2011 Index ranges from 32% for Vanuatu, the riskiest, to 0.02%
for Qatar.
(3) AXCO Global Statistics (2012) and Swiss Re Sigma Report (2013).


Seven country notes based on initial market surveys were produced (Phase 1).Thecountry notes
provide an initial, non-exhaustive review of disaster risk financing and insurance activities in the seven
selected developing countries, based on the inputs provided by the working group. The notes review (i)
government’s public financial management of natural disasters, (ii) ex-ante and ex-post public
interventions from government and donors against natural disasters, (iii) and state of the domestic non-
life insurance market. In conclusion, the notes identify potential opportunities for investments to
promote domestic catastrophe/agricultural risk insurance solutions.
In the next phase (Phase 2), it is proposed to conduct a detailed market assessment for three
countries.Based on the findings of the initial market surveys, a short list of three countries has been
identified where more detailed assessment (including country visits) will be conducted. This will also
include initial discussions with the governments to secure their support in this initiative.
Phase 2 would lead to recommendations for an investment plan,which will be presented to a meeting
of donors and insurers in early 2014.

Findings from the market surveys

This initiative aims to increase disaster resilience of vulnerable populations through market-
mediateddisaster risk insurance solutions, built on a strong partnership between the public and
private sectors.Insurance solutions that do not scale up cannot have a substantial impact on
vulnerability. Experience suggests that sustainable, scaled up disaster risk insurance programs are based
on an equal partnership between the public and private sectors. The limited success of many private


                                                    Page 3 of 7
sector agricultural insurance pilots can partly be explained by under-developed risk market
infrastructure; lack of coordinated investments in key public goods such as data, lack of technical
capacity of local stakeholders including domestic insurers, and absence of public institutions with
sufficient capacity to ensure competitive markets and consumer protection.

Experience suggests that making disaster risk insurance compulsory (e.g. linked to credit) and/or
integrating it within social protection programs can produce the critical market size required to
support continued investments in the risk market infrastructure.Many large scale agricultural insurance
programs in low and middle income countries (e.g. India, China) have achieved scale in part due to
insurance being bundled with agricultural credit on a compulsory basis. Turkey’s earthquake insurance
program (TCIP), which currently protects over 4 million households, achieved scale in part due to
coverage being compulsory for homeowners. As an example of a social safety net program which uses
agricultural insurance principles, Mexico’s CADENA provides agricultural insurance to over 2.5 million
targeted smallholder farmers, with the US$100m total annual premium paid in full by federal and state
governments. Provision of a catastrophe level of risk insurance to vulnerable households not only
reduces the government’s potential liabilities, but crowds in the provision of more commercial layers of
insurance, which reduces overall risk exposure as well.

The Political Champions Group could support the funding of a package of investmentsto shift from ex
post to ex ante disaster risk financing using market-mediated insurance solutions and the high level
political commitment required for such a public private partnership approach in priority countries. In
many countries, public responses to disaster risk are driven by ex-post rather than ex-ante approaches.
For example, in the aftermath of a large shock to agricultural production, public funds might be used to
support vulnerable farmers or to bail out troubled lenders. Ex-post approaches can be slow as it can take
time to reallocate public funds from other activities. They also typically offer unreliable protection to the
intended beneficiaries and can adversely distort agricultural risk management decisions. A move to an
ex ante market-mediated insurance regime (where in the advance of a potential disaster, investments
are made in mechanisms to support the resilience of farmers, herders and supply chains) is one way that
can help lead to more timely, efficient, equitable, reliable and transparent protection being available to
intended beneficiaries.
       Kenyahas well-established insurance and banking sectors, both of which have demonstrated
        high levels of capacity. Kenya represents an excellent opportunity to make targeted
        investments aimed at increasing disaster resilience among vulnerable population using market-
        mediated solutions. For example, a multi-donor, private sector supported pilot on livestock
        insurance for pastoralists in Northern Kenya has established proof of concept. Links could also
        be explored to integrate this, or other insurance products, into social safety net programs, such
        as the Hunger Safety Net Program, which is implemented in the resilient-deficit arid and semi-
        arid lands. Coordination with broader Horn of Africa resilience efforts, such as those of the
        Global Alliance could also be explored.

       Bangladeshoffers opportunities to increase the outreach of insurance to larger sections of the
        population, especially to those most vulnerable to the substantial exposure to numerous
        hazards. The micro-finance market is well developed and provides opportunities to expand the
        still very limited availability of micro-insurance propositions to the rural population. Index-based
        insurance programs supported by mobile payment systems have already been piloted and there
        is considerable scope for this to be expanded, especially when appropriately subsidised to
        address affordability issues. However, this will require further strengthening of the insurance



                                                  Page 4 of 7
    market, in respect of the implementation of the Insurance Act 2010 and of consumer
    representation, which is underdeveloped but may contribute strongly to improve the public’s
    confidence and help the industry to develop successful propositions also for emerging
    customers.

   There may be opportunities for targeted investments in Ghana,especially the northern part
    more prone to drought, aimed at increasing disaster resilience among vulnerable
    populations.Links could be explored developing governmental plans to expand social welfare
    programsusing market-mediated solutions; for example, the government plans to expand the
    coverage of the Livelihood Empowerment Against Poverty Program (LEAP) by over ten-fold in
    the next three years. These mechanisms could scale up programs against post flood events or
    drought events in the north. Donors could provide technical assistance to the government to
    enable them to integrate insurance instruments into their social welfare programs, which are
    being expanded. Using local insurance capacity to bear some of the risk and develop the
    insurance products could be investigated. Such mechanisms delivered through social welfare
    programs would create a critical mass of policyholders, which could spur the development of a
    more commercial layer of agriculture insurance. Those investments should leverage the
    considerable work already carried out by key donor partners such as GIZ in association with
    Government agencies.

   There is a unique window of opportunity for micro-insurance inSenegal as specific regulation is
    being implemented. This has generated momentum that can significantly grow the outreach of
    insurance but calls for technical and financial support. The most immediate opportunities for
    promising multi stakeholder interventions in Senegal are in agriculture insurance – especially in
    the more resilient deficit areas of Eastern Senegal. Credit linked property microinsurance against
    floods could also be explored.

   Expansion of disaster risk insurance into Tanzaniacould be seen as a second phase of an
    engagement looking to develop these markets in Eastern Africa, with Kenya targeted in the first
    phase. Banking penetration in Tanzania is low, as is insurance and microinsurance penetration,
    even when compared to regional countries. In addition, the insurance industry has struggled in
    recent years with profitability, indicating that insurance technical capacity within the country
    may be limited. Given the comparative advantages of engaging in Kenya, a potential course of
    action would be to use Kenya as a demonstration case in east Africa to spark interest in the
    Government for development of catastrophe and agriculture insurance markets.

   Haiti has world champions of catastrophe insurance at the macro and micro level; the Caribbean
    Catastrophe Insurance Facility (CCRIF), the Micro-insurance Catastrophe Risk Organisation
    (MiCRO), and the Alternative Insurance Company (AIC),Nonetheless, there are various
    opportunities to help scale up the impact they currently have. Social protection has become a
    priority of the government, and can be further strengthened with market-mediated insurance
    mechanisms, like for example cash transfers that increase in amount or outreach based on
    specific populations’ needs approximated by disaster loss indices. Haiti can benefit from a
    growing body of evidence that shows how public private partnerships and the use of insurance
    related principles benefit low income households.

   Vietnam has embraced insurance mechanisms in disaster risk management and agriculture
    more vigorously than most developing countries. But some initiatives like the disaster risk


                                            Page 5 of 7
        reduction (DRR) strategy’s mandate to implement disaster risk insurance are yet to be
        conceived, while others such as the agriculture insurance scheme have been launched but
        experienced unsustainable outcomes and need strengthening. Technical assistance to guide this
        process can have substantial impact, and could include the consolidation of available risk
        modeling and hazard maps and closing major gaps these may have. Appropriate insurance of
        public assets would further strengthen the property insurance sector and justify investment in
        risk models and underwriting expertise that will subsequently be available for businesses and
        households.

Recommendations

1) Country Selection for Phase 2. Based on the preliminary findings of the country notes and follow up
   technical discussions of the expert-level group, it is proposed that the next phase will further narrow
   the focus on the countries that offer the greatest potential for success, yet remain consistent with
   the PCG resilience agenda. To that end, it is recommended that this next phase focus on the
   following countries: Kenya, Bangladesh and Senegal.

2) Agenda and work plan for this initiative. The technical working group has proposed the following
   activities and timeline :
By early 2014—In-depth field assessments: The Political Champions Group will invite the governments
of selected countries to actively participate in a fiscal, market and impact assessment to determine
specific action and investments in order to scale up insurance. This assessment will investigate the fiscal
costs, political and commercial feasibility and potential social impact of scaling up public private
partnership in, for example, agricultural insurance linked with social protection and/or credit. This could
include a national stakeholder workshop, a report on the results of the assessment, and a suggested
roadmap for implementation. Where possible the process would leverage existing complementary
initiatives and efforts.4
By April 2014—Investment plans:Analysis from the assessment and stakeholder consultation will inform
the development of a programme of investment for each country. These will be presented to donors
and private sector partners will take placeby April 2014. The objective of the meeting will be to seek
commitment of political and financial support.
2014 and beyond—Scaling-up implementation: Implementation of mutually agreed market-mediated
disaster risk insurance solutions in these three countries.The solutions will generated in the light of the
findings of the detailed assessments conducted in Phase 2 and the outcome of the meetings with donors
and private sector partners. They could potentially build on the following three areas of support, to be
tailored to each country.These possible activities would aim to create an enabling policy and technical
environment to promote sustainable and affordable market-mediated disaster risk insurance solutions
aims to increase disaster resilience to vulnerable population.
    a. Investments in data risk infrastructure. Coordinated investments in collecting, auditing and
       managing insurance-quality yield, remote sensing, and weather data allows insurance providers
       to design indexed products that offer affordable, reliable protection against large agricultural
       shocks. New datasets would need to be collected and existing data collection processes would

4
  For example, this assessment could build on the ongoing agricultural risk assessments conducted under the G-
8/New Alliance, complementing such an assessment with detailed analysis of agricultural risk financing and
insurance options and the role of the private insurance sector.


                                                  Page 6 of 7
    need to be enhanced or protection is likely to be poorly targeted (high basis risk), slow, and
    either expensive or totally unavailable. If such investments are made, data and indices should
    be used across the continuum from purely social programs which can benefit from risk-based
    prices and responsive, timely, disciplined post-disaster payouts to purely commercial programs,
    which can benefit from improved indices and larger premium volume. For this to be achieved,
    data for insurance indices should be regulated as a public good, available to all market players
    on standard terms.

b. Technical Assistance to domestic insurance market through a technical support unit : Actuarial
   and other specialist expertise can be expensive. An international model used successfully to
   manage this cost would to house such expertise centrally, for example within a Technical
   Support Unit.

c. Investments to support affordable risk financing whilst initial investments in data are being
   made. With the exception of countries which already have a large scale agricultural insurance
   program in place, most developing countries do not currently have the data collection and audit
   processes necessary for such a program. They may collect some yield, weather or satellite data
   but are unlikely to collect and audit it to the standards of international reinsurers. However, in
   the early years of a new program, whilst new or enhanced data collection or audit processes are
   being piloted, reinsurance can be expensive. Moreover, even when a long time series of data is
   available, reinsurance can be expensive for catastrophic events which remain difficult to
   quantify. Such high reinsurance uncertainty loads for risk which cannot be well quantified are
   necessary due to modern approaches to prudential regulation and credit rating for reinsurers.
   This means that high layers of risk (covering low probability events) and elements of coverage
   based on new datasets (designed to reduce basis risk) are typically expensive to reinsure. A risk
   financing fund which provided risk financing on best estimate cost basis to programs investing in
   improved data sources would be a cost-effective way to support development of viable
   products.




                                            Page 7 of 7
