                                                                                                                97962
                                                                                                                   NOTE
                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                   9
Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
The Role of Social Protection
Social protection delivery through community-driven
development platforms: International experience and key
considerations for Myanmar1


                          Social protection schemes can contribute to poverty re‐
                          duction objectives pursued through current community-driven de‐
                          velopment (CDD) platforms in Myanmar by building household and
                          community resilience. In turn, existing CDD platforms provide viable
                          options to promote a transition to government-led social protection
                          delivery. Making infrastructure development more pro-poor and
                          providing communities with an expanded menu of options, includ‐
                          ing social protection schemes, can be a first step in enhancing the
                          poverty reduction potential of CDD platforms.




1.	 This Note was prepared by Mariana Infante-Villarroel (World Bank). Comments and inputs were provided by Philip O’Keefe, Puja
    Vasudeva Dutta, Inge Stokkel, Nikolas Myint, and Khin Aye Yee (World Bank). The team benefited from the collaboration of HelpAge
    International (HAI), ActionAid and the International Organization for Migration (IOM), which kindly shared information about their
    programs. Any comments and questions can be addressed to ainfantevillarro@worldbank.org. The team is grateful to the Ministry
    of Social Welfare, Relief and Resettlement and to the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development for their inputs and
    facilitation of field trips for the entire assessment; and to the Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social Security, the Ministry of
    Finance and the Ministry of National Planning and Economic Development for their inputs and guidance. The team benefited from
    contributions and field support from WFP, ILO, UNOPS-LIFT, SC, HAI, ActionAid, IOM, MDRI, and several UN agencies and NGOs
    throughout the process. The team is grateful to the Rapid Social Response program and its five donors- the Russian Federation,
    Sweden, Norway, the United Kingdom and Australia- for funding this assessment.
2   Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
    The Role of Social Protection
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar                                                   3

1. Introduction

Community-driven development (CDD) models are based on the principle of empowering com-
munities to directly manage efforts such as infrastructure development and service provision.
International experience with CDD approaches shows the potential for these models to finance
and deliver components of social protection provision such as safety nets.

Social protection is an important component of development processes by directly contributing
to inclusive growth and poverty reduction. Social protection systems, policies, and programs help
households and communities build Resilience to risks and shocks;contribute to Equity by prevent‐
ing and alleviating economic and social vulnerabilities; and create Opportunity through building
community assets and helping households access services for a better future. Social protection
helps reduce poverty and increases social cohesion by ensuring poor and vulnerable groups ben‐
efit from economic prosperity.

Although Myanmar has experience with government-led CDD approaches, these have so far not
included social protection components. On the other hand, development partners (DPs) have
delivered social protection schemes through community-based approaches without establishing
linkages with government structures. This note reviews Myanmar’s experience with government-
led CDD models and with DP social protection support through community-based structures; dis‐
cusses the rationale for delivering social protection through CDD platforms based on international
experience; and identifies potential avenues to deliver social protection in Myanmar through ex‐
isting government-led CDD platforms to make these more effective in achieving poverty reduction
and resilience-building.




2. Myanmar experience: CDD Platforms and community-
based social protection models
2.1 Government CDD platforms

The Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development (MLFRD) is actively involved in the
implementation of CDD programs. They are considered important instruments to achieve inclu‐
sive and sustainable rural development through people-centered approaches and ultimately to
help reduce poverty, as stated in the Rural Development Strategic Framework (RDSF). The Mya
Sein Yaung (MSY), also known as Evergreen Village Development Project, and the National Com‐
munity Driven Development Project (NCDDP) are the two main government-led CDD approaches
in Myanmar.2 While both address key development challenges – namely, livelihoods and local in‐
frastructure – neither has yet incorporated explicit social protection schemes in its operations.

2.	 Smaller CDD platforms include the Asian Development Bank’s Enhancing Rural Livelihoods and Incomes Project (US$ 12 million)
    in the Ayeyarwaddy Delta, Dry Zone, Tanintharyi and Shan Plateau. Besides infrastructure development, the project includes vo‐
    cational training components, especially in the Delta and Dry Zone. http://adb.org/projects/details?page=details&proj_id=47311-
    001
4            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection




2.2 Mya Sein Yaung (MSY, 2014-2016)

The MSY has the objective of reducing poverty in rural areas by creating job opportunities,
achieving food security, increasing productivity, and improving the resilience of rural livelihoods
to disasters through village-level revolving funds. The project provides transfers (loans) to vil‐
lages for village-level revolving funds – about MMK 30 million per fund – to finance household
businesses related mainly (depending on local conditions) to solar energy, viable livestock-rearing,
family-owned and viable fishery and farming projects, agricultural business, and other businesses.
The project targets poor villages that have the potential to make profits with the loans, are suit‐
able for livestock-rearing, have rule of law and good behavior, and are enthusiastic and credible in
reimbursing the loan (MLFRD, 2014a)3

The MSY is being rolled out in a phased manner, starting with a first (pilot) phase (April
2014-March 2015) in 1,150 villages across 136 townships and 47 districts, reaching more than
1.8 million beneficiaries with a budget of MMK 34.5 billion. Shan state (nearly MMK 8 billion)
and Ayeyarwaddy (more than MMK 6 billion) are benefiting the most from MSY funds, followed by
Bago (around MMK 3.5 billion), Sagaing (MMK 3 billion) and Magway and Mandalay (around MMK
2.5 billion each)4. MLFRD plans to extend the program to 10,000 more villages in 200 townships to
reach 4.8 million beneficiaries in the 2015-2016 cycle with additional financing (MMK 335.5 bil‐
lion; MLFRD, 2014b).

The implementation structure of the program uses task forces at different levels (union, state/
region, township, and district), although the most critical structures are MSY committees at vil-
lage level. Each is composed of seven respectable villagers (at least 50 percent women), who
should be interested in the village’s welfare, not belong to religious clergy, be financially literate,
own a somewhat sizable business, and have the ability to allocate time for the program’s purposes
(MLFRD, 2014a). MSY village committees are responsible for the administration of the village fund,
authorize loans, calculate interest rates, collect payments, and audit financial statements (ibid.).5

The design of revolving funds such as the MSY typically makes such programs more easily ac-
cessed by the non-poor. The effectiveness and sustainability of revolving fund models are based
on the assumption that households will be able to pay back the loan. This limits the assignment of
loans to better-off households and not to the very poor, who are less likely to have the expertise
and networks to utilize the loan effectively and to be able to pay it back.6 In the case of the MSY,
village committee members are entitled to borrow twice as much from the fund as other villagers
and can pay administrative expenses (e.g. travel expenses) out of the fund (MLFRD, 2014a).7 Land‐
owner and non-poor households thus tend to access larger loans than landless ones under the
scheme,reinforcing the focus on the non-poor.

3.	 Approximately 70 percent of MSY villages are in RDSF priority districts (World Bank staff estimate).
4.	 Discussions with MLFRD.
5.	 Non-governmental organizations (NGOs) will provide technical support in implementation (MLFRD, 2014a).
6.	 Microcredit projects are also difficult to implement in post-conflict contexts since the scheme relies on trust and collective action
    that may be eroded, tends to benefit individuals more than communities in initial rounds (before all community members have
    the chance to benefit), and can have difficulties in balancing the objectives of sustainable microfinance (promote profitable invest‐
    ments) and community empowerment (promote access by the poor) (Strand et al., 2003).
7.	 Fieldwork showed loans to individual households can range between MMK 50,000 and MMK 500,000. Interest rates vary across
    villages, ranging between 0.5 percent and 1.5 percent per month.
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar                                                       5

2.3 National Community Driven Development Project	
    (2012-2021)

The NCDDP (supported by the World Bank) has the objective of delivering key infrastructure and
services through community-block grants. It also aims to build government’s capacity to respond
promptly and effectively to crises or emergencies. The initial phase (2012-2014) had a budget of
MMK 88.5 billion8 and started a gradual rollout in Chin state, Tanintharyi division and Shan state,
aiming to cover 640 village tracts in 15 townships (one in each state/region).

Townships are selected based mainly on poverty criteria in consultation with region/state gov-
ernments. Poverty criteria are complemented by factors such as absence of external funding,
willingness and capability of township authorities to implement the project, peace and stability of
the township, and relative ease of access to and within the township. Region and state govern‐
ments hold consultations with a wide range of stakeholders to apply these criteria in their particu‐
lar contexts and shortlist townships based on local-level knowledge (GoM, 2014).9 All village tracts
in selected townships benefit from the program.

The NCDDP has been rolled out in annual implementation cycles with positive achievements
that have motivated an expansion. During the first implementation cycle in three townships, the
NCDDP financed 357 subprojects aimed at increasing access to and use of basic infrastructure and
services, including rehabilitating and expanding school buildings, health centers, water supplies,
roads, footpaths, jetties, and bridges. Similarly to the MSY, transfers averaged MMK 30 million per
village (MLFRD and World Bank, 2014).The second implementation cycle is currently underway
with additional government and DP resources that translate into more than MMK 453 billion to
expand the project to 40 additional townships, home to approximately 6 million people.10 The
number of grant cycles available to beneficiary communities will increase from three annual cycles
in the original grant design to four cycles. The additional cycle will increase the funds available to
communities to around MMK 39 million, drawing on international evidence that CDD projects in‐
crease in effectiveness over time as communities become more familiar with the approach.

Government roles are found at union, region/state, township, and, critically, village tract and
village levels.11 Village tracts are the main planning and supporting unit at community level. Vil‐
lage Tract Project Support Committees (VTPSC) are responsible for consolidating and submitting
proposed projects made up of subprojects put forward by villages and village tracts. MLFRD’s De‐
partment of Rural Development (DRD) along with township authorities verifies that the proposed
infrastructure subprojects do not duplicate existing government efforts. A finance subcommittee
is formed at the village tract level to manage the block grants and village support committees un‐

8.	 USD 86.3 million, USD 80 million International Development Association (IDA) grant and USD 6.3 million from government funds.
    Exchange rate = 1,025.50.
9.	 More information on targeting in Myanmar can be found in the Note on ‘Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar’.
10.	 Additional resources include additional government funds, USD 300 million from an IDA grant, a USD 20 million concessional loan
     from the government of Italy and a grant of approximately USD 11 million from the Japan Trust for Social Development to enhance
     key elements of the project, including capacity-building for community facilitation and further development of social accountabil‐
     ity mechanisms.
11.	 More information on government roles in the NCDDP can be found in the Note on ‘Institutional landscape for implementation and
     financing of social protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar’.
6            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



dertake subproject implementation, along with other subcommittees for monitoring and procure‐
ment. Support is envisaged in the near future through a finance clerk in each village as project
tasks are challenging and time-consuming for committee members.

Building capacity of local-level structures, particularly township and village tracts, to undertake
program operations effectively will be an important challenge in future implementation cycles.
In light of the ongoing expansion of the program and the underlying objective of strengthening
government-led service delivery at local level through program implementation, the current de‐
sign of the program sets aside resources for specific capacity-building activities at union and town‐
ship levels, which can also finance additional technical support at lower levels (e.g. village clerks).

The ongoing expansion of the program offers opportunities to explore areas where the program
can be complemented to address poverty reduction more comprehensively. For instance, the
expansion will test the adequacy of strategies and procedures for engagement and risk manage‐
ment in areas affected by conflict, as well as the flexibility of the model to foster partnerships on
key complementary issues of interest for communities (e.g. on livelihoods, income security, and
social services). Lastly, the NCDDP has a component on emergency contingency support (e.g. rap‐
id response to disasters). This has not been used yet but options for resilience-building and emer‐
gency support could already be identified and articulated in current program operations.




3. Current experience with social protection schemes
   delivered through community-based approaches12

DPs have been actively involved in the implementation of social protection schemes as part of
community-based approaches. The Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT) has been the
main sponsor of community-based models, which often include the provision of social protection
to particular groups within communities. Annex 1 includes a list of social protection schemes de‐
livered through DP-led community-based approaches in Myanmar.

Livelihood support features strongly in DP-led schemes, although access to services is also en-
couraged. Help Age International (HAI) supports in-kind and cash transfers (CTs) for productive
investments (partial loans) in Mandalay and Sagaing. ActionAid supports vulnerable women in
communities in Magwe through cash-for-training and micro loans for productive investments, al‐
though a more innovative feature of this model is the way it links women to government services
such as ID provision, health care, and business development. Lastly, the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) has supported contributory and non-contributory health emergency funds in
Ayeyarwaddy.




12.	 This Note refers to ‘DP-led community based approaches’ given the diverse range of DP-led initiatives that have communities as
     main beneficiaries but that may not strictly follow the definition of CDD models.
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar                                                      7
Evidence on the impact of social protection schemes delivered through community-based mod-
els is scarce. Some of these schemes (e.g. ActionAid) are new so evidence on impact is not yet
available. Impact evaluations for the other two schemes in Annex 1 have not been conducted.13
Other schemes used in Myanmar and supported mostly by LIFT include community-based infra‐
structure development (with less emphasis on social protection than on infrastructure develop‐
ment objectives)14 and rice and paddy banks. Emerging models that could bring future lessons
include business development grants with extensive technical support in vulnerable communities
in Rakhine, implemented by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).




4. Social protection provision through CDD platforms
   in Myanmar : a way to enhance pro-poor results

Expanding the scope and reach of current CDD programs is a sensible step towards achieving
poverty reduction in Myanmar. Discussions during the Third Myanmar Development Cooperation
Forum acknowledged the importance and achievements of the MSY and NCDDP, but also the need
to clearly identify progress in poverty reduction and exploit even further community-based ap‐
proaches as poverty reduction tools. Against a backdrop of low productivity in agriculture, over‐
reliance on single crop income, an underdeveloped manufacturing and services sector, and sharp
regional disparities, there is potential to further reduce poverty through enhanced CDD platforms
and overall rural development.

Social protection provision through CDD platforms can help Myanmar identify opportunities to
strengthen its poverty reduction agenda. Selecting the more effective schemes based on Myan‐
mar’s needs and institutional capacity and taking advantage of existing delivery platforms can
complement current government efforts on poverty reduction through the MSY and NCDDP.

Conversely, embedding social protection schemes as part of CDD platforms in Myanmar can be
an appropriate option for social protection implementation. Current experience with govern‐
ment CDD models can facilitate the gradual transition from DP-led social protection provision to a
more sustainable government-led system. This gradual transition would need a) significant efforts
to build government capacity, especially at local levels, through a learning-by-doing approach on
roles of government and non-government actors, as well as enhancing coordination across local
stakeholders; b) overcoming current perceptions of communities vis-à-vis government in many
places (e.g. conflict-affected communities); and c) providing models that can help overcome po‐
litical economy issues in Myanmar. On the latter, large-scale national social protection programs,
which are often the preferred option for ‘quick wins’, make raising a budget difficult and imply
dealing with large-scale initial operational issues that can derail even a good program. Scaling-
back if the model is not found to be very effective would be hard. In addition, designing national
programs is challenging given the diversity of needs and priorities across Myanmar.

13.	 An evaluation of livelihood changes in areas where LIFT-supported programs are implemented (e.g. the HAI scheme) is available al‐
     though it does not cover the impact of specific programs. The IOM scheme was evaluated in terms of its operational performance,
     as shown in Annex 2.
14.	 See Noteon ‘The experience of public works programs in Myanmar’ for more information on PWPs in the country.
8            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



From that perspective, a platform like the NCDDP could become more effective in achieving
poverty reduction and community empowerment by strengthening the emphasis on pro-poor
investments in infrastructure development, as well as by using an expanded menu of options
that includes social protection interventions. The NCDDP already generates important employ‐
ment opportunities for local communities, with 80 percent of assets built directly by communities
(instead of contractors). Modifying the guidelines for infrastructure development to prioritize pro-
poor infrastructure (see Box 1) through labor-intensive approaches that prioritize the poorest can
maximize the amount of resources that reach the poor directly.15 A menu of interventions beyond
infrastructure development delivered through the NCDDP can also help address a wider set of is‐
sues that the poor face, such as access to social services (see next section for a potential menu). A
pro-poor emphasis can also make project resources reach more directly priority groups such as
women, children, and migrants, which may benefit less directly from traditional infrastructure-
oriented approaches. In addition, the effort made by the program to meaningfully include women
in project committees presents an opportunity to achieve gender-sensitive community choices as
part of an expanded menu.

  Box 1: Preference targeting - options for increasing the pro-poor focus of CDD platforms

  Preference targeting (Van Domelen, 2007) refers to the need for CDD programs to successfully incor‐
  porate the poor into planning processes in order to enhance pro-poor results, given that certain in‐
  vestments and schemes tend to be more pro-poor than others. Preference targeting is mostly, though
  not exclusively, relevant to infrastructure development projects. For instance, basic sanitation and in‐
  frastructure for social service delivery reaches more poor households than do complex infrastructure
  development such as sewage systems. Making sure the poor can meaningfully influence the type of
  projects chosen and pro-poor options are available on project menus can enhance pro-poor results
  through preference targeting.

  Besides infrastructure projects, preference targeting could also be encouraged in the selection of so‐
  cial protection schemes out of a menu of options. Social protection schemes such as CTs to vulnerable
  groups can be more pro-poor than more complex and costly contributory schemes such as community-
  based health insurance (CBHI) (Batthamishra and Barrett, 2008).

  Preference targeting can be an important complementary targeting mechanism to reach the poor
  through CDD platforms. The targeting success of Argentina’s Trabajar program (Phase II; see Annex 2),
  where 85 percent of the beneficiaries fell in the bottom 20 percent of the income distribution, was
  achieved through a combination of geographic targeting, wages that promoted self-targeting of the
  poor, and preference targeting by encouraging pro-poor infrastructure (potable water and social infra‐
  structure, both labor-intensive and disproportionately benefiting the poor).




15.	An example of practices that can be changed to maximize income support to the poor comes from LIFT-supported public works
    programs (PWPs) in the Dry Zone. Households with ox-carts were paid higher wages as their contribution to rapid completion of
    infrastructure was higher. However, if the emphasis of PWPs shifts to providing protection to poor households, this practice may
    need to change (e.g. better-off households with ox-carts are not encouraged to participate and poor households with no assets are
    prioritized).
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar                      9

5. Potential modalities to incorporate social protection
   schemes in CDD platforms

Several social protection programs may be suitable to meet the needs of the rural poor. Labor-
intensive public works programs (PWPs) can simultaneously provide the infrastructure communi‐
ties need and generate income for local vulnerable and income-insecure households. Cash and
in-kind transfers (e.g. food transfers) can help vulnerable households (e.g. the elderly and those
unable to work) meet their needs.

Social protection schemes as part of CDD models include those that support individuals and
communities manage risk and shocks, protect them from poverty and destitution, help them
access services, and build skills and assets for a better future. There are three broad project areas
that have been financed by CDD models and that include social protection schemes, as shown in
Figure 1: income security, access to social services, and community-based social insurance.




Figure 1: Social protection schemes as part of CDD platforms




Source: Adapted from Da Silva and Sum (2008).
10            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
              The Role of Social Protection



A focus on the poorest and most vulnerable along a selection of the simplest schemes can be a
good starting point to narrow down options for Myanmar. Annex 2 shows four international ex‐
amples of social protection provision through CDD platforms, in Argentina, India, Indonesia, and
Tanzania. These and other models have achieved a wide array of social outcomes and provide
important lessons that can be useful for Myanmar. Priority should be given to schemes that capi‐
talize on opportunities to make infrastructure development more pro-poor, support access to ser‐
vices by the poor and vulnerable, and build social cohesion and community resilience. Within
these, schemes with relatively simple operational considerations, like those with which Myanmar
is familiar or that make identifying beneficiaries easy, can facilitate implementation.

  Box 2: Public works programs and cash transfers

  PWPs, also known as workfare or labor-intensive rural works programs, can serve two objectives: cre‐
  ation of jobs for needy workers and creation and maintenance of small-scale community infrastructure.
  These programs provide temporary employment at low wages, mainly to unskilled workers in rural
  areas. Such temporary employment during the slack season or during crisis will typically contribute
  to consumption-smoothing and poverty alleviation. Public works can also be used to promote social
  cohesion; schemes are now present in 94 countries. CTs provide assistance in the form of cash or near-
  cash instruments (vouchers) to poor and vulnerable households to satisfy consumption needs, allow for
  more risk-taking in productive activities, and invest in human capital development. While the number of
  countries with in-kind social assistance programs such as school-feeding remains stable, CTs are becom‐
  ing increasingly popular. CTs can be unconditional or conditional, depending on the specific objectives,
  administrative capacity for monitoring conditions, and supply of education and health services. UCTs
  or CTs with soft conditions (e.g. encouragement of behavior rather than full enforcement) can be more
  appropriate in contexts with evolving administrative capacity or with limited availability of services that
  can constrain compliance with conditions. CCTs are now present in 64 countries, more than double the
  27 in 2008. In the past year, new information has become available for 11 countries with UCTs, totaling
  130 worldwide.

  Sources: Fiszbein et al. (2011); Subbarao et al. (2013); Fiszbein et al. (2011); (World Bank, 2015).




5.1 Strengthening the emphasis on pro-poor investments
in infrastructure development

Myanmar CDD platforms could explore the possibility of delivering basic community infrastruc-
ture through labor-intensive PWPs in order to provide a safety net for income and food insecure
households.16 PWPs can simultaneously provide the infrastructure communities need and gener‐
ate income for local vulnerable and income-insecure households through labor-intensive practices
(see Box 2).

An important step to maximize the benefits of PWPs in platforms such as the NCDDP is to ex-
plore feasible modifications to guidelines for infrastructure development to prioritize pro-poor
infrastructure. Given the public-good nature of assets developed through CDD approaches, addi‐

16.	Information on PWPs in Myanmar and further elaboration of some recommendations on PWPs can be found in the Note on ‘The
    experience of public works programs in Myanmar’.
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar                                               11

 tional elements embedded in program design can help make these projects more pro-poor. Op‐
 tions of feasible projects can be expanded to facilitate ‘preference targeting’ through assets that
 benefit the poor more directly in specific contexts (see Box 1).

 Another potential modification to infrastructure development is to promote labor-intensive ap-
 proaches that prioritize the poor through community-based targeting.17 This can help maximize
 the direct benefits (e.g. through wages) from local infrastructure development to the poor in local
 communities and would be aligned with operational demands of current platforms like the NCDDP
 where understanding local labor markets is needed. LIFT has implemented PWPs through commu‐
 nity-based structures that can provide interesting lessons in light of implementation through gov‐
 ernment systems and the need to balance objectives of asset creation and employment genera‐
 tion.18




 5.2 Incentivizing utilization of social services and improv-
 ing human development outcomes

 CDD programs can encourage access to services by giving communities flexibility on how to ad-
 dress access constraints. For instance, Indonesia’s PNPM Generasi (see Annex 2) gives communi‐
 ties options and discretion (with the help of trained facilitators) to choose schemes that can better
 help households invest in health and education. Schemes chosen include scholarships, uniforms
 and textbooks, transport costs to schools and health facilities, and nutrition services for children
 and pregnant women, among others. PNPM Generasi has significantly increased growth monitor‐
 ing and school enrollment and attendance, and has significantly decreased malnutrition, with the
 strongest effects in worse-off areas.19

 Several instruments can be considered when designing a menu of options that encourages ac-
 cess to services by the poor. Cash and in-kind transfers can help vulnerable households in the
 community (e.g. the elderly and those unable to work) meet their needs. Social services such as
 immunization, nutrition, and sanitation campaigns as well as legal support for conflict resolution
 (e.g. protection of migrant workers) can support vulnerable groups in communities (e.g. children
 and the elderly).

 Operationally simple options such as unconditional cash transfers (UCTs) for vulnerable groups20
 and community-based care can be considered in an initial phase. In addition to supporting infra‐
 structure development, CTs can support particularly vulnerable groups such as the poor elderly,

 17.	 See the Note on ‘Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar’ for more details on how community-based targeting is being
      implemented in Myanmar. The World Food Programme (WFP) has some experience with this type of beneficiary identification in
      its asset creation programs.
 18.	 See the Note on ‘The experience of public works programs in Myanmar’ for more information on PWPs in the country.
 19.	 http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/2012/07/04/pnpm-generasi-program-final-impact-evaluation-report
 20.	 Information on CTs in Myanmar can be found in the Note on ‘The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar’.
12              Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                The Role of Social Protection



people with disabilities, and people living with chronic illness. There is a wealth of international
examples of community-based care services for vulnerable groups such as older people, people
living with disabilities, and female-headed households.21 The Ministry of Social Welfare, Relief
and Resettlement has started a pilot program for older people self-help groups, with support from
HAI. Linkages with this structure could be established if possible, but working through existing
informal arrangements or DP-led community-based initiatives can also be pursued in a first stage.

Additional medium-term interventions to facilitate access to social services can pursue both the
establishment of linkages with government agencies for service delivery and the contracting of
service delivery provision to fill remaining delivery gaps. Models such as the ActionAid one (see
Annex 1) that explicitly bring in government officers (mainly from township level) to share infor‐
mation and provide services (ID, health and education campaigns) could be replicated as part of a
CDD platform. India’s self-help groups (SHGs) (see Annex 2) build on community mobilization to
demand government services, including social protection. When services are unavailable through
government agencies, communities could identify alternative providers (e.g. non-governmental
organizations (NGOs) and DPs. For instance, adapting models such as World Food Programme
(WFP) school-feeding and nutrition programs to be delivered through CDD platforms can benefit
food-insecure communities and help promote access to education.22




5.3 Promoting social cohesion and building community re-
silience23

Social protection schemes can help respond to post-conflict needs as part of CDD platforms.
PWPs can help with reconciliation efforts by including ex-combatants and ethnic minorities in
community development efforts. These approaches have brought positive results in countries like
Liberia and Sierra Leone.24 Implementing these schemes as part of CDD platforms can help address
the need for quick results against a backdrop of weak institutional capacity in post-conflict areas.
Other services needed in post-conflict contexts can also be delivered as part of CDD platforms,
such as legal services for returning migrants and displaced populations (Strand et al., 2013).

Community empowerment can be reinforced by social protection schemes, particularly benefit-
ing vulnerable groups. Besides planning process around infrastructure development, schemes for
community mobilization through SHGs have been found to have significant positive effects on fe‐
male empowerment in India, even among non-participants (Deininger and Liu, 2009).25 Action‐
Aid’s model (see Annex 1) aims to further empower vulnerable women in the Dry Zone by going

21.	 See, for example, Voluntary Home Care in Sri Lanka, the Home and Community-Based Care Program in Korea, Grameen Vikas
     Santhsa in Uttar Pradesh, India, and Hogares Comunitarios in Colombia.
22.	 See Andrews et al. (2011) for more on school-feeding delivered through CDD platforms in Togo.
23.	 More information on disaster risk management (DRM) and social protection can be found in the Note on ‘Social protection for
     disaster risk management: Opportunities for Myanmar’.
24.	 See Andrews and Kryeziu (2013) for more information on PWPs and social cohesion.
25.	 Economic empowerment is measured based on the ability of a woman to set aside money for her own use, go to the market, to the
     clinic or the community center, visit friends, or work on fields outsides the village, without asking permission from her husband or
     other males in the family.
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar                                                 13
 beyond economic vulnerabilities to support access to services, community mobilization, and ca‐
 pacity-building.

 Social protection can complement the potential of CDD platforms to build community and
 household resilience. Schemes such as CTs and PWPs can support household economic recovery
 in times of crises. They provide a mechanism to deliver cash to households, which can be readily
 available to support disaster response, enable households to recover faster, and reduce the long-
 term economic impact of disasters on households and communities. Disaster response has been
 enhanced and accelerated by the existence of household-level transfers and SHGs in India and
 Tanzania, where droughts and macroeconomic crises have challenged governments’ response
 (see Annex 2). In these contexts, existing social protection schemes as part of CDD models have
 served to channel resources, identify beneficiaries, and ultimately deliver response programs
 timely and effectively, resulting in less severe impacts on the nutritional status of communities in
 the case of India (Deininger and Liu, 2009). PWPs can also promote resilience by building hazard-
 proof infrastructure and by enabling quick response and recovery activities after disasters, such as
 debris removal and community reconstruction.26




 6. Opporunities and challenges for social protection
    provision as part of CDD platforms

 CDD platforms bring several advantages to social protection provision in contexts where service
 delivery systems are still evolving. First, CDD platforms maximize effectiveness by taking advan‐
 tage of having first-hand information on the goods and services communities need, as well as on
 households and groups in need of assistance. This can potentially translate into relevant schemes,
 targeting efficiency, and program ownership. Second, CDD platforms can help weak local govern‐
 ments transition to a more responsive service-delivery approach, as participatory planning and
 budgeting around social services help local governments get familiar with social protection needs
 of communities, available mechanisms to respond to these needs, and their potential roles in de‐
 livering those services. Lastly, the existence of strong community-based mechanisms for risk man‐
 agement can support the deployment of central-level responses to crises (Deninger and Liu,
 2009).27

 However, measures to mitigate risks associated with weak institutional capacity and elite cap-
 ture are needed. Elite capture and the creation of structures parallel to local governments are
 both common risks in CDD approaches, and Myanmar is no exception. Elite capture can be a sig‐
 nificant risk for social protection delivery since schemes intended to reach the poor and vulnera‐

 26.	 Additional examples can be found in the Note on ‘Social protection for disaster risk management: Opportunities for Myanmar’. For
      example, following the Pakistan earthquake, the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund was able to set up disaster relief centers and
      provide support in 2,000 communities within one day and USD 220 million in CTs was delivered to households. Indonesia’s PNPM
      Mandiri CDD program was used to provide UCTs to the poorest and most affected households as part of response and recovery
      efforts after the 2004 tsunami in Aceh and other disaster events between 2005 and 2010. The CDD program accelerated commu‐
      nity economic recovery with funds spent locally to purchase replacement goods. It also provided employment opportunities by
      clearing rubble and rebuilding community infrastructure through cash for work programs.
 27.	 See also the Note on ‘Social protection for disaster risk management: Opportunities for Myanmar’.
14          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



ble can fail to do so if the poor are excluded from decision-making processes in the first place. CDD
platforms can also create parallel structures to those of local governments, which can undermine
the sustainability and scalability of schemes, particularly if local government stakeholders are not
sufficiently involved in program activities. Despite the privileged information communities pos‐
sess, clear program guidelines and sufficient community facilitation of decision-making processes
are needed for schemes to be able to reach target groups and strengthen, rather than replace,
government structures in the process.




7. Recommendations: Social protection a short-term
   option for expansion of CDD platforms

Sustainable and government-led PWPs and CTs can be powerful instruments for social protec-
tion and poverty reduction in Myanmar; exploring them through a CDD platform can be the
most appropriate vehicle to promote a transition towards government-led social protection
provision. CDD platforms can address some of the key outstanding questions regarding imple‐
mentation of PWPs and CTs in Myanmar: how to balance objectives of asset creation and employ‐
ment generation in PWP implementation and how to test household-based CTs with relatively
simple design and implementation arrangements, in order to complement efforts on community
development. Basic care for vulnerable groups could be part of a more comprehensive menu of
social protection schemes, in addition to cash-based interventions. From this perspective, the fol‐
lowing can be feasible social protection options to explore operationally in Myanmar in a first
stage.
•	 Strengthening the emphasis on pro-poor investments and resilience-building in infrastruc-
   ture development: Features of PWPs such as labor-intensive approaches and encouraging the
   participation of the poor through community-based targeting can be promoted in order to
   provide a safety net for income- and food-insecure households. Pro-poor infrastructure can be
   encouraged through active participation of poor households in community decision-making
   process and a pro-poor menu of projects (preference targeting). Incorporating these features
   can also support community resilience-building, provide a mechanism to channel resources
   for household support in time of crises, and become a vehicle to further support social cohe‐
   sion in post-conflict contexts.
•	 Expanding the menu of options to include selected social protection interventions: Interven‐
   tions beyond infrastructure development can also help address a wider set of issues that the
   poor face, such as access to social services. Examples could include:
   o	 UCTs for vulnerable groups: In addition to supporting infrastructure development, CTs can
      support particularly vulnerable groups such as the poor elderly, people with disabilities,
      and people living with chronic illness.
   o	 Community-based care for vulnerable groups: Linkages with existing informal arrange‐
      ments and SHGs can help identify the services vulnerable groups most need in communi‐
      ties.
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar                                                     15
 As CDD platforms stand today in Myanmar, the NCDDP appears technically more viable to test
 social protection schemes in the short term than the MSY or any DP-led platform. First, the prin‐
 ciple of community grants – as opposed to loans – that underpins the program allows for explora‐
 tion of a wider range of social protection schemes and takes the pressure off of choosing only
 profitable options. Second, enhancing the pro-poor focus of the local infrastructure created
 through the NCDDP requires relatively minor adjustments to the existing model, making it simpler
 to operationalize, at least in communities that have already experienced the first implementation
 cycle. Third, components of the NCDDP such as community facilitation, administrative support,
 emergency response mechanisms, and institutional capacity development can facilitate the im‐
 plementation of social protection implementation functions – such as beneficiary identification
 and payments – in low-capacity settings while minimizing the risk of developing parallel structures
 that undermine sustainability or exacerbating elite capture. The NCDDP has also served as a viable
 platform to pool resources from DPs, decreasing the risk of fragmentation. Lastly, the time envis‐
 aged for project implementation (until 2021) allows enough space to test the effectiveness of de‐
 livering social protection schemes through CDD platforms in Myanmar and provide government
 with lessons for an eventual scale up, if effective.

 DPs involved in social protection provision could support government in gathering lessons from
 their implementation experience and providing technical advice in particular stages of program
 design and implementation.28 DPs like LIFT and its partner NGOs have a wealth of experience in
 implementing community-based models in Myanmar. Advising design phases and supporting gov‐
 ernment with particular functions of service delivery such as community mobilization and com‐
 munication can contribute to strengthening government’s capacity to implement social protection
 programs.




   28.	 Additional information on potential roles of DPs in specific delivery functions of social protection provision can be found in the
        Note on ‘Note on ‘Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social protection programs’.
16          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



References


Andrews, C. and Kryeziu, A. (2013) ‘Public Works and the Jobs Agenda: Pathways for Social Cohe‐
sion?’ Background Paper for the World Development Report 2013.

Andrews, C., Galliano, E., Turk, C., and Zampaglione, G. (2011) ‘Social Safety Nets in Fragile States:
A Community-Based School Feeding Program in Togo’. Social Protection and Labor, SP Discussion
Paper 1117. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Berra, C. (2010) ‘Temporary Employment: Lessons Learned’. PowerPoint presentation. Buenos Ai‐
res: Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social Security.

Bhattamishra, R. and Barrett, C.B. (2008) ‘Community-Based Risk Management Arrangements: An
Overview and Implications for Social Fund Programs’. Social Protection and Labor, SP Discussion
Paper 0830. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Da Silva, S. and Sum, J.W. (2008) ‘Social Funds as an Instrument of Social Protection: An Analysis of
Lending Trends’. Social Protection and Labor, SP Discussion Paper 0809. Washington, DC: World
Bank.

Deininger K. and Liu, Y. (2009) ‘Economic and Social Impacts of Self-Help Groups in India’. Policy
Research Working Paper 4884. Washington, DC: Development Research Group Sustainable Rural
and Urban Development Team, World Bank.

Fiszbein, A., Schady, N. et al. (2011) ‘Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Past and Present Pov‐
erty’. Washington, DC: World Bank.

GoM (Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar) (2014) ‘National Community Driven
Development Project: Operations Manual’. Naypyidaw: GoM.

MLFRD (Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development) (2014a) ‘Evergreen Village Devel‐
opment Project Operations Manual’. Naypyidaw: MLFRD.

MLFRD (Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development) (2014b) ‘Evergreen Village Devel‐
opment Project Document’. 30 April. Naypyidaw: MLFRD.

MLFRD (Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development) and World Bank (2014) ‘Myan‐
mar National Community Driven Development Project: Helping Communities Help Themselves’.
Naypyidaw: MLFRD and World Bank.

Strand, A., Toje, H., Jerve, A.M., and Samset, I. (2003) ‘Community Driven Development in Con‐
texts of Conflict’. Report for ESSD, World Bank.

Subbarao, K., del Ninno, C., Andrews, C., and Rodríguez-Alas, C. (2013) ‘Public Works as a Safety
Net: Design, Evidence and Implementation’. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar                  17
 Van Domelen, J. (2007) ‘Reaching the Poor and Vulnerable: Targeting Strategies for Social Funds
 and Other Community-Driven Programs’. Social Protection and Labor, SP Discussion Paper 0711.
 Washington, DC: World Bank.

 World Bank (1998) ‘Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Loan in the Amount of US$284
 Million to the Argentine Republic for a Third Social Protection Project (Trabajar Program). Buenos
 Aires: World Bank.

 World Bank (2009) ‘Additional Financing for Tanzania Second Social Action Fund (TASAF II)’. Project
 Information Document. Dar es Salaam: World Bank.

 World Bank (2012a) ‘PNPM Generasi Final Evaluation Report’. Jakarta: World Bank.

 World Bank (2012b) ‘Implementation Completion and Results Report on a Credit in the Amount of
 XDR 219.60 Million (US$333.87 Million Equivalent) to the Republic of India for an Andhra Pradesh
 Rural Poverty Reduction Project’. New Delhi: World Bank.

 World Bank (2013) ‘Implementation Status & Results:  Tanzania Second Social Action Fund
 (P085786)’. Dar es Salaam: World Bank.

 World Bank (2015) ‘The State of Social Safety Nets’. Washington, DC: World Bank.
18             Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
               The Role of Social Protection




Annex 1:

Examples social protection schemes delivered through
community-based approaches in Mynmar

                          HAI – LIFT-supported              ActionAid – LIFT-supported*          IOM
Name                      Reducing Economic Vulner‐         Socio Economic Development           Village Health Funding Mecha‐
                          ability through an Equitable      Network for Regional Develop‐        nism (2010-2013)
                          Inclusive Approach to Liveli‐     ment (2013-2016)
                          hood (2011-2014)
Main objective            Improve livelihoods and           Contribute to social and             Increase access to maternal
                          reduce vulnerability of food-     economic development of              and child health services by
                          insecure households in Dry        vulnerable families in Magwe         communities affected by
                          Zone                              region                               Cyclone Nargis (2008)
Description/              Community-based transfers to      Provision of cash-for-training       Three funds per village: a)
emphasis                  establish a revolving fund to     and facilitating access to           revolving fund to finance
                          finance community develop‐        services through a referral sys‐     health emergencies in vil‐
                          ment activities. Social protec-   tem for poor and vulnerable          lages by means of loans;
                          tion components (analyzed         women. Promotion of women            b) non-contributory health
                          subsequently): livelihood         support groups through soft          emergency referral fund
                          in-kind transfers for poor        loans after training                 for pregnant women and
                          and vulnerable households.                                             young children and subsidies
                          Cash and in-kind assistance                                            to health workers to reach
                          to vulnerable people (elderly,                                         remote areas (financed by
                          disabled, children)                                                    interests from revolving fund)
                                                                                                 (social protection component
                                                                                                 analyzed subsequently); and
                                                                                                 c) development fund (financed
                                                                                                 by interests from revolving
                                                                                                 fund)
Geographical scope        15 villages in Ma Hlaing town‐    40 villages in Myaing and            60 villages in Myawlamyine‐
                          ship (Mandalay region) and 15     Pakokku townships, Magwe             gyun township (Ayeyarwaddy
                          villages in Ayadaw township       region                               region)
                          (Sagaing region)
Target population         Entire villages for develop‐      2,500 poor and vulnerable            Pregnant women and children
                          ment activities. Poor and         women with children                  particularly poor and in hard‐
                          vulnerable households for                                              to‐reach areas
                          livelihood transfers
Targeting criteria        • 	Geographic: not clear          • 	 Geographic: villages with        • 	 Geographic: township af‐
                          •	 Categorical: elderly,              high levels of poverty, exist‐       fected by Cyclone Nargis
                             disabled, women-headed             ing LIFT–Adventist Develop‐      •	 Categorical: pregnant
                             households                         ment and Relief Agency              women and children
                                                                support such as ‘trained
                          •	 Poverty: use of Economic           youth fellows’ and Village
                             Vulnerable Score (3 levels         Development Committees
                             of poverty beneficiaries           (VDCs), good relations with
                             belong to Level 1), verified       government authorities,
                             by communities                     potential for commercial‐
                                                                ization of goods in Bagan
                                                                touristic area
                                                            •	 Categorical: poor and
                                                               vulnerable women with
                                                               children
                                                            •	 Poverty: as determined by
                                                               VDCs
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar                                               19

                                 HAI – LIFT-supported             ActionAid – LIFT-supported*     IOM
  No. of beneficiaries           Between 50% and 75% of vil‐      200 women so far                About 300,000 people had
                                 lagers are categorized as poor                                   access to these funds
                                 and benefit from transfers
  Benefit levels                 In-kind provision of inputs:     USD 30/month/trainee            About USD 8 to subsidize
                                 cash equivalent of USD 125                                       transport costs
                                 per vulnerable household to
                                 start livelihood activities
  Frequency of payments          One time only                    Monthly for 3-4 months while    As needed
                                                                  training
  Conditions                     Repayment of 25% of transfer     Attending training              Access health service
                                 after 9 months
  Budget                         About MMK 30 million per         -                               -
                                 village fund (loan)
  Role of government in imple-   •	 Township: coordination        Over 50 state service provid‐   Implementation has been
  mentation                         with project implementa‐      ers are part of the referral    handed over to local stake‐
                                    tion teams and township       network (e.g. GAD, MOE, Min‐    holders but there is no clarity
                                    authorities for service       istry of Immigration, NATALA,   yet on roles of government
                                    provision                     MOH, MRRSW, Ministry of
                                 •	 Village: none. Village ad‐    Commerce, etc.)
                                    ministrators excluded from
                                    project-established VDCs to
                                    ensure vulnerable groups
                                    are part of the VDCs

  Impact                         -                                -                               An evaluation was done on
                                                                                                  fund status, not on outcomes
                                                                                                  on beneficiaries. Findings: a)
                                                                                                  funds have disappeared in
                                                                                                  some villages; b) meetings and
                                                                                                  activities regarding fund man‐
                                                                                                  agement are more frequent
                                                                                                  than those on health-related
                                                                                                  activities (e.g. referrals)
                                                                                                  although villages where funds
                                                                                                  still exist carry out more refer‐
                                                                                                  ral activities than those where
                                                                                                  funds no longer exist; c) refer‐
                                                                                                  ral fund could extend to other
                                                                                                  emergencies if contribution to
                                                                                                  this fund is established

 Note : * Although not exactly a CDD model, this approach illustrates how linkages with government structures can be
 encouraged through non-government-implemented programs.
20            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
              The Role of Social Protection




Annex 2:

International examples off social protection delivery
through CDD platforms
                    Tanzania – Tanzania So-     Indonesia – PNPM         India – Districts Poverty      Argentina – Trabajar
                    cial Action Fund (TASAF)    Generasi                 Initiatives Project (DPIP)     (Phases I, II, III; 1997-
                    (Phase II, 2004-2013)                                (2000-2003), and Rural         2001)
                                                                         Poverty Reduction Project
                                                                         (RPIP) (2003-2011)
Main objective      Improve access of           Address three lagging    Socioeconomic empower‐         Improve living standards
                    beneficiary households      Millennium Develop‐      ment of women by promot‐       of communities through
                    to enhanced socioeco‐       ment Goals: Maternal     ing and strengthening SHGs     execution of infrastruc‐
                    nomic services and          Health, Child Health,                                   ture projects with high
                    income-generating op‐       and Universal Educa‐                                    social value that provide
                    portunities                 tion                                                    work to unemployed
                                                                                                        workers

Budget              USD 176 million (Nation‐    USD 44 million from      DPIP: USD 110 million;         Phase II: USD 1,200
                    al Village Fund (NVF))      government (2012)        RPRP: USD 150 million          million
                                                plus USD 28 million                                     Phase II: USD 1,077
                                                from DPs for expansion                                  million
                                                (2011-2012)
Description and     The NVF provides a          Incentivized com‐        DPIP: existing SHGs were en‐   Implementation of PWPs
social protection   mechanism that allows       munity block grant       couraged to convert to the     by local governments,
emphasis            local and village govern‐   program that builds      program-promoted SHGs,         NGOs and civil society.
                    ments to provide social     on the architecture      which means a) inclusion of    Average project cost
                    protection schemes          of government’s CDD      poor and vulnerable women      USD 100,000, employing
                    demanded by commu‐          program, the National    (e.g. from excluded castes)    about 20 workers. Labor
                    nities. These schemes       Community Empower‐       previously excluded from       intensity of 60%. Project
                    include NVF-financed        ment Program in Rural    SHGs); b) viable economic      duration 4.5 months. A
                    PWPs and CTS, grants        Areas (PNPM Rural).      opportunities identified by    positive menu of options
                    for income-generating       The program uses a       community facilitators; c)     is provided. Types of
                    activities, and improved    facilitated commu‐       savings and loans for busi‐    projects include potable
                    service delivery and        nity decision-making     ness development; d) food      water, sewerage, latrines,
                    infrastructure              process to allocate      transfers under the public     housing, roads, urban
                                                block grant funds to     distribution scheme; e) in-    works, irrigation, schools,
                                                target 12 health and     kind credit for food; and f)   health centers, and other
                                                education indicators.    insurance                      community social infra‐
                                                Communities work         RPRP: similar to DPIP but      structure. A pilot within
                                                with facilitators and    with greater emphasis on       Phase III encouraged
                                                health and education     the poorest and aiming at      pro-poor investments
                                                service providers to     convergence with govern‐       by giving additional
                                                improve access to        ment schemes and institu‐      resources for non-wage
                                                and use of health and    tional structures              costs. These projects
                                                education services.                                     satisfied the following
                                                Average block grants                                    criteria: a) located in one
                                                total approximately                                     of the 300 municipali‐
                                                USD 12,000 village/                                     ties in which the share
                                                year. Subsequent fund‐                                  of the population with
                                                ing is partly informed                                  unsatisfied basic needs
                                                by performance on the                                   is over 40%; b) fall into
                                                12 indicators                                           the category of either
                                                                                                        potable water or social
                                                                                                        infrastructure (includ‐
                                                                                                        ing education, health,
                                                                                                        and sanitary facilities for
                                                                                                        those and other com‐
                                                                                                        munity infrastructure);
                                                                                                        and c) cost no more than
                                                                                                        USD 35,000
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar                                                    21

                          Tanzania – Tanzania         Indonesia – PNPM            India – Districts Pov-     Argentina – Trabajar
                          Social Action Fund          Generasi                    erty Initiatives Project   (Phases I, II, III; 1997-
                          (TASAF) (Phase II, 2004-                                (DPIP) (2000-2003),        2001)
                          2013)                                                   and Rural Poverty Re-
                                                                                  duction Project (RPIP)
                                                                                  (2003-2011)
  Geographical scope      All of Tanzania’s 11,000    8 provinces, 290            DPIP covers six poorest    National program; 85%
                          villages (Phase I tar‐      kecamatan, and 2,892        districts in Andhra        of municipalities
                          geted 40 poor villages)     villages                    Pradesh RPRP aimed
                                                                                  to cover the remaining
                                                                                  districts of the state
  Target Population       Poor households in          Communities with poor       Women, particularly        Poor unemployed and
                          food-insecure and/          results on maternal and     poor, vulnerable, and      unskilled over 18 years
                          or remote communi‐          child health and educa‐     previously excluded        old, in poor areas
                          ties, vulnerable groups     tion. Vulnerable groups     from SHGs
                          (people living with HIV/    most benefiting from
                          AIDS or disabilities,       the program are poor
                          orphans, elderly)           women and children
  Targeting criteria      Rural villages prepare      Geographical: prov‐         •	 Geographic: Andhra      Geographic: addi‐
                          project proposal, for       inces of West Java, East       Pradesh (6 poorest      tional incentives for
                          which funding is allocat‐   Java, North Sulawesi,          districts initially)    investments in poorest
                          ed based on population      Gorontalo, East Nusa        •	 Categorical: women      areas (pilot Phase III).
                          and poverty data            Tenggara, West Nusa                                    Self-targeting through
                                                      Tenggara, Maluku,           •	 Means-testing:          low wage. Additional
                                                      and West Sulawesi to           government’s ‘below     pro-poor focus through
                                                      target high levels of          poverty line’ Census    financing pro-poor
                                                      malnutrition and severe        information             infrastructure
                                                      malnutrition                •	 Community-based:
                                                                                     participatory iden‐
                                                                                     tification of poor
                                                                                     complemented
                                                                                     quantitative means-
                                                                                     testing indicators
                                                                                     with criteria such as
                                                                                     social exclusion and
                                                                                     vulnerability
  No. of beneficiaries    20.2 million, 54%           3,630,818 (approxi‐         11.3 million households    700,000 jobs created.
                          women                       mately 1,835,100 of         mobilized into 1 million   26,453 projects com‐
                                                      whom are women)             SHGs                       pleted (72% of those
                                                                                                             initiated)
  Role of government in   Village governments         In addition to the          Line agencies are using    Ministry of Labor,
  implementation          support implementa‐         Ministry of National        Village Organizations      Employment and
                          tion at local level and     Development Planning,       (VOs) (associations of     Social Security manages
                          district-level officers     the Coordinating Minis‐     SHGs at village level)     program through its
                          compile and submit          try for People’s Welfare,   as effective service       central, regional, and
                          proposals. A central of‐    and the Ministry of         delivery agents. VOs are   provincial structures:
                          fice approves proposals     Finance                     entry points for govern‐   preparation of positive
                          and disburses funding                                   ment programs such         list of projects, al‐
                                                                                  as PWPs (Mahatma           location of provincial
                                                                                  Gandhi National Rural      resources based on
                                                                                  Employment Guarantee       poverty, unemployment
                                                                                  Scheme, food support)      and implementation
                                                                                                             performance data.
                                                                                                             Municipalities and
                                                                                                             local organizations can
                                                                                                             propose subprojects to
                                                                                                             be financed
22             Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
               The Role of Social Protection




                           Tanzania – Tanzania         Indonesia – PNPM           India – Districts Pov-       Argentina – Trabajar
                           Social Action Fund          Generasi                   erty Initiatives Project     (Phases I, II, III;
                           (TASAF) (Phase II,                                     (DPIP) (2000-2003),          1997-2001)
                           2004-2013)                                             and Rural Poverty Re-
                                                                                  duction Project (RPIP)
                                                                                  (2003-2011)
 Impact                    •	 22,850,497 person-       Significantly increased    DPIP: greater par‐           Trabajar II and III
                              days of temporary        growth monitoring          ticipation of women          successfully reached
                              employment               and school enrollment      in political activities of   the poor: 85% of ben‐
                              provided by PWP,         and attendance, and        communities; economic        eficiaries fell into the
                              increased meals          significantly decreased    empowerment; higher          bottom 20% of income
                              per day, increase in     malnutrition, with         consumption and bet‐         distribution. Forgone
                              household assets         strongest effects in       ter nutritional status       income was, however,
                              such as poultry,         worse-off areas: en‐       among members of             considerable (about
                              goats, and pigs, and     abled over 1.6 million     SHGs                         half of what was earned
                              increased household      women and children         RPRP: increased income       through the program).
                              consumption              to receive nutrition       and asset accumula‐          Female participation
                           •	 Flexible design al‐      counseling and support;    tion for poor member         was low (15%) though
                              lowed rapid scale-up     assisted over 1 million    households, poverty          without gender dispari‐
                              to respond to 2008-      children under the age     reduction, livelihood        ties in income. Satisfac‐
                              2010 financial, fuel,    of 5 to obtain Vitamin A   diversification, higher      tion with infrastructure
                              and food crises to       supplements; ensured       school enrollment            projects was high
                              reach the vulnerable     over 770,000 pregnant      among girls
                              poor with PWPs,          women received iron
                              platform to pilot the    supplements; helped
                              community-based          over 365,000 children
                              conditional CT that      receive immuniza‐
                              was the foundation       tions; eliminated over
                              (along with TASAF’s      185,000 cases of
                              lessons) of Tanzania’s   underweight children;
                              Social Safety Net        provided training and
                              Program launched in      operational support to
                              2012                     over 59,000 commu‐
                                                       nity health volunteers;
                                                       enabled 556,000 poor
                                                       primary and junior
                                                       secondary students
                                                       to obtain textbooks;
                                                       provided assistance to
                                                       approximately 382,000
                                                       poor primary and junior
                                                       secondary students in
                                                       the form of scholar‐
                                                       ships, transportation
                                                       money, and uniforms;
                                                       and engaged women in
                                                       basic health and educa‐
                                                       tion service planning
                                                       and decision-making
                                                       processes – on average
                                                       67% of participants in
                                                       program socialization,
                                                       planning, and monitor‐
                                                       ing meetings were
                                                       women



Source: Tanzania – World Bank (2009, 2013); Indonesia – World Bank (2012a); India – Deininger and Liu (2009), World Bank (2012b);
Argentina – Berra (2010), World Bank (1998)
Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms:
                International experience and key considerations for Myanmar   23
24          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection




              'Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms: International
              experience and key considerations for Myanmar' is the ninth note in the series Building
              Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar: the Role of Social Protection. All notes are
              available at www.worldbank.org/myanmar.




                                 Myanmar Social Protection Notes Series

                                 The note – ‘Building resilience, equity, and opportunity in Myanmar: The role
                                 of social protection’ – provides an overview of the technical notes in the se‐
                                 ries. These include:

                                 1.	 Risks and vulnerabilities along the lifecycle: Role for social protection in
                                      Myanmar
                                 2.	 Framework for the development of social protection systems: Lessons
                                      from international experience
                                 3.	 Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar
                                 4.	 The experience of public works programs in Myanmar: Lessons from a
                                      social protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                 5.	 The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                      protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                 6.	 Social protection for disaster risk management: Opportunities for
                                      Myanmar
                                 7.	 Strengthening social security provision in Myanmar
                                 8.	 Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
                                      protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                                 9.	 Social protection delivery through community-driven development
                                      platforms: International experience and key considerations for Myanmar
                                 10.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable: Key considerations in designing
                                      targeting systems
                                 11.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                      protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                 12.	 Developing scalable and transparent benefit payment systems in
                                      Myanmar




World Bank Office Yangon
57 Pyay Road, Corner of Shwe Hinthar Road,
6 1/2 Mile, Hlaing Township, Yangon
Republic of the Union of Myanmar. Tel: +95 1 654824
www.worldbank.org/myanmar
www.facebook.com/WorldBankMyanmar
