                                                                                                                 97964
                                                                                                                NOTE
                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                  11
Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
The Role of Social Protection
Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar: Lessons from
a social protection and poverty reduction perspective1



                          Several government and development partner pro-
                          grams employ different approaches to ensure the inclusion of poor
                          and vulnerable areas and people in Myanmar’s development. Build-
                          ing on this experience, this Note aims to identify feasible options to
                          effectively reach these groups, as government programs expand.
                          Depending on program-specific choices about geographic focus and
                          individual/household eligibility, identifying poor and vulnerable ar-
                          eas and people in Myanmar can become more evidence-based, ef-
                          fective, and systematic, as better data become available and admin-
                          istrative systems develop. While targeting is currently done by
                          individual programs, there can be important economies of scale in
                          sharing and developing these systems in a coordinated manner so
                          as to support multiple programs.




1.	 This Note was prepared by Puja Vasudeva Dutta and Yuko Okamura (World Bank), with inputs from Mariana Infante-Villarroel, Inge
    Stokkel, Philip O’Keefe, Christian Bodewig, Nikolas Myint, and Khin Aye Yee (World Bank). It draws on information received from
    the World Food Programme (WFP), the Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund (LIFT), Save the Children (SC), and other partners.
    Any comments and questions can be addressed to pdutta@worldbank.org. The team is grateful to the Ministry of Social Welfare,
    Relief and Resettlement and to the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and Rural Development for their inputs and facilitation of field
    trips for the entire assessment; and to the Ministry of Labor, Employment and Social Security the Ministry of Finance and the
    Ministry of National Planning and Economic Development for their inputs and guidance. The team benefited from contributions
    and field support from WFP, ILO, UNOPS-LIFT, SC, HAI, ActionAid, IOM, MDRI, and several UN agencies and NGOs throughout the
    process.The team is grateful to the Rapid Social Response program and its five donors the Russian Federation, Sweden, Norway,
    the United Kingdom and Australia for funding this assessment.
2   Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
    The Role of Social Protection
                                     Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar:
                 Lessons from a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                              3

1. Overview

Inclusive growth in Myanmar will require focused support to the poor and vulnerable to enable
them to better manage the opportunities and risks arising from the growth process and ongoing
reforms. Developing an effective mechanism is a complex and sometimes costly task, but one that
can contribute to improving the quality and poverty impact of social protection programs and
social services.

With increasing government investments in social service delivery and rural development there
is now an increased focus on the poor and vulnerable. This is manifested in the introduction of
programs to ease financial constraints in accessing health, nutrition, and education services and
community-based programs to deliver local infrastructure to underdeveloped areas. In addition,
although the system for inter-government fiscal transfers between the union and states and re-
gions is still evolving, some transfers are starting to incorporate need-based criteria (see World
Bank, 2015). For instance, in its first phase (2012-2014), the Poverty Reduction Fund (PRF) trans-
ferred an equal amount of MMK 1 billion as an unconditional block grant to regional and state
governments. In 2014-2015, additional criteria related to poverty and conflict were introduced.2

In particular, achieving Myanmar’s goals of ‘education for all’ and universal health coverage will
require a combination of quality service provision and well-designed targeted programs to en-
sure equitable and affordable access to services. For example, the government is trying to in-
crease the coverage and quality of public schools. At the same time, programs to increase enroll-
ment and decrease dropouts have been introduced, including a primary school stipends program
(for all primary school students) and a pilot stipends program for additional financial support to
enable poor children.

There is considerable experience within Myanmar on how to prioritize specific geographic areas
and, in many cases, specific groups. This Note reviews the various approaches currently used in
Myanmar by government and non-government actors to prioritize poor and vulnerable areas and
people (see Annex 1 for a brief description of selected programs). A companion Note summarizes
the key considerations underlying these choices.3 The aim is to draw lessons from this rich experi-
ence and identify feasible options for reaching the poor and vulnerable through large-scale na-
tional government programs.




2. Identifying poor and vulnerable areas
Both government and DP programs rely on geographic targeting to prioritize program and fund-
ing allocation. The criteria used have some commonalities but also notable differences. Some of
the differences in approach are rooted in the nature of programs and benefits or services deliv-

2.	 Rakhine and Kachin received MMK 15 billion, Shan MMK 4 billion, and Kayin MMK 2 billion; other states/regions continue to re-
    ceive the original amount (MMK 1 billion). See Note on ‘Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social protec-
    tion programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar’.
3.	 See companion Note on ‘Reaching the poor and vulnerable: Key considerations in designing targeting systems’.
4            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



ered, while others reflect the diversity of implementing agencies and challenges of coordinating
approaches across programs.

Development partner (DP) programs have typically focused resources in specific geographic ar-
eas, as these emerged primarily as emergency and disaster responses. For instance, cash and/or
food transfers have focused on areas affected by conflict and disasters, such as the Delta in the
aftermath of Cyclones Nargis and Giri and the camps for internally displaced people (IDP) in Kachin.
In addition, agreements between the government and DPs have limited the scope of interventions
to predetermined boundaries, constraining scope for expansion and leading to some areas being
underserved (Saha, 2011).4

In DP programs with a more development focus, priority areas are typically identified based on
food and income insecurity and infrastructure needs. The two largest financiers of social assis-
tance in Myanmar –the World Food Programme (WFP) and the Livelihoods and Food Security
Trust Fund (LIFT) - rely on pre-specified criteria, with some fine-tuning based on local context and
cultural practices (see Annex 1).5 LIFT-supported cash for work (CFW) programs select villages
based on estimated local infrastructure needs (assessed as part of overall regional development
as well as post-disaster recovery). WFP uses food security monitoring data for its cash and food for
work (C/FFW) and school-feeding programs in the Border States and the Dry Zone. Villages are
selected based on village profiles that include food security and livelihood data, as well as on con-
sultations with village tract and village leaders. Several other DPs also conduct their own assess-
ments to identify priority areas, based on their particular focus.6 However, there are also cases of
more opportunistic selection, particularly with some smaller organizations focusing their inter-
ventions in areas with existing active networks.

Government programs promoting people-centered community development focus on specific
communities in rural areas. At the policy level,the Rural Development Strategic Framework (RDSF)
identifies 28 priority districts (and priority townships within these districts) for comprehensive
rural development. The selection is based on the share and number of poor people in the district,7
combined with considerations of operational feasibility for setting up a township fund for rural
development (DRD, 2014a). In principle, the RDSF priority districts are expected to form the basis
for the interventions included under this framework. In practice, programs such as the Depart-
ment of Rural Development’s (DRD’s) Mya Sein Yaung (MSY; also known as Evergreen Village De-
velopment Program) and the National Community Driven Development Project (NCDDP) incorpo-
rate considerations of program-specific objectives as well as political and operational feasibility.8
For instance, the MSY identifies a longer list of 47 priority districts, with local authorities factoring
in four criteria: feasibility to implement livestock farming, security, buy-in from villagers, and vil-

4.	 There were some exceptions with greater flexibility, such as WFP’s cash and food for work programs in border areas and the Inter-
    national Labour Organization’s (ILO’s) public employment program in Tanintharyi.
5.	 WFP and LIFT are among the largest financiers of social assistance in Myanmar, with total expenditure and coverage significantly
    higher than those of government (see Note on ‘Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar’).
6.	 For example, World Vision conducts its own assessment, based on poverty-related indicators, agreement with government, acces-
    sibility, and security to determine its program areas every three years (World Vision Myanmar, 2014). SC has conducted cost of diet
    and household income assessments in its areas of operation.
7.	 The poverty data are estimates from the Integrated Household Living Conditions Survey (IHLCS), with likely large standard errors
    at the district and township levels.
8.	 The NCDDP aims to deliver key infrastructure and services. The MSY is a revolving fund to support livelihood and income genera-
    tion activities. See Note on ‘Social protection delivery through community-driven development platforms: International experi-
    ence and key considerations for Myanmar’ for details.
                                     Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar:
                 Lessons from a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                                5
lage-level poverty.9 The NCDDP predates the RDSF and selects priority townships based on socio-
economic indicators that serve as proxies of poverty as well as level of infrastructure develop-
ment.

Recently introduced government pilot programs that promote access to health and education
also employ geographic targeting as a first step in the selection of program beneficiaries. Al-
though there is little coordination across these programs in terms of design of the targeting tool
or selection process, most use poverty criteria in combination with program-specific criteria of
deprivation and operational feasibility. For instance, the Ministry of Education’s (MOE’s) pilot sti-
pends program, launched in 2014, is operational in a selected number of poor townships (and
selected schools) with low education performance.10 In 2012, the Ministry of Health (MOH) intro-
duced a pilot maternal and child health voucher scheme (MCHVS) in Bago region, focusing on
townships with low access to health services. Besides these initiatives to address barriers to utili-
zation, the government has also introduced initiatives to improve the supply of education and
health services in disadvantaged areas (see Box 1).

  Box 1: Targeted social service delivery in remote areas

  In ensuring education for all and moving towards universal health coverage, the government is making
  additional efforts to support service delivery in disadvantaged and remote areas. For instance, the Min-
  istry of Home Affairs identifies 90 townships in 10 states/regions as ‘hardship townships’; government
  officials (including health and education workers) assigned to these townships receive additional hard-
  ship allowances. This is expected to incentivize skilled professionals to serve in these areas, contribut-
  ing to better health and education services for the resident population. However, it is not clear what
  criteria, beyond accessibility, are used to identify these townships. Note that accessibility also seems
  unevenly applied, given that the list includes one township in Yangon (GoM, 2014).



Acknowledging data constraints, the pilot stipends program and NCDDP combine an evidence-
based approach with local consultations to priority townships. In the first step, these programs
compile available socioeconomic data for all townships from the Myanmar Information Manage-
ment Unit (MIMU) database (see Section 4). This includes socioeconomic indicators that serve as
proxies of poverty and other criteria that are relevant for the specific program objectives (such as
infrastructure in the case of the NCDDP and enrollment in the case of stipends). The second step
involves consultations with local authorities, ethnic groups, civil society groups, non-governmen-
tal organizations (NGOs), and community-based organizations (CBOs) at the state/region level to
identify the top five priority townships. During these consultations, participants review the rank-
ings based on the socioeconomic data and apply additional considerations of operational feasibil-
ity (including capacity, peace and stability, accessibility) and equity (i.e. absence or limited other
sources of external assistance).




9.	 There is a great deal of overlap: approximately 70 percent of MSY villages are in RDSF priority districts, with the remaining 30
    percent located in other, non-priority districts (DRD, 2014a, 2014b).
10.	 Note that the Ministry of Education also has a national stipend program (2009/10 to date) that covers all 330 townships in the
     country, albeit at a small scale in terms of number of beneficiaries.
6            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection




3. Identifying poor and vulnerable people

Several government and DP programs further refine eligibility at the household and/or individ-
ual level, using a range of different tools. As discussed in the companion Note on global experi-
ence,11 the choice to provide benefits to specific individuals/households and the methods used to
identify them are typically linked to overall program objectives, patterns of poverty, vulnerability
and exclusion, social norms and gender dynamics, and political, fiscal and administrative feasibil-
ity. In Myanmar, the following types of social protection programs provide benefits targeted to
households and individuals a) those designed to reduce barriers to utilization of health, nutrition,
and education services and b) those that specifically address issues of food or income insecurity
and poverty.

The first set of programs – that is, those designed to promote equitable access to social services
– tend to focus on specific groups that lack the resources to participate or might otherwise be
excluded. Both such government and DP programs rely on geographic targeting as a first step, and
follow two distinct approaches in identifying individual beneficiaries.

DP programs tend to identify broad groups (i.e. categorical targeting) in the selected areas. For
instance, the WFP school-feeding program provides school meals to all children in selected schools.
SC’s maternal and child health conditional cash transfer (CCT) includes all eligible women (preg-
nant women and mothers of children under 12 months) in targeted villages in Rakhine.12

In contrast, the two government pilot programs – stipends and the MCHVS –overlay categorical
targeting with additional poverty and vulnerability criteria. The stipends program uses a simpli-
fied poverty scorecard with a set of indicators that are strongly correlated with poverty (see Box
2). The next step is community validation of the beneficiary lists, managed by the school commit-
tee. The MCHVS, on the other hand, prioritizes poor pregnant women who have not been at-
tended by skilled professionals at delivery. Selection is on the basis of inclusion and exclusion cri-
teria, using information on income, assets, and sources of support collected by the program
implementers. Although village leaders attest poverty status, there does not appear to be broader
community validation (MOH et al., 2014).

The differences in the two approaches reflect the trade-off between the number of people that
can be covered in each community and the number of communities that can be covered, given
a fixed budget and level of benefits. The rationale for categorical targeting in the DP programs
was that incidence of poverty and malnutrition in selected villages was very high, making the ad-
ministrative and social costs of targeting poor children within a school or poor women within a
community unacceptably high. However, this meant focusing on a smaller number of schools or
villages in order to cover all eligible children or women, respectively. Meanwhile, both the govern-
ment programs –stipends and the MCHVS –are in the pilot phase, with the intention of scaling up
nation-wide. Thus, these programs chose to cover only the poorest and most vulnerable children
and women, but with the potential to expand to a larger number of areas. In the long run, as fiscal


11.	 See Note on ‘Reaching the poor and vulnerable: Key considerations in designing targeting systems’.
12.	 The WFP program selects villages with high levels of malnutrition and poverty and schools with low attendance and high dropout
     rates in the selected villages. The SC program selects villages based on food insecurity, accessibility, and poor feeding practices.
                                     Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar:
                 Lessons from a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                              7

  Box 2: Reaching poor and vulnerable students in the stipends pilot program

  MOE’s stipends pilot program uses a three-stage process, combining the geographic targeting of town-
  ships and schools with individual-based assessment.

  First, townships are ranked using socioeconomic indicators that serve as proxies of poverty and poor
  education performance (measured as low enrollment rates). Consultations with state and regional
  stakeholders are used to identify the top five priority townships. In the first year of implementation of
  the pilot program, accessibility was also considered to allow close monitoring.

  Second, schools are selected based on measures of poverty and low education performance. In the
  first year, administrative data on dropout rates was used. However, concerns regarding data quality and
  reporting incentives led to a revised approach in the second year. Schools are now selected on the basis
  of a composite measure of 10 school and community indicators, such as share of students who have no
  uniform or uniform in bad condition, share of students who occasionally miss school, share of families
  that have only one family member working for the minimum or a low wage, etc. Township committees
  validate and finalize school selection and allocation of quota to each school.

  Third, in selected schools, children in need of financial assistance to continue schooling are selected
  using a simplified and modified poverty score. Parents and teachers are required to fill out a two-page
  application form with indicators such as mother’s educational level, ownership of car/motorbike/other
  assets, housing characteristics, breadwinner’s job status, affordability of school appliances and uniform,
  and community-specific indicators. The poverty scorecard model was first developed for UNDP’s liveli-
  hood and social cohesion program and is based on 2010 IHLCS household survey data (Schreiner, 2012).
  Then, school committees (that includes parents, village leaders, and school officials) check the initial
  ranking based on poverty score and finalize the student selection.
  Source: MOE, 2014 and 2015, SC, 2015


space expands and data and implementation capacity constraints ease, these choices can be revis-
ited. However, it is likely that political imperatives will encourage expansion to more areas cover-
ing at least all states and regions, not just those most in need. As a result, fiscal constraints will
continue to reinforce this trade-off.13

The second set of social protection programs – that is, programs that address food insecurity
and poverty -typically employ community-based targeting to identify those most in need of as-
sistance. However, approaches vary in terms of the level of local discretion employed. For in-
stance, in the wealth ranking approach in several LIFT-funded CFW and other social protection
programs, communities have full discretion: they define what it means to be poor and group
households accordingly. The community consultations in the WFP C/FFW and TatLan CFW pro-
gram and unconditional cash transfers (UCTs) for labor-poor households follow a more guided
approach, with communities grouping households as per predefined criteria but with some flexi-
bility to adapt to local conditions. Still others, like the HelpAge International (HAI) older persons
self-help group model, use an economic vulnerability survey to score households and validate the
list of vulnerable households through community meetings (see Annex 1). In all these cases, inten-
sive facilitation is required to mobilize community members for these discussions and mecha-

13.	 If all Grade 1-11 students (8 million) were to be provided stipends at the current level of benefits, an estimated budget of MMK
     500 billion would be required. The budget in 2014 was MMK 3 billion; even with the doubling to MMK 7 billion in 2015, the cur-
     rent outlay is only about 1.5 percent of the estimated total.
8            Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
             The Role of Social Protection



nisms are set up (e.g. quotas in committees) to overcome cultural barriers to women’s participa-
tion in decision-making processes.

In the case of C/FFW programs, self-targeting is also used in some cases. In practice, the choice
of targeting tool (i.e. poverty targeting through community consultations or self-targeting) often
depends on whether the program’s primary objective is to create local infrastructure for the entire
community or to provide income support to poor and vulnerable households.

LIFT-supported CFW programs are part of an overall community development framework, and
as such emphasize rapid creation of local infrastructure over employment generation for the
poor. As a result, field assessments indicate that beneficiary households are not always selected
using wealth ranking. Instead, individuals have often self-selected into the program (LIFT, 2012,
2013a, 2013b). This is in fact consistent with the global experience of such programs, with the
program design (i.e. the work requirement and wage level) typically encouraging greater partici-
pation among the poor and discouraging the non-poor (Subbarao et al., 2013). However, when
underemployment and vulnerability is high (as in Myanmar’s Dry Zone and Delta), the program
may not be able to accommodate the demand for employment on these projects and people may
either be turned away or offered fewer days of work. This process may or may not be pro-poor
depending on program implementation arrangements and local context.14

The WFP C/FFW programs, on the other hand, have the primary objective of addressing food
insecurity and vulnerability and rely mostly on community-based targeting to identify program
beneficiaries. However, these programs also allow individuals to self-select into the program in
two cases. One, in some areas, this reflects the local cultural practice whereby the whole commu-
nity feels a responsibility to contribute to building village infrastructure (see Section 4). Two, in
areas where vulnerability is high, community-based selection (thereby ensuring participation by
the poorest) is supplemented by self-targeting to allow the near-poor to participate and benefit
from the program (WFP, 2013).




4. Currrent challenges and emerging opportunities
4.1 Better data to understand the patterns of poverty, vul-
nerability and exclusion

At present, the selection of priority areas and people is significantly constrained by the limited
and poor quality data available. Data on spatial mapping of poverty, vulnerability, or other social
indicators (such as gender disaggregated data on prevalence of school dropouts, malnutrition,
etc.) are weak, and more recent household surveys are required to develop eligibility criteria at
the household or individual level. Some organizations have conducted their own assessments in

14.	 For instance, there is some evidence that, in order to speed up project completion, some communities have employed labor-
     displacing machines – reducing total employment generated – or paid higher wages to households with greater potential contribu-
     tion to the rapid completion of infrastructure (e.g. households with ox-carts) but that may not necessarily be the poorest or most
     vulnerable (LIFT, 2013b). See also Note on ‘The experience of public works programs in Myanmar’.
                                    Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar:
                Lessons from a social protection and poverty reduction perspective              9
order to determine their program areas and design targeting tools,15 but,with the two exceptions
noted below, these tend to be quite small as there is little incentive to cover areas where the or-
ganizations cannot operate as per the agreements with government.

Two current initiatives provide important lessons for developing a national information base for
more informed geographic targeting. First, MIMU provides a data depository that compiles near-
ly 200 indicators for all 330 townships. These include official administrative and household survey
data in 12 sectors, including agriculture, climate, demography, economy, education, environment,
health, information and communication, nutrition, protection, transportation, and gender.16 Sec-
ond, the Food Security Information Network (FSIN), which has 30 members (UN agencies, NGOs,
and CBOs), conducts a standardized food security assessment in the townships in which they are
active. Data on food security indicators and commodity prices are collected three times a year for
50 townships in six states/regions.17 Although geographic coverage is low, the FSIN is an interest-
ing example of a multi-agency collaboration to establish a coordinated food security monitoring
system, with an emphasis on standardization and coordination in data collection, knowledge-shar-
ing, and establishing links between central decision-makers and local expertise.

Data constraints in Myanmar are changing rapidly, providing opportunities to employ more rig-
orous tools for identifying poor areas and poor people. The government of Myanmar is making
concerted efforts to strengthen its statistical capacity and the quality of its administrative data.
New sources of information will become available soon with data from the 2014 Population Cen-
sus and the most recent nationally representative household survey, the Myanmar Poverty and
Living Conditions Survey (MPLCS), due to become available in late 2015. National food security
assessments by the DRD are also currently underway, with support from WFP. These new data
sources will provide highly disaggregated estimates of food insecurity, poverty, and other key indi-
cators, at the state, district and township level.

These initiatives can provide the basis for a national information base, managed by govern-
ment, that can serve multiple programs with respect to selection of priority areas. The disag-
gregated information from administrative statistics from MIMU and field monitoring data from
the FSIN can be gradually updated as disaggregated information from the 2014 Population Census,
household surveys, and food security assessments becomes available. In addition, by combining
the census data with the household survey data using small area estimate techniques can gener-
ate poverty maps with disaggregated poverty data by 2016.

With the availability of more recent household survey data in coming months, rigorous poverty
and vulnerability analysis can suggest which groups are most at risk in order to better inform
categorical and poverty targeting. It can also improve the quality of the targeting tools. For in-
stance, the current poverty scorecard developed by the UN Development Programme (UNDP) is
relatively simple and the indicators (and associated weights) are derived from the 2010 Integrated
Household Living Conditions Survey (IHLCS) data. As a result, there is scope to fine-tune and refine
eligibility criteria with the forthcoming 2015 household survey.




16.	 See http://www.themimu.info/
17.	 See http://www.fsinmyanmar.net/
10          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection




4.2 Better understanding of perceptions of targeted 		
support and considerations in conflict-affected areas

Communities that have received some external assistance are likely to be more familiar with the
emphasis on the poor and vulnerable. In the Dry Zone and Delta, where communities are rela-
tively homogenous (at least in terms of presence of internal migrants), where social trust is rela-
tively high, and where there is some sustained exposure to external assistance, informal mecha-
nisms for targeted support seem to be more acceptable and widespread. Many villages in LIFT
project areas reported instances of community mobilization to provide assistance to community
members who experienced serious illness or injury or faced other emergencies. There are also
several examples of mechanisms to support the poor and vulnerable (especially old people) or
promoting access to education and health for poor children, through either the monastery system
or other village organizations in these regions (Enlightened Myanmar Research and World Bank,
2015; Thu and Griffiths, 2012).

External assistance also usually results in gender-sensitive program implementation structures
at the village level that can facilitate collective action to support vulnerable groups. For instance,
NGOs have supported several villages in the Delta to establish a rice bank for use in times of need.
In ActionAid/Thadar Consortium villages, where there was an emphasis on capacity-building and
awareness-raising, these rice bank committees introduced a system to donate one tin of rice on
every withdrawal from the bank; this donated rice is passed on to persons with disabilities and
older people (LIFT,2013a). Women, older people and direct beneficiaries of these schemes often
belong to program committees where they can voice their needs.

The nature and duration of assistance can play a role in the acceptability of targeted support.
For instance, the experience of the WFP C/FFW programs in the Border States and Dry Zone indi-
cates that, while some communities are comfortable with targeting households for C/FFW pro-
grams, other communities feel all households need to contribute to building village infrastructure.
This has implications for the choice of the targeting tool, as described in Section 3. Similarly, the
experience of targeted food and cash support to IDPs in camps in Kachin suggests duration of sup-
port also plays a role. For instance, there are some cases where IDP camps offer profitable liveli-
hood strategies (e.g. amber trading) and residents are arguably better off than many families in
the host communities. Host communities then question the rationale of supporting IDPs for more
than three years while they receive little extra support to cope with over-demand of available so-
cial services (WFP, 2014).

Conflict-affected areas where non-state actors (NSAs) are actively providing services can gener-
ate dynamics that influence the way identifying poor areas and poor people is perceived. Target-
ing areas where NSAs are active for government programs can generate tension unless programs
explicitly promote cooperation between government and NSA structures. For instance programs
in areas where ethnic grievances exist, such as Shan and Kayin, can exacerbate grievances if pro-
grams are perceived as an expansion of government control in the area rather than as an oppor-
tunity to build partnership between the state and local service providers (Jolliffe, 2014). Assets
and services provided without NSA collaboration can be seen as less legitimate by communities
and risk not being used. On the other hand, programs that promote equal access to services and
that (indirectly) benefit ethnic minorities can be appropriate in areas where NSAs are active. For
                                  Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar:
              Lessons from a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                                  11

instance, the Mon National Education (MNE) system has partnered with MoE to coordinate MNE
and MoE systems, benefitting ethnic Mon secondary school graduates who have studied in Mon
language (with Burmese as second language) and who can have official high-school diplomas.




4.3	 Insights for developing targeting systems for
	    large-scale government programs

Most programs in Myanmar have employed geographic targeting to focus resources in selected
areas; many also select specific households and individuals using categorical targeting and/or
poverty targeting. In scaling up government programs, these choices for beneficiary selection will
need to take into account the trade-off between the number of people that can be covered in each
community and the number of communities that can be covered, given a fixed budget and level of
benefits.18 A combination of geographic targeting and some form of household targeting will con-
tinue to be needed for government social protection programs.

In identifying the poor and vulnerable, most DP programs rely on community-based targeting,
with varying levels of discretion. This experience provides some insights that are particularly rel-
evant in the context of transition to large-scale government programs. In particular, while local
information might correctly identify specific groups or households and individuals at the commu-
nity level and lead to greater ownership and accountability, these methods are process- and re-
source-intensive. The following operational considerations for scaling-up emerge:19

•	 Building on existing community structures. As noted above, communities with relatively high
   social trust and some sustained exposure to external assistance are more likely to develop in-
   formal mechanisms for targeted support and to accept targeted government support. This can
   be strengthened by ongoing efforts to build the capacity of communities for collective action
   as well as of government officials in working with communities.20

•	 Ensuring participatory and inclusive decision-making, particularly in the context of access to
   benefits. Within communities, there is some evidence that some groups are more likely to be
   excluded from village social structures and basic services. These include, for example, in-mi-
   grants, people of different ethnicities, and others who may face stigma or exclusion such as
   divorced or separated women (Enlightened Myanmar Research and World Bank, 2015). This
   poses the need for careful facilitation by well-trained facilitators, as well as measures to miti-
   gate the risk of elite capture and exclusion.21 This also has implications for the definition of

18.	 For instance, if all grade 1-11 students (8 million) were to be provided stipends at the current level of benefits, an estimated budget
     of MMK 500 billion would be required. The budget in 2014 was MMK 3 billion; even with the doubling to MMK 7 billion in 2015,
     the current outlay is only about 1.5 percent of this estimate.
19.	 See also del Ninno and Mills (2015) and Leite (2014) for the experience of community-based targeting in several African countries.
20.	 For instance, ActionAid has trained 700 youth leaders in selected villages in all states/regions (except Shan and Chin) in community
     mobilization and planning, with an emphasis on establishing linkages with local governments.
21.	 For instance, risk mitigation in LIFT’s community-based development projects includes internal and external monitoring of activi-
     ties; use of public forums and active encouragement of women’s participation; and use of manuals, village development plans, and
     other public tools to reduce local discretion (LIFT, 2013b).
12              Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                The Role of Social Protection



     community structures responsible for identifying priority households and individuals. For
     greater transparency, the entire community, rather than a committee of selected individuals,
     should be involved. However, this is operationally challenging and costly (LIFT, 2013b; SC,
     2013a).

•	 Linking with government fiscal and administrative structures. These methods capture rela-
   tive rather than absolute poverty within communities, making comparability across space
   problematic. The use of predefined criteria addresses this issue to some extent. However, for
   government programs, this ‘bottom-up’ identification of the poor and vulnerable needs to be
   aligned with ‘top-down’ allocations of fiscal resources across communities and with govern-
   ment delivery systems.

Given the operational challenges in using community-based targeting at scale, large-scale gov-
ernment programs will likely need to explore alternative options that facilitate comparability
across communities. This is possible by using standardized criteria and tools to assess household
poverty status and generate an initial beneficiary list, followed by community validation. Though
the local knowledge of communities continues to inform beneficiary selection, the role changes to
supplementary validation of the primary household targeting method.

In this context, the experience of targeting poor and vulnerable people in the government’s
stipends and MCHVS pilot programs highlights the importance of good design and careful imple-
mentation, building on existing norms and community structures. The following findings emerge:

•	 The poverty scorecard method used in the stipends program retains the central role of the
   community in validation, but introduces standardized criteria and process in order to facili-
   tate comparisons over time and space, and addresses the challenge of scaling-up. The pilot
   stipends program compiles an initial beneficiary list based on a simplified poverty scorecard,
   followed by community validation (with complete flexibility resting with the community to
   modify the initial list).22 An assessment of this approach indicates that it works well in captur-
   ing poor students, relative to community-based targeting and household classification by vil-
   lage administration.23 Stigma was not found to be present among parents of beneficiary chil-
   dren though some children felt uncomfortable receiving the stipend. The three methods
   generate similar results, but the poverty scorecard is more operationally feasible for large-
   scale programs, given that community ranking requires significant facilitation and the avail-
   ability of household classification by village administration varies across villages (SC, 2015).24

•	 In contrast, an evaluation of the MCHVS finds the targeting tool was difficult to implement,
   owing to issues with the design and implementation. The inclusion and exclusion criteria
   (based on information on income, assets, and sources of support) were found to be difficult to
   apply in practice. Income in particular is prone to concerns of under reporting and measure-
   ment errors. Although the process was able to identify the poorest pregnant women and
   screen out the richest, identifying poor women in the middle of the income distribution was

22.	 The LIFT-funded HelpAge program follows a similar approach, but it uses the umbrella model based on the economic vulnerabil-
     ity survey instead of a poverty scorecard.
23.	 Village administrators are supposed to maintain a list of households grouped according to socioeconomic status, based on an
     assessment by village leaders, elites, and 10 household heads. This list is to be used to collect contributions from households for
     religious affairs. In practice, there is variation across villages, and not all villages compile such lists.
24.	 Poverty scorecards have been also used by UNDP programs in 330 villages, and their assessment is underway.
                                  Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar:
              Lessons from a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                              13
     difficult. In terms of implementation processes, while the village leader attests to poverty sta-
     tus, there was no broader community validation. In urban areas in particular, there were per-
     ceptions of stigma about being considered poor and underutilization of vouchers as a result.
     These challenges suggest improvements in the design and implementation of the targeting
     tool could improve the credibility of the program. However, the question of stigma raises the
     question of whether poverty targeting is acceptable in such a program when malnutrition is
     widespread, particularly in remote areas (as in the pilot) (MOH et al., 2014).




5. Future directions

The experience documented here reflects pragmatic choices on whether or not to target the
poor and vulnerable, and, if yes, how. These choices were made in the context of serious data
and capacity constraints and driven, at least initially, by the need to provide emergency and hu-
manitarian relief, and, increasingly, to promote inclusive development. Most social protection and
community-driven development (CDD) programs tend to focus resources in selected areas, re-
flecting the regional diversity in the country. Several social protection programs also prioritize
specific households and individuals, often combining two or more methods.

Depending on program choices about eligibility determination, identifying poor and vulnerable
areas and people in Myanmar can gradually become more evidence-based, effective, and sys-
tematic, with a more harmonized approach across programs. Given current data and other con-
straints, a phased approach will be needed. In the short to medium term, a common platform for
geographic targeting will need to be developed within the government. In the medium to long
term, household targeting systems will need to be further strengthened, initially in the context of
specific programs but gradually evolving into an integrated system for reaching the poor and vul-
nerable.25




5.1 Strengthening geographic targeting

In the short term,a national information base with subnational indicators can provide a plat-
form for interactive maps to select priority areas for fiscal allocations and program funding. This
could build on existing databases like MIMU and the FSIN, both of which are already being used to
guide geographic targeting, and could be further supplemented as disaggregated data from the
2014 Population Census, new household surveys, and ongoing food security assessments become
available.


25.	 Experience from other low income countries also points to this gradual evolution of targeting systems, starting with simple geo-
     graphic targeting using existing data, often combined with community-based targeting, and potential introduction of poverty score
     cards. As data constraints ease and social protection provision expands in Myanmar, it will be important to review and identify the
     most appropriate mix of targeting methods (Leite, 2014, Zapatero and Lopez, forthcoming).
14             Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
               The Role of Social Protection



In the medium term, a government agency would need to become the custodian of such a na-
tional information base and promote a harmonized approach to geographic targeting. Both
MIMU and the FSIN provide good examples of making their databases publicly available for use by
other programs and agencies. In particular, the FSIN is a product of focused efforts to coordinate
and standardize data collection efforts across 30 partners and to build local capacities for data col-
lection. However, both initiatives currently lie outside government systems. In many countries, it
is a government agency (typically the planning ministry or the national statistical agency) that is
the custodian for such a national information base and is responsible for developing protocols for
information-sharing and identifying a set of poor and vulnerable areas. These provide the basis for
geographic targeting by government programs, usually in combination with program-specific indi-
cators (such as enrolment, malnutrition, infrastructure deficits, etc.). In the long term, it will be
important for Myanmar to make this transition in order to facilitate a more harmonized approach
for prioritizing areas most in need. However, the exclusive use of geographic targeting needs to be
carefully assessed keeping in mind political and social factors, particularly in conflict-affected ar-
eas. Most social protection programs typically rely on a combination of methods, including geo-
graphic targeting in the first stage, combined with some form of household or individual targeting
in a second stage.



5.2 Strengthening household targeting

In the short to medium term, systems for program beneficiary identification and management
will likely remain program-specific. Myanmar is in the initial stages of a transition from DP- to
government-led social protection delivery, at a time of considerable economic, social, and political
transition. Institutional structures and delivery systems are not yet in place for beneficiary identi-
fication for large-scale programs. During this transition period, community knowledge will con-
tinue to be important. However, given the operational challenges in scaling up community-based
targeting, large-scale government programs will likely need to explore alternative options that rely
on standardized criteria and processes. The experience examined above suggests categorical tar-
geting (i.e. identifying specific groups and covering all individuals within these groups) and/or
poverty targeting (using predefined criteria as in the poverty scorecard) combined with commu-
nity validation are feasible options.

Integrated household targeting systems typically take longer to set up, but there are important
benefits in doing so. The number and scale of government programs and services in Myanmar are
expected to continue to expand, with a continued emphasis on the poor and vulnerable. The in-
troduction of different targeting tools to reach the same population can lead to unnecessary and
costly duplication of efforts on the part of program implementers and potential confusion on the
part of communities and potential beneficiaries. Global experience suggests a common household
registry with basic demographic information (for categorical targeting), additional socioeconomic
characteristics (for poverty targeting), and unique identifiers would help reduce administrative
and social costs.26




26.	 See companion Note on ‘Reaching the poor and vulnerable: Key considerations in designing targeting systems’.
                              Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar:
          Lessons from a social protection and poverty reduction perspective               15
Two approaches to building a common household registry are possible. Some countries (e.g.
Cambodia, Chile, Vietnam) first put in place a targeting system, with the stated intention of sup-
porting multiple programs. Others (e.g. India, the Philippines) developed program-specific target-
ing systems, which, when found effective, were scaled up to verify eligibility for other programs.
The latter seems more appropriate for Myanmar. Opportunities exist to build on the methods be-
ing used for the recent government social assistance pilot programs and gradually expanding to
serve multiple programs.

The methods and procedures developed in the government’s stipends program provide the
most likely basis to develop into a more coordinated system for Myanmar. The poverty scorecard
method is scalable for large scale government programs, and has also been used for beneficiary
selection in the relatively large UNDP's community programs for several years. The program is also
developing sub-systems of outreach and communication, beneficiary data collection, community
validation, recertification, monitoring, and grievance redress within government systems. These
will need to be gradually strengthened to address current gaps. For example, the current benefi-
ciary selection processes are school-based. Therefore, by design, these exclude poor children who
are outside of school system. In the long term, significant improvements in business processes and
data management systems could potentially enable this initial platform to be further adapted to
serve multiple government programs.
16          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection



References


DRD (Department of Rural Development) (2014a) ‘Rural Development Strategic Framework’. Nay-
pyidaw: DRD.

DRD (Department of Rural Development) (2014b) ‘Evergreen Village Development Program Op-
erational Manual’. Naypyidaw: DRD.

Enlightened Myanmar Research and World Bank (2015) ‘Qualitative Social and Economic Monitor-
ing (QSEM) of Livelihoods in Myanmar, Round 5’. Report commissioned by LIFT.

GoM (Government of Myanmar) (2014) ‘Rules and Regulations for Civil Servants’. 26 May. Naypy-
idaw: GoM.

GoM (Government of the Republic of the Union of Myanmar) (2014b) ‘National Community Driv-
en Development Project: Operations Manual’. Naypyidaw: GoM.

Jolliffe, K. (2014) ‘Ethnic Conflict and Social Services in Myanmar’s Contested Regions’. Yangon:
The Asia Foundation.

Leite, P. (2014) ‘Effective Targeting for the Poor and Vulnerable’. Social Protection and Labor Tech-
nical Note. June 2013 Number 6, Washington, DC: World Bank.

LIFT (Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund) (2012) ‘Annual Report’. Yangon: LIFT.

LIFT (Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund) (2013a) ‘Annual Report’. Yangon: LIFT.

LIFT (Livelihoods and Food Security Trust Fund) (2013) ‘Mid-Term Review of the Delta II and Coun-
trywide Programmes’. Yangon: LIFT.

MOE (Ministry of Education) (2014 and 2015) ‘Pilot Stipend Program Operational Guidelines’. Nay-
pyidaw: MOE.

MOH (Ministry of Health), WHO (World Health Organization) Country Officer for Myanmar, and
Health Interventions and Technology Assessment Program, Thailand (2014) ‘Mid‐Term Review of
Maternal and Child Health Voucher Scheme’. Naypyidaw: MOH.

SC (Save the Children) (2013a) ‘Cash Emergency Preparedness Assessment’. External Version. Yan-
gon: SC.

SC (Save the Children) (2013b) ‘A Cost of Diet Analysis in the Peri-Urban Township of Hlaingthayar,
Myanmar’. Yangon: SC.

SC (Save the Children) (2015) ‘Qualitative Assessment of School Grants and Stipend Program’.
Yangon: SC.
                              Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar:
          Lessons from a social protection and poverty reduction perspective              17
World Bank (2015) ‘Public Expenditure Review’. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Schreiner, M. (2012) ‘Serving Poorer Areas and Poorer Households with Poverty Scoring in Myan-
mar’. Targeting Manual. New York: UNDP.

Subbarao, K., del Ninno, C., Andrews, C., and Rodríguez-Alas, C. (2013) ‘Public Works as a Safety
Net: Design, Evidence, and Implementation’. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Thu, E.E. and Griffiths, M. (2012) ‘Strengthening Community Based Social Protection Practices for
Child Protection’. Yangon: SPPRG.

WFP (World Food Program) (2013) ‘Asset Creation Operational Guidelines’. Rome: WFP.

WFP (World Food Program) (2014) ‘Kachin Cash Assessment Report, Myitkyina and Waingmaw’.
Rome: WFP.

WFP (World Food Program) (2014b) ‘Myanmar Mid-Project Update July 2014’. Rome: WFP.

Zapatero,E., and LópezA. V. (upcoming) ‘Discussion Paper: Operationalizing Targeting’ Social Pro-
tection Discussion Paper. Washington, DC: World Bank.
18              Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
                The Role of Social Protection




Annex 1:

Examples of selected programs in Myanmar
Program           NCCDP                       Pilot stipends program      School-feeding program        CCF, social protection, com-
(started in)      (2010)                      (2014)                      (1996)                        munity programs funded
                                                                                                        under LIFT
                                                                                                        (2009)
Implemented by    DRD, Ministry of            MOE                         WFP                           Over 30 implement-
                  Livestock, Fisheries and                                                              ing partners, including
                  Rural Development                                                                     consortiums*(oversight
                                                                                                        by UN Office for Project
                                                                                                        Services)
Budget (USD)      80 (2012-2019)              19 (2014-2018)              15 (2014)                     31 (2013)
(year)
Main objectives   To enable poor rural        To keep children in         To improve education          To improve the lives and
                  communities to benefit      school                      outcomes and to address       prospects of poor and vulner-
                  from improved access                                    hunger                        able people in rural Myanmar
                  to and use of basic                                                                   (each project has specific
                  infrastructure and ser-                                                               objectives)
                  vices through a people-
                  centered approach
Description       Provide block grant to      Provide monthly             Provide 10 kg of rice per     58 projects including agricul-
                  village tract (MMK 30       stipends to children        month (in severely food-      ture, livelihood, environment,
                  million per village on      (MMK 5,000-10,000 per       insecure area, with regu-     social protection, capacity-
                  average; planning to        month) with regular at-     lar attendance (90%)) or      building, microfinance
                  increase to MMK 38          tendance (75-85%)           daily food snack (in less     programs
                  million depending on                                    food-insecure areas)
                  size of population)
Target            Villages with limited       Poor children in Grades     Children at risk of poverty   General: poor and vulnerable
                  access to and use of        5-11, at risk of dropping   and food insecurity           people in rural areas
                  basic infrastructure and    out of school
                  services
Number of         2 million people (in        100,000 students (by        232,000 students (in          2.5 million people (0.5 million
beneficiaries     3,000 villages) (by         2015)                       2013)                         households) (cumulative
                  2015)                                                                                 since 2010)
Geographical targeting
Coverage          15 townships, 1 from        27 townships (2015) (to     5 states/regions (Chin,       107 townships in 12 states/
                  each state and region       be expanded)                Rakhine, Shan North and       regions
                  (to be expanded)                                        South, and Magwe)
Criteria          Townships selected          Level 1:**township          Level 1: village selection    Depending on the nature/
                  based on poverty as         selected based on pov-      based on low education        objective of the program
                  primary criteria. Ad-       erty and low education      and food insecurity
                  ditional criteria include   performance                 Level 2: school selection     Example:
                  absence of external         Level 2:***schools          based on low education        Tat Lan (CFF combined
                  funding and com-            selected based on pov-      performance (low atten-       with UCT) was rolled out
                  mitment by regional         erty and low education      dance and high dropout        in 4 townships in Rakhine,
                  government. Exclude         performance                 rates) and food insecurity    as emergency response to
                  conflict area                                           indicators (chronic food      Cyclone Giri
                                                                          security and shocks)
Methodology       Township selection is       Township selection uses     Based on food security/
                  based on consultation       same methodology as         shock indicators collected
                  in each state/region,       CDD. School selection       through the FSIN, which
                  chaired by chief minis-     is based on school and      covers 50 townships
                  ter. Participants include   community character-        through a joint efforts of
                  a wide range of repre-      istics (as proxies for      30 members
                  sentation, and discuss      poverty and low educa-
                  priority ranking based      tion performance) and
                  on socioeconomic data       validation by township
                                              committee
                                    Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar:
                Lessons from a social protection and poverty reduction perspective                                               19

 Program             NCCDP                       Pilot stipends program      School-feeding program       CCF, social protection, com-
 (started in)        (2010)                      (2014)                      (1996)                       munity programs funded
                                                                                                          under LIFT
                                                                                                          (2009)

 Individual targeting

 Rational/           No individual targeting,    Based on budget enve-       No individual targeting,     Depending on the nature/ob-
 relevancy for       as grant goes to village    lope of the program,        given high concentra-        jective of the program, while
 individual          tract for community         each school is given        tion of the poor and         poverty is primary criterion:
 targeting           development                 a quota for stipends        malnutrition in identified
                                                 students, therefore         areas therefore difficult    Tat Lan selects the poor-
                                                 they need to identify       and cost-ineffective to      est and most food-insecure
                                                 children who best meet      exclude non-poor. All        households with vulnerable
                                                 the poverty criteria and    students in the selected     members and members who
                                                 in the greatest need        schools are entitled         can provide labor for CFW
                                                                                                          Social protection programs
 Criteria            N/A                         Poverty. Children in        N/A                          (by HAI) select the poor and
                                                 need of financial as-                                    the elderly (categorical) for
                                                 sistance to continue                                     self-help group.
                                                 schooling will be se-                                    Consortium (e.g. Action-
                                                 lected. Among equally                                    Aid, Thadar Adra) selects
                                                 poor children, priority                                  poor households for social
                                                 to be given to those                                     programs
                                                 who are orphan, father-                                  Rice bank prioritizes the
                                                 less, motherless, and                                    poor with disabilities and the
                                                 with more siblings                                       elderly


 Methodology         N/A                         A simple application        N/A                          Predominantly conducted
                                                 form is used to calculate                                through conventional partici-
                                                 poverty score (modified                                  patory community targeting.
                                                 from poverty scorecard                                   Some combine with vulner-
                                                 developed by UNDP)                                       ability mapping and poverty
                                                 for each student. Then,                                  indicators, with complete
                                                 school committees                                        local discretion
                                                 check the initial ranking                                Tat Lan: pre-identified
                                                 based on poverty score                                   poverty indicators and com-
                                                 and finalize the student                                 munity validation
                                                 selection                                                Social protection program:
                                                                                                          participatory poverty assess-
                                                                                                          ment
                                                                                                          Help Age: pre-identified crite-
                                                                                                          ria (using vulnerability model)
                                                                                                          and community validation

Notes:
* 	 WHH-GRET, Radanar Ayar, Mangrove Service Network, ActionAid–Thadar Consortium, Proximity Designs, Proximity Finance, IRRI,
    UNDP, Pact, Mercy Corps, Ar Yone Oo, AVSI, LEAD, ADRA, Oxfam–NAG, SEDN, DPDO, EcoDev, HAI, MBCA, Myanmar Ceramics
    Society, IWMI, GRET, CARE, Cervi, GRET, Metta, SWISSAID, Tag, CDN (consortium of Dutch NGOs), Tat Lan Consortium (IRC and
    partners), and MERN.
**	 For township selection of stipends program, accessibility was also considered in the first year to allow close monitoring.
*** 	School selection for the stipends program was revised in Year 2, based on lessons learned from Year 1. In the first year, schools were
     selected using administrative data on dropout rates. However, this raises concerns regarding data quality and reporting incentives.
     Therefore, the criteria were changed to select schools on the basis of a composite measure of 10 school and community indicators,
     such as share of students who have no uniform or uniform in bad condition, share of students who occasionally miss school, share
     of families that have only one family member working for the minimum or a low wage, etc. (MOE,2014).
20          Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in Myanmar:
            The Role of Social Protection




          'Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar: Lessons from a social protection and poverty
          reduction perspective' is the eleventh note in the series Building Resilience, Equity and Opportunity in
          Myanmar: the Role of Social Protection. All notes are available at www.worldbank.org/myanmar.




                                  Myanmar Social Protection Notes Series

                                  The note – ‘Building resilience, equity, and opportunity in Myanmar: The role
                                  of social protection’ – provides an overview of the technical notes in the se-
                                  ries. These include:

                                  1.	 Risks and vulnerabilities along the lifecycle: Role for social protection in
                                       Myanmar
                                  2.	 Framework for the development of social protection systems: Lessons
                                       from international experience
                                  3.	 Inventory of social protection programs in Myanmar
                                  4.	 The experience of public works programs in Myanmar: Lessons from a
                                       social protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                  5.	 The experience of cash transfers in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                       protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                  6.	 Social protection for disaster risk management: Opportunities for
                                       Myanmar
                                  7.	 Strengthening social security provision in Myanmar
                                  8.	 Institutional landscape for implementation and financing of social
                                       protection programs: Towards effective service delivery in Myanmar
                                  9.	 Social protection delivery through community-driven development
                                       platforms: International experience and key considerations for Myanmar
                                  10.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable: Key considerations in designing
                                       targeting systems
                                  11.	 Reaching the poor and vulnerable in Myanmar: Lessons from a social
                                       protection and poverty reduction perspective
                                  12.	 Developing scalable and transparent benefit payment systems in
                                       Myanmar




World Bank Office Yangon
57 Pyay Road, Corner of Shwe Hinthar Road,
6 1/2 Mile, Hlaing Township, Yangon
Republic of the Union of Myanmar. Tel: +95 1 654824
www.worldbank.org/myanmar
www.facebook.com/WorldBankMyanmar
