                                98049


   PROGRAM GUIDANCE NOTE


  Incorporating Nutrition
Actions in Rural Livelihoods
          Projects




            May 2014
          Ashi Kohli Kathuria
            Rajni Khanna
               PROGRAM GUIDANCE NOTE


       Incorporating Nutrition
     Actions in Rural Livelihoods
               Projects



                                          May 2014




                                      Ashi Kohli Kathuria1
                                        Rajni Khanna2




1
    Senior Nutrition Specialist, World Bank
2
    Senior Nutrition Consultant, World Bank
  Incorporating Nutrition Actions in Rural Livelihoods Projects:
  Program Guidance Note



                                                  Table of Contents

ACRONYMS ......................................................................................................................... iii

SECTION I: Background and Rationale ................................................................................ 1

   1.             Background and Rationale for World Bank Involvement: ................................... 1

   2.             Purpose of the Program Guidance Note-why, what and for whom?................... 2

   3.             Malnutrition in India ........................................................................................... 2

   4.             Government of India’s Multisectoral Policy and Programs................................. 3

   5.             Why Invest in Nutrition? .................................................................................... 3

   6.             Nutrition is a Multisectoral Problem and Requires a Multisectoral Response: ... 4

   7.             Basics in Nutrition ............................................................................................. 5

          a.      Malnutrition ....................................................................................................... 5

          b.      Consequences of Undernutrition: ...................................................................... 5

          c.      Importance of Nutrition in the First 1,000 Days-Window of Opportunity ............. 6

SECTION II: RURAL LIVELIHOODS AND NUTRITION ........................................................ 6

   8.             Background of National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM) ................................ 6

   9.             Nutrition cum Day Care Centers (NDCCs) in Andhra Pradesh .......................... 7

   10.            Brief about the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project (Jeevika) .................................. 8

   11.            Nutrition Sensitive Rural Livelihoods ............................................................... 10

   12.            Key Principles to incorporate Nutrition in Rural Livelihoods Projects. .............. 10

   13.            Key Steps ....................................................................................................... 12

SECTION III: Case Study- Jeevika’s Multisectoral Convergence Pilot in Bihar .................... 13

   14.            Background of Jeevika’s Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot in Bihar .... 13

   15.            Developing the Design of the Multisectoral Convergence Pilot: ....................... 14

   16.            Sample Checklist that can be used to develop nutrition sensitive interventions15

   17.            Design and Planning Stage............................................................................. 16
18.   Objectives and Results Framework ................................................................. 17

19.   Nutrition Sensitive Interventions of the Model ................................................. 17

20.   Institutional Arrangements and Delivery Mechanisms ..................................... 19

21.   Capacity Building: ........................................................................................... 20

22.   Program Impact Pathway: as in the diagram below ........................................ 21

23.   Design of an Impact Evaluation....................................................................... 21

24.   Key Issues, Opportunities and Challenges: ..................................................... 22
ACRONYMS


ASHA     Accredited Social Health Activist
ANM      Auxiliary Nurse Midwife
AWW      Anganwadi Worker
BCC      Behavior Change Communication
BMGF     Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation
BRLP     Bihar Rural Livelihood Project
BRLPS    Bihar Rural Livelihood Promotion Society
B-TAST   Bihar Technical Assistance Support Team
CNCCs    Community Nutrition Care Centers
FGD      Focus Group Discussion
FSF      Food Security Fund
GDP      Gross Domestic Product
GoB      Government of Bihar
ICDS     Integrated Child Development Scheme
IQ       Intelligent Quotient
JS       Jeevika Saheli
NDCCs    Nutrition Day Care Centers
NLTA     Non Lending Technical Assistance
NRHM     National Rural Health Mission
NRLM     National Rural Livelihoods Mission
NRLP     National Rural Livelihoods Project
ODF      Open Defecation Free
PAD      Project Appraisal Document
PCI      Project Concern International
PDS      Public Distribution System
PHED     Public Health Engineering Department
PGN      Program Guidance Note
RAS      Regional Assistance Strategy
SA       South Asia
SHGs     Self Help Groups
SNP      Supplementary Nutrition Program
TTL      Task Team Leader
VO       Village Organization
WB       World Bank
WDC      Women Development Corporation
WSP      Water and Sanitation Program
      INCORPORATING NUTRITION ACTIONS IN RURAL LIVELIHOODS
      PROJECTS: PROGRAM GUIDANCE NOTE




SECTION I: Background and Rationale

1.      Background and Rationale for World Bank Involvement:

     The World Bank is committed to reduce malnutrition and has made investments
     in multiple sectors, many of which are relevant for nutrition. It is promoting a
     multisectoral approach as one of its policy and program strategy. This will be
     done through nutrition specific interventions, primarily by the health sector and
     indirect nutrition sensitive interventions which could be implemented through
     other sectors such as Rural Livelihoods, Agriculture, Food Security, Social
     Protection, Water and Sanitation, besides others. These sectors will need to
     explore, plan and implement interventions and investments to maximize
     nutrition benefits for women and young children. To promote that to happen it is
     important to support and enable program planners and implementers to move
     towards a multisectoral approach to nutrition by providing them programmatic
     guidance and tools as they develop their programs and projects.

     India currently has one of the highest prevalence rates of malnutrition in the
     world. There are significant regional disparities in nutrition indictors across
     states with 60 percent of malnutrition burden found in the lagging or low income
     states (Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar
     Pradesh).

     Bihar is a poor state with high malnutrition burden. It is also a priority state for
     the World Bank Operations and has been selected as the geographical area for
     trying out the Multisectoral Approach to Nutrition Actions. One of the several
     Operations of the World Bank underway is the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project
     which was the Bank’s first loan to Bihar. The project aims to promote social and
     economic empowerment of poor rural women on a large scale in Bihar.

     Under the World Bank Non Lending Technical Support Assistance (NLTA), Bihar
     has been selected as the specified geographical area to mainstream nutrition
     sensitive interventions across multiple sectors and program platforms in three
     World Bank Operations. The NLTA was based on consultations with government
     counterparts and client organizations. The technical assistance has been
     undertaken in two phases. Phase 1 was the scoping and design phase and Phase
     2 will be the implementation of the designed interventions. This Program
     Guidance Note is limited to the Design phase.




                                            1
2.      Purpose of the Program Guidance Note-why, what and for whom?

a. This Program Guidance Note (PGN) is developed to assist the program planners
   and implementers of Rural Livelihoods Projects and other stakeholders involved
   from relevant sectors. The purpose is to analyze and design nutrition sensitive
   interventions within the Rural Livelihoods projects. The PGN is meant for
   generic guidance and is suggestive rather than prescriptive which can be adapted
   to specific operational and project contexts. It provides the rationale, need,
   importance and the how of nutrition actions that can be incorporated into the
   design of new and or ongoing project/s. It sets out the principles for action
   related to design of nutrition interventions and to work with multiple
   stakeholders through a project cycle approach.
b. The PGN will be developed in two phases. Phase 1 which is the present Program
   Guidance Note is related to the development and design of nutrition sensitive
   interventions within the Rural Livelihoods project drawing on the experience of
   designing the Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence pilot by the Bihar Rural
   Livelihoods project (Jeevika) with technical support from the nutrition team at
   the World Bank. This would be useful and relevant for similar projects within the
   framework of the National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) and the National
   Rural Livelihoods Project (NRLP) supported by the World Bank. Phase 2 PGN
   will be developed later as a sequel to this Program Guidance Note and will
   provide guidance on the implementation, monitoring and evaluation aspects.
c. The PGN is structured into three sections. Section I provides information on the
   background and rationale, causes and consequences of malnutrition and why it is
   important to invest in Nutrition. Section II provides information on the National
   Rural Livelihoods Mission and Projects and key principles to incorporate
   nutrition within it and some practical steps required to be taken to design and
   implement Nutrition Actions. Section III draws on from the Case Study of the
   Jeevika Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot in Bihar to develop the design
   of nutrition sensitive interventions using the project cycle approach.


3.       Malnutrition in India

     India faces a development paradox of economic growth and malnutrition which
     remains unacceptably high. Around one third of the world’s undernourished
     children are found in India. Maternal and child malnutrition attributes to more
     than one third of the mortality of children less than 5 years many of which are
     preventable through effective nutrition interventions operating at scale. One
     third of the children are born with low birth weight, 43 percent children less than
     five years are underweight, 48 percent are stunted and 20 percent are wasted.
     Micronutrient deficiencies are extremely high and almost 75 percent of below
     three children are anemic, 62 percent deficient in Vitamin A and over 13 million
     infants remain unprotected for iodine deficiency disorders.



                                            2
     There are significant disparities in the prevalence of malnutrition based on socio-
     economic groups and geographical areas. Malnutrition varies across states with
     some states being worse off than others, with rural areas being worse off than
     urban areas. Malnutrition is found to be higher in poor, marginalized and
     vulnerable groups such as scheduled caste and tribes and other disadvantaged
     groups

     The problem of malnutrition is complex and multi-dimensional affected by
     several factors such as poverty, gender inequality, inadequate food consumption,
     inequitable food distribution, inappropriate maternal, infant and child feeding
     and care practices, poor hygiene and environmental sanitation, limited access to
     health, education and social services. Other factors which contribute to it include
     economic, political, social, cultural and geographical, as well as issues related to
     governance and accountability.


4.      Government of India’s Multisectoral Policy and Programs

     India has accorded high priority to combating malnutrition given that it remains
     extremely high despite the multitude of efforts made by the Government. Given
     the multi-dimensional nature of the nutrition challenge, a plethora of
     government programs such as the Integrated Child Development Scheme(ICDS),
     National Rural Health Mission(NRHM), Nirmal Bharat Abhiyan (NBA), Public
     Distribution System(PDS) and others are being implemented to address nutrition
     and health challenges. However, these programs operate in their own silos, face
     implementation challenges and slow progress has been made to improve
     nutrition outcomes.

     The Government has recently made a policy commitment to mobilize
     multisectoral action to address the multiple causes of malnutrition effectively and
     is formulating a Multisectoral Strategy jointly by the Ministries of Women and
     Child Development and Health and Family Welfare. The Multisectoral Program
     will bring strong nutrition focus in various sectoral plans through institutional
     and program convergence and provide a platform at all levels to facilitate
     convergence of the key services and stakeholders to address maternal and child
     undernutrition. The Multisectoral Nutrition Program will be implemented as a
     special intervention in 200 high malnutrition burden districts across the country
     in a phased manner.


5.      Why Invest in Nutrition?

     As mentioned above, there is a renewed focus on nutrition from the international
     community and the Indian government- both central and states which have
     started to give nutrition or malnutrition the attention that it deserves. It is well
     known that investment in nutrition can lead to sustainable development,
     economic growth and improve the well being of people. It can significantly
                                            3
     contribute to positive outcomes in maternal and child health, cognitive
     development and educational attainment and breaks the intergenerational cycle
     of poverty. There are substantial economic costs of undernutrition which results
     in losses of direct productivity estimated at more than 10 percent which affects
     the lifetime individual’s earning capacity and contributes to about 2-3 percent
     loss to GDP. In terms of human development, malnutrition in early years results
     in loss of height in adolescence, delay in starting schooling and loss of schooling.
     It makes children 30 percent more likely to escape poverty as adults. Stunted
     mothers are three times more likely to have malnourished infants. Much of this
     under-nutrition is during pregnancy and in the first two years of a child’s life and
     without appropriate interventions the damage to physical and cognitive
     development, economic productivity and human development are enormous and
     largely irreversible.


6.      Nutrition is a Multisectoral Problem and Requires a Multisectoral
        Response:

     The determinants of malnutrition are multisectoral. Its immediate causes are
     related to food intake and health, whereas the underlying causes relate to
     maternal and child care practices, lack of access to health services, availability of
     clean water and sanitation, girl’s education, social protection and gender issues.
     The basic causes of undernutrition are due to institutional, economic, political,
     and social issues such as poverty, governance, leadership, organizational
     capacity and environmental issues.




     The determinants of malnutrition call for convergent actions between sectors
     including rural livelihoods, agriculture, water and sanitation, health, education
     and women’s empowerment. Unless the determinants of malnutrition are
     adequately addressed it will not improve nutrition outcomes and reduce
     malnutrition. Therefore there is an urgent need to move from rhetoric to action

                                             4
     towards convergent multisectoral action to reduce poverty and demonstrate
     improvement in nutrition outcomes by bringing together different sectors to
     work in coordination.

        Nutrition Specific Interventions        Nutrition Sensitive Interventions
        A term that refers to interventions     These are interventions within
        that directly address inadequate        sector specific objectives which aim
        dietary intake or disease which are     to    improve      the    underlying
        the     immediate      causes     of    determinants of nutrition, namely
        malnutrition.     These     include:    food security, adequate maternal
        promotion of breast feeding,            and child care at household and
        complementary feeding, treatment        community level, access to health
        of    malnutrition,   micronutrient     services,        hygiene         and
        supplementation and deworming,          environmental      sanitation,   and
        adolescent and maternal health and      incorporates     specific   nutrition
        nutrition.                              objectives and actions. Various
                                                actions that would address the
                                                determinants of malnutrition are
                                                possible in many sectors such as
                                                rural livelihoods, agriculture, water
                                                and sanitation, education and so on.


7.      Basics in Nutrition

a. Malnutrition is poor nutritional status caused by nutritional deficiency
   (undernutrition) or excess (overnutrition). The focus is on undernutrition which
   results from inadequate quantity and quality of food, disease and inadequate
   care and feeding practices that results in underweight(low weight for age),
   stunting( low height for age) and wasting( low weight for height) and /or
   micronutrient deficiencies.
   Maternal malnutrition: Many children are born undernourished because their
   mothers are undernourished. The nutritional status of women and girls are
   affected due to several factors such as limited access to food, traditional and
   cultural practices where women tend to eat the last and least, early marriage,
   repeated pregnancies, frequent infections with limited access to health care and
   sanitation.

b. Consequences of Undernutrition:
    Single largest cause of child death
    Lost human capital: Undernourished children have poorer cognitive
     development, lower school attainment and lower IQ, lower productivity and
     incomes as adults and are more likely to have undernourished children thereby
     perpetuating poverty.
    Lost economic growth: It is estimated that undernutrition costs as much as 2-3
     percent of GDP in many low income countries.

                                          5
    Irreversibly important for the first 1000 days: Malnutrition experienced during
     pregnancy and the first two years of life will have severe and irreversible
     consequences on child development.
    Nutrition is important throughout the life cycle: Malnutrition reduces adult
     workers productivity, exacerbates disease, results in reduced work capacity, and
     chronic fatigue.

c. Importance of Nutrition in the First 1,000 Days-Window of Opportunity
     Pregnancy to age 24 months, the first 1,000 days of life is the critical window of
     opportunity. By the time children reach their second birthday, if undernourished,
     they could suffer irreversible physical and cognitive damage which could impact
     their future health, development and well being. The consequences of insufficient
     nourishment in early childhood can continue into adulthood and be passed on to
     the next generation as undernourished girls and when women have children of
     their own. The importance of proper nutrition during this 1000 day period in
     pregnancy and until 24 months of the child’s life is therefore critical. Effective
     interventions are known which when provided during the first 1000 days of life
     can improve undernutrition. These include exclusive breast feeding, appropriate
     complementary feeding, micronutrient interventions (Vitamin A, iodine and
     iron), deworming, hand washing and hygiene and food supplementation in food
     insecure households. It is critical to ensure these interventions reach women and
     children during the narrow window of opportunity.


SECTION II: RURAL LIVELIHOODS AND NUTRITION



8.      Background of National Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM)

     The National Rural Livelihoods Mission (NRLM) is perhaps the largest poverty
     reduction initiative and the largest program for women in the world. The World
     Bank is supporting this program through its National Rural Livelihoods Project,
     which is its largest single investment in a poverty reduction program. NRLM
     will be implemented in 12 states that account for 85 percent of the rural poor
     households in India.

     The NRLM reaches down to the household level to support the formation of
     institutions of the poor at the community level from Self Help Groups(SHGs) to
     aggregation of these institutions which are federated at village, cluster, block and
     district levels. These provide a collective space and voice for the poor especially
     women to work together to leverage resources and services related to livelihoods.
     These include savings, building assets, adoption of new livelihoods for
     themselves and their families. The vast resources enable the institutional
     platforms to engage with many sectors and interact with many service providers.
     The program was a wide outreach.

                                            6
     Through the National Rural Livelihoods project, the World Bank provides
     technical and financial support to improve program delivery. The program
     which is being rolled out in a phased manner will allow the 12 states that have
     high poverty rates (Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Madhya Pradesh,
     Chhattisgarh, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil
     Nadu and Uttar Pradesh) to implement large scale pilots, create demonstration
     sites and best practice to incorporate lessons learned. It provides an excellent
     program platform to incorporate Nutrition Actions. An example of the model
     that has incorporated nutrition interventions under the World Bank supported
     Andhra Pradesh Poverty Reduction project called Nutrition cum Day Care
     Centers (NDCCs) is given below.


9.      Nutrition cum Day Care Centers (NDCCs) in Andhra Pradesh

     This World Bank supported pilot program aims to reduce malnutrition and
     improve nutritional status of pregnant and lactating women and young children
     from poor households in the long term. The NDCCs are community driven,
     community owned and community supervised rather than having a top down
     approach. They have been built on the social infrastructure of women’s Self Help
     Groups (SHGs) and their Village Organizations (VOs) and federations that have
     been established across the state for almost two decades. NDCCs aim to provide
     complete nutrition to pregnant and lactating and their children below two years
     with three cooked, well balanced meals a day on site to ensure that the food is
     consumed by the beneficiaries themselves. The cost of the meal is being
     recovered through a variety of measures with a view to becoming financially
     sustainable. These include amongst others, payment by beneficiaries (one third of
     the cost of the meal), linkages with programs like ICDS and Public Distribution
     System (PDS) to get food in bulk and at subsidized prices and to use fresh
     foodstuff from the centers own community gardens. The NDCCs seek to ensure
     provision of antenatal care for all pregnant women, postnatal care for mothers
     and immunization for young children, increase awareness and behavior change
     for maternal, infant and young child health and nutrition practices and
     repayment for services by the NDCC beneficiaries. Since 2007, through a phased
     incremental approach around 5000 NDCCs have been established in villages
     across Andhra Pradesh.

     It is recommended that a Review of other Nutrition Sensitive Interventions
     within Multisectoral Projects that are being implemented especially in the Rural
     Livelihoods sector be carried out to draw lessons learned on what has worked
     well and why and what has not worked well so that these can be used to inform
     future nutrition interventions that can be planned and carried out within the
     framework of the National Rural Livelihoods Mission and Projects.




                                           7
10.      Brief about the Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project (Jeevika)

      The Bihar Rural Livelihoods Promotion Society (BRLPS) is an independent
      society set up by the Government of Bihar (GoB) and supported by the World
      Bank. The GoB has designated BRLPS as the State Rural Livelihoods Mission for
      implementation of NRLM at the state level. The BRLPS is implementing Jeevika-
      Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project (BRLP) to promote social and economic
      empowerment of the rural poor especially women which is being carried out on a
      large scale in Bihar.

      The objectives of the project are to:
      i) Create self managed community institutions of participating households,
      ii) Enhance income through sustainable livelihoods,
      iii) Increase access to social protection including food security by enabling
           women to have a voice in implementation of such schemes.

      The strategy of the project is to build dynamic, self managed social capital
      comprising of community institutions of women. The strategy promotes savings,
      credit and livelihood opportunities where community organizations revolve
      leveraged funds to meet their various needs. The Self Help Groups (SHGs) are
      the primary level community organizations which are federated at village level
      into Village Organizations (VOs) as well as at the cluster and block levels. The
      project is moving towards a saturation approach to cover all the poor households
      in the geographical areas of its operation. The BRLP intervenes with the
      community through the following four themes which include: i) Institution and
      capacity building, ii) Social development, iii) Microfinance and iv) Livelihoods
      promotion.

      Nutrition Actions within BRLPS
      More recently, BRLPS has included Health and Nutrition interventions as a fifth
      theme which is being incorporated within its Project. Initially this was done with
      a view to reduce health expenditures and provide food security to its target
      group of women. Jeevika is presently experimenting with different models and
      approaches of nutrition interventions which are being carried out in different
      geographical areas and in collaboration with different sectors and organizations.
      These are being implemented through Jeevika’s community structures and
      project infrastructure.

   The various models and approaches on Nutrition of the BRLPS include:
i) The Community Health and Nutrition Care Centers (CHNCCs): This pilot was started
   in 2012 with the objective of setting up community managed Nutrition Care
   Centers to improve nutrition and health and nutrition seeking behavior among
   pregnant and lactating women and young children below two years from the
   poorest and disadvantaged households. It is based on the Andhra Pradesh
   Nutrition cum Day Care Centers model. The CHNCCs are supported by the
   Village Organization (VO) structure and targets pregnant and lactating women
                                            8
       and for children 13 to 24 months provides them with nutritious on site meals
       three times a day at the center. It promotes exclusive breast feeding for children
       from birth to six months and provides weaning foods for children from 7 to 12
       months as well as nutrition and health education, health check up and
       immunization through monthly check-ups. The beneficiaries are SHG members
       who pay a subsidized amount for the meals.
ii)    BRLPS administered Supplementary Nutrition Program model for ICDS: will be
       piloted in 5 blocks where VOs will administer supplementary feeding program.
       BRLPS will receive funds from the ICDS which will in turn be transferred to the
       VOs who will procure food supplies, supervise distribution of take home rations
       to pregnant and lactating women, prepare and distribute supplementary food to
       children below six years at the AWCs. This intervention provides the potential to
       enhance community participation and improve service delivery of the
       supplementary nutrition component of the ICDS through an open, transparent
       and accountable process.
iii)   The Gram Varta model: The purpose of this intervention is to promote positive
       health, nutrition, water and sanitation practices in the community through the
       platform of SHGs. Gram Varta is a process of 20 participatory learning and action
       based meeting cycles delivered through SHGs using participatory methods
       integrating nutrition, health, water and sanitation messages targeting pregnant
       women and young children under two years (1000 days window of opportunity).
       Community meetings by VOs to engage with local service providers in order to
       seek their participation for improving service delivery. Technical and capacity
       building support is provided to Jeevika by the Technical Assistance support team
       (B-TAST) and learning and financial support by the Women Development
       Corporation (WDC). The first phase will cover 36 Blocks in five districts of Bihar
iv)    Model of collaboration between BRLPS and Project Concern International (PCI) to
       improve nutrition and health service coverage and outcomes. The Ananya
       program is a consortium of development partners funded by the Bill and
       Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF) implementing a package of demand and
       supply side of interventions with a focus to reduce maternal and child mortality
       and improve health and nutrition outcomes. PCI through its Parivartan program
       is implementing interventions that aim to catalyze community mobilization and
       action to bring change in desirable behaviors specifically eight on health and
       nutrition and four related to water and sanitation through mobilizing and
       strengthening SHGs.
v)     The Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot: Jeevika has developed this pilot with
       technical support from the nutrition team at the World Bank. The pilot builds on
       Jeevika’s existing community institutions of Self Help Groups (SHGs) and Village
       Organizations(VOs) to interface with multiple local service providers through a
       community based convergence approach to generate demand, improve quality
       and utilization of services, enhance mutual accountability and improve nutrition
       especially for women and children. The pilot will start small as a feasibility phase
       with inbuilt mechanisms for learning, monitoring and scale up.



                                              9
The above nutrition action models/approaches of Jeevika are at different stages of
planning, start up, implementation, and are located in different or in some cases
same geographical areas. Some of these models have focused on center-based
feeding for the nutritionally vulnerable groups mainly pregnant and lactating
women and young children (1000 days window of opportunity) in conjunction with
health check- ups and behavior change communication, and in some instances the
water and sanitation component has been included. The Jeevika Multisectoral
Nutrition Convergence pilot is a systematic attempt of a community based
multisectoral convergence approach of working with multiple sectors and
stakeholders to generate demand and improve service provision for improved
nutrition outcomes.

The various models and approaches adopted by Jeevika are of different scope, size
and scale. It provides a unique opportunity for BRLPS to learn from them on what
and how to implement nutrition sensitive interventions and to assess the
effectiveness and outcomes of these different approaches for future scale up.

This Program Guidance Note draws on the experience of developing the design of
the Multisectoral Convergence Pilot by Jeevika with technical support from the
World Bank.


11.   Nutrition Sensitive Rural Livelihoods

A large proportion of malnourished persons reside in rural areas and the most
affected amongst them are women and children. Rural livelihoods provide a source
of income for the poor especially women through savings and livelihood
opportunities. Simply increasing women/household incomes and agriculture
production are insufficient to improve nutritional status of family and within it
women and young children (especially the 1000 days window of opportunity). Many
poor and vulnerable households lack nutrition and health information and
awareness and often do not avail of existing services. Investing in nutrition
especially for women will not only improve nutrition outcomes for their families and
community but will also support rural livelihoods and poverty reduction efforts.

Therefore Rural Livelihoods is an important sector and has the potential to address
nutrition especially for women and children on a large scale and would further
empower poor and disadvantaged women. Nutrition sensitive Rural Livelihoods
policy and projects can influence and improve nutrition outcomes for the rural poor
especially women and young children by layering nutrition actions related to food
and nutrition security, maternal, infant, child and adolescent health and nutrition
practices, create demand for services and its utilization by providing appropriate
nutrition support through its community platforms.


12.   Key Principles to incorporate Nutrition in Rural Livelihoods Projects.

                                        10
Guiding principles can be kept in mind to incorporate nutrition sensitive
interventions into the design and implementation of policies, projects and
investments within the National Rural Livelihoods Mission/Rural Livelihoods
projects. These can be adapted and used to individual contexts.
 Incorporate nutrition concerns into the design and implementation of Rural
    Livelihoods projects, policies and investments and to measure nutrition
    outcomes. The way to achieve this principle is to include nutrition objective/s
    and nutrition sensitive interventions explicitly into the project design and to
    measure nutrition outcomes and results which should be part of the overall
    Monitoring, Results and Evaluation framework of the project.
 Target nutritionally vulnerable groups. In the rural livelihoods project, the
    population that is being targeted is the poorest and most marginalized women
    who are being reached. From a nutrition standpoint, the most nutritionally
    vulnerable groups within this target group which needs to be prioritized and
    reached is the target group “1000 days window of opportunity” which starts
    during pregnancy and closes at about 2 years of age which is the critical period
    for preventing child malnutrition.
 Increase year round availability of diverse food basket to the income and food
    deficit households. The affect of seasonal food shortage and seasonal income
    deficits (periods when there is no/little work available) can have negative
    consequences on food and nutrition security of the household especially for the
    critical 1000 days window of opportunity. To prevent and mitigate this situation
    and to reduce the affect of food shortage on families and nutritionally vulnerable
    within it, it is important to provide access to diverse food basket throughout the
    year. Information related to when food and income shortages occur, who gets
    most affected by it and for how long and how severe needs to be obtained. By
    using a nutrition lens, the project can plan and implement (during periods of
    food scarcity and otherwise)what provisions need to be made through different
    mechanisms such as food security fund or alternate income generating activities,
    what and how much food would be required to meet the food and nutrition
    needs of the households especially for pregnant women and young children
 Improve nutrition knowledge among rural households especially women:
    Incorporate nutrition awareness and communication to target behavior change
    especially related to maternal, infant and child health and nutrition, safe hygiene
    and sanitation practices for the community especially women.
 Empower women in nutrition and invest in them. Increase in rural women’s
    incomes through livelihood opportunities has contributed to women’s economic
    empowerment. This can be further strengthened by juxtaposing nutrition and
    health knowledge and awareness and building capacity of women’s collectives
    and strengthening their role in decision making including how community
    resources and household incomes are spent. Women who control income have
    significant positive effect on child nutrition, family food security, health seeking
    behavior besides other benefits. Given that women play multiple roles within
    household and community, it will not only benefit them but also their families
    and community.


                                          11
     Promote interface between demand and supply and seek opportunities to work
      across sectors. Through community structures and organizations promoted and
      strengthened by the rural livelihoods programs (NRLM) these can be enabled to
      foster linkages and engage with nutrition, health and sanitation programs for
      mutual accountability. Promote interface between demand and supply through
      community platforms for convergence with service providers from multiple
      sectors. This would require multisectoral planning, coordination, geographical
      overlaps and creating shared structures and commitment for coordination in
      order to improve nutrition outcomes. Issues around governance and
      accountability, roles and responsibilities and incentives for coordination will
      need to be well defined. Actions can be planned taking into account the context,
      objectives and operating environment
     Reaching nutrition to the unreached: The Rural Livelihoods project primarily
      targets the most impoverished and vulnerable households which are often
      missed out by service providers and difficult to reach. Discriminated groups
      require specific measures to help them overcome obstacles that impede their
      access to and utilization of nutrition, health and sanitation services and to make
      these services more responsive and accountable to their needs.
     Develop understanding and capacity on nutrition as a development priority:
      Develop capacity of human resources within the project in nutrition (especially
      on maternal and child nutrition) at all levels (relevant project staff and
      community cadres) and to ensure training, capacity building support, mentoring
      and guidance, motivation and recognition is provided for nutrition work
      especially for front line workers and community cadres.


13.      Key Steps

     In the case of an ongoing project, review the Project Document to understand the
      project objectives, results framework, activities, geographical areas covered,
      implementation arrangements, project status and key issues. Assess what could
      be possible opportunities and key entry points for incorporating nutrition
      interventions. For new projects, engage at the outset during the project
      preparation and design stage to incorporate nutrition actions within it.
     Get commitment and buy-in from the Project Leader (PL) and other related staff
      and continue to engage with them on an ongoing basis in the development of the
      design of nutrition sensitive interventions for incorporation within the Rural
      Livelihoods project. Keep PL and concerned staff in the loop and get their
      support to problem solve and help make progress during different stages of the
      project cycle.
     Project site visits and meetings with the project task teams of counterpart
      organizations at the state, district and block levels. Consultations with key
      stakeholders from project (concerned state, district and block project staff, VO
      members and other community members) as well as external stakeholders- from
      government programs (such as the ICDS, NRHM, PHED and other development


                                            12
      organizations working in the area) to understand the context, programs and
      issues in the operational area.
     Information and analysis of the context, nutrition problems, opportunities and
      risks to incorporate nutrition sensitive interventions within the project platform,
      building on need and what is there.
     Identify key entry points and synergy between the Project and Nutrition Actions
      identified.
     Provide ongoing technical support in nutrition to the project team in design of
      the project.
     Develop and build a perspective amongst the team on the importance of
      nutrition within the project framework.

         The Project Leaders and Program Implementers and other Stakeholders of
         Rural Livelihoods Projects to take action to include in their new and or
         ongoing project design nutrition objective, nutrition sensitive interventions
         and measure its progress through relevant output and outcome indicators.




SECTION III: Case Study- Jeevika’s Multisectoral Convergence Pilot in Bihar

14.      Background of Jeevika’s Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence Pilot in Bihar

BRLPS (Jeevika) has developed the Multisectoral Nutrition Convergence pilot with
technical support from the nutrition team at the World Bank. The model aims to
promote community based convergence approach through interface between
community organizations (VOs) and local service providers in nutrition, health and
sanitation from government programs(ICDS, NRHM and PHED) to generate
demand and utilizations of services for improved nutrition outcomes.

The pilot is in its early stages of implementation in Saharsa District within one block
of Saur Bazar to cover three panchayats with 29 Village Organizations. The
interventions will reach out to the targeted areas covering the most vulnerable
disadvantaged households and groups with priority given to pregnant women and
young children. Some interventions will cover the entire community. The initial
feasibility phase will be for a period to learn from and adjust before it is scaled up.

The nutrition sensitive interventions of the pilot include:
1. Behavior Change Communication (BCC) in nutrition, health, water and
   sanitation.
2. Household Food and Nutrition Security
3. Convergence and Coordination between community organizations and local
   service providers
4. Water and Sanitation Component –demand generation and service provision
5. Women’s Empowerment will be cross cutting.

                                            13
The Approach adopted by the model as well as its geographical location of the pilot
is given below:

 Approach adopted by the Pilot:
 A bottom up, community based participatory approach starting small with plans
   for scale up through learning and adjustment.
 Promote interface between demand and service provision of nutrition sensitive
   interventions through a community based convergence approach
 Leverage resources, expertise and learning’s of the different stakeholders.
 Adopts a multisectoral approach with multiple stakeholders.
 Invest in women and their empowerment.


                          Map of Bihar and the Pilot Area




15.   Developing the Design of the Multisectoral Convergence Pilot:

A Project Cycle Approach was
adopted to develop the design of
the model. The design was
developed based on context
analysis, multi-stakeholder analysis
and extensive consultations within
Jeevika (with communities and
project staff) and consultations with
external       stakeholders      from
government        and   development
organizations working in the area




                                        14
16.   Sample Checklist that can be used to develop nutrition sensitive
      interventions

                                   Sample Checklist

1. Analysis of the            Sample Questions
   context and               What are the prevalent nutrition problems in the
   nutrition issues in        operational area and more widely?
   the operational area      Which population and target groups suffer the most?
                             What are the existing maternal, infant and child care
                              practices?
                             What is the role of women in addressing these
                              problems?
                             How can increased incomes be used to improve food
                              and nutrition security of households?
                             Who are the service providers and development
                              organizations working in nutrition, health, sanitation
                              in the geographical area of operation?
                             What are the opportunities and risks for community
                              structures to work with them?

                          Tools: Review existing documents, consultations with key
                          stakeholders, site visits, Focus Group Discussion with
                          SHGs/VOs members.

2. Consultation with          Sample Questions
women from SHGs/             Dietary/food consumption patterns
Village Organizations        Seasonal food availability (households and
                              community)and intra-household food consumption
                             Prevalent practices related to maternal, infant and
                              young child feeding, hygiene and sanitation practices
                             Awareness and use of nutrition and health services
                             Roles and responsibilities of women within household
                              and community and in decision making

                          Tools: Focus Group Discussion with members of SHGs
                          and VOs
3.Consultations with        Sample Questions
project staff              What are the nutrition problems in the area?
                           What, why and how can nutrition activities be
                            incorporated into the project?
                           What are the activities that can be built on and
                            strengthened? E.g. Food Security Fund, kitchen
                            gardens, agriculture/nutrition related livelihoods
                            activities?
                           Need and how to collaborate with government services
                                         15
                              in the area?
                             What are the potential opportunities and risks and
                              suggestions?

                          Tools: Meetings with staff, one to ones


4. Consultations with         Sample Questions
external stakeholders        What is the perception about multisectoral
(ICDS, Health, PHED,          coordination? Who and what (sectors and constituents)
District leadership and       to collaborate with and for what purpose?
development                  How to facilitate coordination and collaboration
organizations) to             between community and service providers in nutrition,
explore the potential         health and sanitation? (horizontally and vertically)
for collaboration            What would be the triggers to work multisectorally?
                             How to make coordination and collaboration work
                              over time?
                             What should be the structure, mechanisms, motivation,
                              dynamics and accountability for this coordination?
                              How can it be mutually beneficial?
                             How to develop shared understanding and
                              commitment to coordination?

                          Tools: Consultations with multi-stakeholders, meetings,
                          workshops




17.   Design and Planning Stage

Drawing from the context analysis,
extensive consultations within
Jeevika (community and staff) as
well as consultations with external
stakeholder     of     government
departments and development
organizations and keeping in mind
the guiding principles, the design
of the Multisectoral Convergence
Pilot was informed and developed
as given in the Design Framework
below.




                                         16
The model adopts a multisectoral convergence approach to address the immediate
and underlying causes of undernutrition, informed by consultations and building on
and strengthening existing initiatives (Food Security Fund) within Jeevika and to
address some of the opportunities and challenges (absence of coordination between
community and government programs like the ICDS, health, water and sanitation
and others) which are operating in silos in the same geographical areas.

The objectives of the model and its expected outcomes and results are given below.


18.    Objectives and Results Framework




19.    Nutrition Sensitive Interventions of the Model

i) Behavior Change Communication (BCC) on nutrition, health, water and sanitation. The
BCC approach will promote awareness and actions as depicted in the diagram below.
Capacity of community cadres (Jeevika Sahelis, other community cadres) and the project
staff of Jeevika will be developed in BCC so that they can understand, influence and drive
change in behavior on key nutrition, health and sanitation messages. Some of the key
messages will focus on the window of opportunity to improve nutrition to include
adolescent and maternal health and nutrition, infant and young child feeding and care
practices, and those related to health, hygiene and sanitation. These messages will be
communicated through one-to-one and one-to-many approaches using and leveraging
existing appropriate tools, materials and resources developed by different organizations
working in the area. The community cadres will support local service providers in nutrition,
health and sanitation for BCC during group meetings and community events.




                                            17
ii) Household Food and Nutrition Security: The purpose is to promote availability of a
diverse basket of food to the poorest and most vulnerable households who are food and
income insecure. As one of the measures, the existing Food Security Fund (FSF) within
Jeevika will be restructured from a nutrition lens to target the poor households including
those with pregnant women and young children below two years through the micro-
planning process and tool. The FSF will make available the basic food basket of cereals,
pulses, oil and other food items as required at reasonable cost throughout the year. Kitchen
gardens will be promoted and universalized to ensure availability of fresh fruits and
vegetables for consumption within targeted households. Emphasis will be on food
availability and intra-household consumption especially by pregnant women and young
children. In addition, Jeevika Sahelis will facilitate participation and contributions from
mothers with young children (6 to 24 months of age) to encourage them to prepare and feed
suitable locally produced nutrient dense foods to their children below two years.

iii) Institutionalize Convergence and Coordination: between community (Jeevika
Saheli/VO members) and local service providers of government programs (ICDS, NRHM
and PHED) for enhanced demand, improved community participation, greater mutual
accountability and improvements in nutrition outcomes. Coordination structures and
mechanisms at village, block and district levels will be established to provide support.
Village Coordination Committees of local service providers (AWWs, ASHAs, ANMs,
panchayat reps, school teachers and others) and Jeevika Sahelis and VO representatives will
plan, coordinate and monitor activities related to health, nutrition and sanitation for the
community through monthly meetings. Building rapport and trust, confidence and close
working relationship between community and service providers will be promoted.
Recognition, rewards and incentives would be provided for good work in coordination.

iv) Water and Sanitation Component: Community mobilization and motivation of
households will be undertaken by triggering behavior change to stop open defecation (ODF)
and create demand for safe sanitation. In response linkages to services will be made to
include building and use of safe toilet facilities. Personal hygiene and sanitation practices
will be promoted through BCC actions for individual and collective action and change
Technical support will be provided by Water and Sanitation Program (WSP).


                                             18
v) Women’s Empowerment: will be promoted through their enhanced awareness and
capacity to participate in decision making and to access resources and services so that
women are able to meet their nutrition, health and sanitation needs as well as for their
families and community.




20.      Institutional Arrangements and Delivery Mechanisms

      The pilot is being implemented through the existing institutional arrangements of
      Jeevika. The following will be involved:

      At Community level: Community cadres will be the main implementers of the
      pilot. Jeevika Sahelis are the nodal persons in the community for implementation
      of the activities of the pilot. She will be supported by the Health and Nutrition
      committee (3-4 members per VO) and Procurement committee members (3-4
      members per VO for FSF) and community mobilizers and village resource
      persons. JS is responsible to the VOs. The roles and responsibilities of the
      community cadres and structures have been defined.

      At Block and District levels: The District Health and Nutrition Manager would
      be responsible for the pilot under the overall leadership of the District Project
      Manager. Need based support as required will be provided by other relevant
      project staff (Area Coordinator and Community Coordinator) at the block level to
      support the community cadres.

      Technical support in nutrition for development of the design and implementation
      has been provided by the WB Consultants.

  The organogram at community and block level is provided below.

Structure at Community                          Structure at District Level




                                           19
               For each Village                             District Project
                Organization
                                                               Manager


                                      Block Project           District Manager         WB Local
      1 – Jeevika Saheli for 2                              (Health & Nutrition)      Consultants*
                                        Manager
                VOs



                                    Area Coordinator
         1 – Community
            Mobilizer

                                                      Community
                                                      Coordinator
         3-4 members of
      Nutrition, Health and
      Sanitation Committee                                          Village
                                                                 Organizations

         3-4 members of
          Procurement
            Committee                                                          Self Help Group




Role of Jeevika Sahelis:
The Jeevika Saheli is a community cadre responsible for carrying out health,
nutrition, and sanitation activities related to the pilot through the community
institutions of Self Help Groups and Village Organisations (VOs) set up by the
Jeevika. The Jeevika Saheli is oriented and trained for activities to be carried out by
her.
1. Deliver Behavior Change Communication messages at fortnightly SHG meetings,
and initiate discussions on relevant topics among women members and its follow up.
2. Mobilize the community to participate and access health, nutrition, and sanitation
services.
3. Coordinate with front line nutrition and health workers through participating as a
member in the monthly village coordination meetings and its follow up to achieve
and improve coordination.
4. Work with other community cadres and the Village Organization’s Health,
Nutrition, and Sanitation sub-committee to support the implementation of activities
related to the pilot such as kitchen garden, food security fund, and safe sanitation.

The Jeevika Saheli is responsible for implementation of activities on the ground for
two Village Organizations. The work of the Saheli is overseen and reviewed by the
Village Organization’s subcommittee on health, nutrition, and sanitation.




21.       Capacity Building:

A capacity building approach to strengthen capacity of community cadres and
concerned project staff on different components of the pilot will be undertaken.

                                           20
Ongoing basic training and mentoring support will be provided to Jeevika Sahelis
and other community cadres. Technical support is provided by Consultants.


22.   Program Impact Pathway: as in the diagram below




23.   Design of an Impact Evaluation

Evaluation: An external Impact Evaluation is planned for rigorous evaluation of the
pilot. Funding from SIEF is likely to be approved soon (seed funding was received to
develop the proposal). The evaluation will be conducted by the International Food
Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) and the Oxford Policy Management (OPM). The
impact evaluation will have a treatment group which will receive the interventions
package of the multisectoral nutrition convergence pilot and a control group which
will provide the counter factual. Both groups will have the same structure of
community based organizations that include women’s Self Help Groups and their
federation of Village Organizations(VOs) thus providing a robust and best possible
counter factual. Treatment and control VOs will be randomly selected. Bias due to
spillovers could take place. To minimize this, assignment of treatment and control
groups will be clustered and specific attention will be given to ensuring that there is
adequate space between clusters of both groups. Clustering will also ensure internal
validity. A quantitative baseline will set base parameters and subsequent midline
and end line will be undertaken. The evaluation period is for three years.
This evaluation and its results will be extremely useful from a policy and program
perspective as there are few initiatives operational on ground and evidence on their
impact is scarce. With established community platforms and infrastructure available,
this provides a unique opportunity to test this model and provide evidence on the
efficacy and impact of a multisectoral approach in Nutrition.




                                          21
24.    Key Issues, Opportunities and Challenges:

This pilot has generated a lot of issues and learning’s based on the design
development phase that need to be taken cognizance of in multisectoral approach to
nutrition. There will be a lot more issues that will emerge once the pilot is
implemented. Some of the key issues are as below:

 Key Issues
 The model has been developed in an ongoing Rural Livelihoods Project, which will
  be first piloted before it is scaled up.
 It is important to provide suitable investments (technical, human and financial) for
  nutrition actions.
 Provide technical support in nutrition to the project staff to develop design and
  initially to help start -up implementation and provide ongoing mentoring and
  capacity building support.
 Develop perspective and understanding among the project team about the
  importance of nutrition as a development priority and its relevance to the project
 Identify within institutional structure, those responsible for implementing nutrition
  actions(among project staff and community cadres) with clarity of their roles and
  responsibilities and accountability
 Address issues related to ownership, commitment and time among staff for
  nutrition interventions. Competing priorities and workloads can de-prioritize
  nutrition interventions.
 Provide suitable Incentives, Reward and Recognition for carrying out nutrition
  actions
 Leadership and Champions within the organization can provide impetus to
  nutrition actions
 Setting up institutional coordination structures and mechanisms to work
  multisectorally with multiple stakeholders requires organizational commitment and
  responsibility, is time intense and requires a different way of working. It has to add
  value for all concerned stakeholders.




                                          22
