                                                                                   98052
     Institutional agenda and PPP options for water
              supply and sewage in Ludhiana




                                     Final Report




                   Prepared for the Government of Punjab




                     Submitted to: The World Bank Group




Prepared by: Ramanujam. S. R
October 2014




This consultant’s report does not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank Group or the
Government concerned, and The World Bank Group and the Government cannot be held liable for its
contents.
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana



     Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana1


                                                Table of Contents


1       Summary ............................................................................................................. 3
2       Institutional assessment of the water supply service provision in Ludhiana ........ 5
     2.1      Overall policy environment for Water supply and sewage functions ............. 6
        2.1.1       Institutional Structure .............................................................................. 6
        2.1.2       Service Standards .................................................................................. 7
        2.1.3       Cost recovery and pricing ....................................................................... 8
        2.1.4       Financing of investments ........................................................................ 8
        2.1.5       Autonomy of WSS service provision ....................................................... 8
        2.1.6       Functioning of WSS department ............................................................. 9
3       Institutional agenda in Ludhiana ....................................................................... 11
     3.1      Cost Recovery agenda ................................................................................ 12
     3.2      Financing agenda........................................................................................ 15
     3.3      Governance agenda.................................................................................... 16
4       Institutional and PPP models for Ludhiana ....................................................... 20
     4.1      Relevance to Ludhiana ............................................................................... 23
     4.2      Recommended institutional models for Ludhiana........................................ 27
5       Annexure 1 – Institutional Models .................................................................... 29




1
    A common assessment was carried out for Ludhiana and Amritsar. While a separate report has been prepared for Ludhiana,
     many of the institutional aspects are common to both cities, and significant parts of the assessments are common.

                                                                                                                             2
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana



1 Summary
Water supply and sewage (WSS) operations in Ludhiana resemble that of many
Indian cities; service levels are poor when compared to benchmarks; cost recovery is
low; the municipal corporation subsidises operating deficits; the Government
finances capital expenditure; assets are created through a State owned entity;
internal capacity, systems and procedures are weak.
The State Government has taken a decision to make key municipal corporations
(including Ludhiana) responsible for future asset creation and also expects them to
share capital expenditure. To improve the quality of service, the city needs
immediate capital investments and change in management practices. Key
institutional actions to achieve this are a) WSS operations focusing on higher cost
recovery, b) increased contribution from the municipal corporation to WSS capital
expenditure financing as opposed to O & M financing and c) modern governance
structure for WSS operations.
Financial analysis indicates that the WSS operations could achieve cost recovery
between the years 2020 and 2022, but it would need substantial tariff restructuring
and rate revisions; in the interim period, the WSS operations would need subsidies.
The Ludhiana Municipal Corporation(LMC) will be in a position to provide these
subsidies and finance other committed capital expenditure and debt repayments;
further it may also be in a position to contribute to 50% of WSS capital expenditure.
To facilitate this, Government of Punjab may need to support LMC to create a
security mechanism out of the VAT related inflows to LMC.
Improving governance will require providing a suitable legal structure for WSS
operations, tariff setting practices, HR rules, performance measurement framework
and an investment framework. Since current capacities in WSS operations are weak,
outsourcing the proposed capital expenditure programme and operations to a private
sector partner can help the municipal corporation bye pass internal constraints and
limitations.
There are a variety of legal structures and PPP options available, some of which
have already been attempted in India. In Ludhiana, private sector financing is
possible; however investments cannot be recovered through tariff and have to be
serviced through subsidies from the municipal corporation. A recommended option
for Ludhiana would be
   a) the creation of a publicly owned utility that is provided autonomy in WSS
      operations
   b) a short term PPP arrangement between the utility and private sector with
      financing being mobilized by the municipal corporation and the State

                                                                                   3
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


      Government. If the creation of a utility is not possible due to legal constraints,
      the WSS operations can be ring fenced within the municipal structure to the
      extent possible.
   c) In Ludhiana, it would also be possible to seek partial financing from private
      sector, in which case a long term PPP arrangement could be adopted.




                                                                                      4
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana




2 Institutional assessment of the water supply service
  provision in Ludhiana2
Water supply services in Punjab are housed within the urban development function.
The urban sector itself is administered by two departments. The department of
Urban Development and Housing(UD & H) is responsible for urban planning
functions. The department of Local Government(LG) is responsible for administrative
oversight of urban local bodies. The Deputy Chief Minister is the Minister for Urban
Development and Housing. The various urban local bodies (ULBs), Urban
Improvement Trusts (UITs) and the Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board are
under the administrative control of the LG department. The office of Town and
Country Planning carries out town planning functions and is housed within the UD &
H department.
The MC of Ludhiana(LMC) is responsible for the following key functions.
1. Operation and maintenance of all water supply assets and provision of service
2. Maintenance of sewage networks within the city
3. Roads and buildings
4. Solid waste management
5. Regulation of building activities and implementation of development control rules
Mayors for the MCs are elected by corporators for a five year term. The House
Finance Committee is constituted by the corporators and has executive powers to
approve contracts.
The Urban Improvements Trusts (UITs) are established through a special legislation.
Their primary responsibility is the development of specific layouts and disposal of
plots and properties. UITs acquire land and develop infrastructure within these
layouts. UITs may also undertake construction of residential and commercial
buildings within these layouts.
The Punjab Municipal Infrastructure Development Company(PMIDC) has been
established with the long term objective of providing financial intermediary services
to cities. At present, PMIDC provides several functions.




2
    Based on “Template for Assessing the Governance of Public WSS Service Providers”; A. Locussol and M. van Ginneken;
     World Bank, 2010

                                                                                                                    5
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


a) A Punjab Municipal Infrastructure Fund (PMIF) has been established by the
   Government of Punjab into which a share of Value Added Tax receipts of the
   Government are credited. This is then allocated to various local bodies as a
   share of State Government tax receipts. A Punjab Municipal Infrastructure
   Development Fund (PMIDF) has also been constituted which receives a share of
   the surcharge on value added tax. PMIDC manages both the funds. While the
   PMIF is divided amongst local bodies under a formula, the PMIDF has been
   leveraged by PMIDC for commercial borrowing. These receipts have been
   advanced as loans to local bodies.
b) PMIDC has also negotiated a line of credit from agencies like HUDCO. Local
   bodies, at their discretion, can directly access this line of credit. Repayment is
   secured through an assurance of intercepting the share of value added tax
   receipts allocated to the local body.
c) In addition to the fund management and financial intermediary functions, PMIDC
   also functions as the State Level Nodal Agency (SLNA) for JNNURM projects.
   PMIDC is also the Secretariat for Punjab Urban Development Mission which
   looks at investments, reforms and governance improvements in the urban sector
   in Punjab. PMIDC also acts as a nodal agency for implementing state wide
   initiatives such as E-Governance implementation, energy saving programme for
   street lights etc. PMIDC has developed a cluster based approach to solid waste
   management and is considering the setting up of a State level mechanism to
   monitor the solid waste management projects being implemented by private
   sector.
The Punjab Infrastructure Development Board(PIDB) is leading the preparation of
Bus Rapid Transport System projects in the State. PIDB would also be the
implementing agency for these projects.

2.1 Overall policy environment for Water supply and sewage
    functions

2.1.1 Institutional Structure
The municipal corporation act (Section 44) identifies water supply, sanitation and
solid waste management among the functions of urban local bodies (ULBs). The
Punjab Water Supply and Sewerage Board (PWSSB) Act established PWSSB with
the responsibilities for planning, design and construction of water supply and
sewage facilities. The Act also tasks PWSSB with administrative powers such as
prescribing staffing norms for water supply within the ULBs.
The LG department of the Government of Punjab (GoP) has policy making powers
with regard to water supply; it also exercises administrative control over the LMC.

                                                                                   6
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


Traditionally, financing of capital expenditure has been the responsibility of the GoP.
The PWSSB is responsible for design and construction, after which the assets are
handed over to the MCs for operation and maintenance. All the ongoing water and
sewage projects approved under JnNURM3 are also implemented by the PWSSB. In
the case of sewage treatment plants, in Ludhiana, the PWSSB continues to operate
them after construction.
                                  Figure 1 - Institutional Structure for WSS

                                                         Govt of Punjab


                        Local Govt Minister            UD Minister (Dy CM)              PHE Minister (AD)

                                                                                         No mandate for
                            Prin Secy LG                   Prin Secy UD                   urban sector


                    PMIDC             PWSSB



                                                           LMC                    UIT              LDA


                                       STP             Water Supply
                                    Operations         Department


In the past, responsibility for construction and operation was fragmented since it was
felt that the municipal corporations lack the specialized skills required for design and
construction. The GoP has recently taken a decision to devolve the entire
responsibility for water supply and sewage functions to five large municipal
corporations including Ludhiana. In future LMC will plan and implement water supply
and sewage projects. Ongoing projects will continue to be implemented by PWSSB.

2.1.2 Service Standards
Service level benchmarks (SLBs) for water supply and sewage functions have been
developed by the Ministry of Urban Development of the Government of India. These
are not mandatory and are intended only as guidelines. Nevertheless, these have
been adopted by the State Governments, especially since the sector did not have
any other standardized framework. The use of SLB framework has also been
accelerated by mechanisms such as the Central Finance Commission grants, which
linked a part of its disbursements to States declaring performance of ULBs as per
the SLB framework. The SLB framework has only been used for reporting and



3
    Jawaharlal Nehru National Urban Renewal Mission, a grant project from the national Government for urban infrastructure
     creation and reforms

                                                                                                                        7
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


planning purposes. There are no requirements to meet the targets specified in the
SLB framework and there are no consequences for under performance. There is no
framework for performance measurement in Punjab other than the SLB framework.

2.1.3 Cost recovery and pricing
Cost recovery is significantly low (28% in 2011 and 31% in year ending March
2014,). This is a result of a) low levels of tariff and exemption, b) poor collection
efficiency and c) higher costs as a result of high tubewell supply. The expenditure
gap is met by ad hoc provisions from the general municipal budget. In the past four
years ending March 2014, 77% of the revenue surplus from the general budget has
been used to subsidise WSS.
There is no established principle for cost recovery and pricing. Deciding the water
tariff structure is the responsibility of the LMC but is subject to the approval of the
State Government. Water supply is not a ring fenced function and the Water supply
finances are reported as a part of the municipal finance. As a result, there are no
targets for cost recovery for water supply.

2.1.4 Financing of investments
Most cities in India operate under an ad hoc investment framework which is
dependent on availability of grants from the State or national Governments; the
exceptions are those with a strong municipal revenue base. Ludhiana too operates in
a similar environment. Neither the water account nor the municipal account generate
surpluses that are capable of meeting the investment needs of the city. The State is
expected to finance the capital expenditure. State support to capital expenditure is
discretionary and there is no formal framework for capital expenditure support.

2.1.5 Autonomy of WSS service provision
Except for the creation of PWSSB by law, there is no formal requirement for any
particular institutional arrangement for the WSS provision. By default, the WSS
functions are housed under a departmental structure. There are no specific
requirements regarding ring fenced operations or financial reporting for WSS. The
WSS assets are owned nominally by the ULB. The accounting systems do not
record asset ownership and these are financed by the State Government. As a
result, there is only a handover of assets to ULBs after construction.
The State procurement rules apply for LMC as well as PWSSB. These rules specify
the procurement method and procedures to be followed. The staff are governed
under Government service rules.
The municipal act permits the ULBs to contract with external entities for specific
services. There is no explicit permission to pursue private sector arrangements;

                                                                                     8
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


there are understood to have been enabled under the facilitating clauses for
contracting. However, there are other restrictions such as the requirement that all
revenues of the municipal body be credited to the corporation fund first.

2.1.6 Functioning of WSS department
The WSS provision is in a departmental structure under the ULB and therefore the
autonomy is negligible. There are no formal specifications of the responsibilities of
the WSS service, performance standards, financial support etc. The operations are
headed by a senior water supply engineer, who is appointed by the State
Government amongst a pool of engineers in municipal services. Traditional
constraints of public sector employment, such as lack incentives for performance;
poor accountability; weak autonomy to execute job responsibilities; poor training and
career development opportunities etc. apply to WSS function also.
Financial management practices are based on Government accounting procedures.
In the recent years, LMC has been moving towards a double entry accrual based
accounting system, from an erstwhile cash based single entry accounting system.
The accounts of the corporation are required to be audited by the Examiner of the
Local Fund Accounts of the Government of Punjab.
Since the sector agencies do not finance infrastructure development and depend on
the State Government, infrastructure development is normally reactive and is in
response to availability of finances, such as through a Government grant programme
or an externally aided project. Plan preparation is carried out by the PWSSB, which
is an asset creator and not an operator. Therefore, plans have tended to focus on
asset creation and have not sufficiently addressed operational problems in service
delivery. Plans are prepared as per national guidelines of the Central Public Health
Engineering and Environmental Organisation.
The technical, commercial and financial operations reflect problems seen commonly
in Indian utilities. Operations are not codified and are generally only focused on
ensuring availability of water on a daily basis to consumers. Other aspects of service
delivery such as uninterrupted supply, complaint redressal etc are not focused on;
the attention to efficiency aspects such as leakage control, reduction of illegal
consumption are also low.




                                                                                    9
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


                      Table 1 - Key Service Level Benchmarks

   Service Area          Benchmark        Average for large         Ludhiana
                                            Indian cities
Water           supply 100%              54.7%                 Above 80%; being
coverage                                                       improved to near
                                                               100%
Availability litres per 135              89.9                  Around 280
capita per day
Hours of supply        24                4.3                   12 Hours
Sewage       network 100%                50.4%                 Above 80%, being
coverage                                                       increased
Treatment capacity 100%                  58%                   100%
as a % of sewage
generation
Cost recovery          100%              56.9%                 Around 31%
Source: Data from LMC, SLB notification of major States
Ludhiana has around 9 staff per 1000 water supply connections. In addition,
Ludhiana also has contract employees attached to each tubewell. The STPs are
operated by the PWSSB. The LMC meets the electricity costs, the cost of
outsourced operator and supervision charges of PWSSB. Compared to other similar
sized cities, the LMC has experienced and senior engineering staff. However, the
senior staff are nearing retirement. Both MCs have extreme short supply of junior
level engineers, since recruitment has been in freeze for several years. The
Government of Punjab is addressing this and is in the process of recruitment of
junior engineers. The Engineering cadre in MCs is transferable across cities which
improves cross learning.
Traditional customer databases, billing and collection systems exist, but these are
not backed by a GIS based customer database. The LMC lacks other utility systems
necessary for modern operations such as a) flow and pressure management, b)leak
detection, c) complaint redressal, d) investment planning, e) revenue and financial
management.




                                                                                10
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana



3 Institutional agenda in Ludhiana
Improving service levels in Ludhiana will require investments as well as improvement
in operational practices. Unlike in the past, this would require substantial efforts from
within the Municipal Corporation. The reasons are as follows:
a) The State Government has taken a decision to transfer design and construction
   responsibilities for water supply and sewage from PWSSB to LMC; Priority
   service improvements to shift to surface water sources and to provide continuous
   supply will require investments of Rs 2100 crores. This is three and a half times
   the capital expenditure LMC has implemented in the last four years; technical
   capacity to plan and implement these investments has to be developed by
   LMC.
b) To improve operational practices and achieve service levels, LMC needs to
   provide greater autonomy to WSS services and also induct technically
   qualified staff and reorient management practices.
c) The financial analysis indicates that in the next eight years the anticipated
   revenue surplus in the general budget is only 75% of anticipated deficit in the
   WSS account. This is a result of higher cost increases in WSS which are not
   matched by revenue increase. Therefore, the general budget will not be in a
   position to support WSS fully. Further, the available surpluses in the general
   budget will also be required to meet other committed loan repayments. Therefore,
   cost recovery from user charges needs to improve to eliminate or minimize
   subsidy requirement from general budget.
d) The State Government policies are expected to require the municipal
   corporations to bear an appreciable share of future capital expenditure. Even if
   the entire anticipated revenue surplus in the general budget is earmarked for
   proposed investments (ignoring subsidy needs of WSS, loan repayments and
   ULB contribution for JNNURM projects), it will only meet 36% of the proposed
   capital investments for the 24 X 7 project. Therefore LMC will need to raise new
   resources and support WSS capital investments.




                                                                                      11
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


                      Figure 2 - Comparison of financial capacity and requirements


                      627               Past Capex              Proposed Capex                             2,100




                732                     Revenue Surplus    WSS Subsidy Required            1,034




                732                     Revenue Surplus         Proposed Capex                             2,100




Note: All figures in Rs Crores




Thus, LMC needs to a) mobilise a part of the investments required, b)
eliminate/minimize reliance of WSS operations on general budget and c) adopt
a governance model that enables effective investments and service delivery.

3.1 Cost Recovery agenda
If WSS continues to demand the current extent of subsidies from the general budget,
none of the institutional agenda can be pursued. Therefore the first institutional
agenda needs to be increased cost recovery. At present, the cost recovery in the
WSS is 31%, as seen from Table 2. As a result 74% of revenue surplus in the
general budget has been utilized to subsidise WSS operations.
                                        Table 2 - Cost Recovery

 All figures in Rs Mn                                     Mar-11            Mar-12         Mar-13             Mar-14

 Revenues from WSS                                           231.0                 245.1           243.3            370.8

 O & M Expenditure                                           823.7                 988.8      1154.3               1202.6

 Cost Recovery                                               28.1%                24.8%        21.1%               30.8%



 General budget surplus                                     2277.6                1609.2      2074.3               1776.1

 Support to WSS                                             1229.0                1513.3      1196.8               1311.9

 WSS subsidy as a % of general budget surplus                54.0%                94.0%        57.7%               73.9%




                                                                                                                            12
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


Poor cost recoveries are a result of several factors, the key among them being
Exemption granted to households: In Ludhiana houses with plot area less than
125 square yards are exempt from water charges. This shrinks the paying customer
base in Ludhiana to 53%.
Non volumetric tariff: The tariff for the rest of the customers is a flat monthly
charge(separate charges exist for water supply and sewage). Further, lack of
increasing block volumetric tariff implies that customers are not being charged for
increased consumption, even though the average customer is being supplied water
in excess of normative requirements.
Lack of regular tariff revision: The fixed monthly tariff is not revised in step with
inflation. Manpower costs and electricity expenses contribute to a maximum share of
O & M expenses and increases in these cost heads are outside the control of LMC,
but it is unable to recover these from the customers through regular tariff revisions.
Lack of a regular tariff revision in the past has steadily reduced cost recovery and
tariffs are now inadequate to even recover staff salaries.
The financial analysis indicates that the 24 X 7 project could reduce electricity
expenses due to the shift to surface water sources. However, this reduction is not so
significant as to improve cost recoveries. Figure 3 summarises the effect of the 24 X
7 project on WSS subsidies as well as the subsidies at different levels of tariff
revision. Scenarios 1, 2 and 3 are without 24 X 7 project. Scenarios 4, 5 and 6 are
with implementation of 24 X 7 project.
In Scenario 1, which is the “as is basis”, WSS subsidies will amount to Rs 1034
crores till March 2022. In Scenario 2, if tariff is increased nominally (10% after
completion of JICA project and 6% p.a thereafter, all slabs are charged) the
subsidies will reduce only marginally (to Rs 899 crores), since tariff is still well below
cost. To achieve O & M cost recovery in the year 2022, annual tariff increase has to
26% (Scenario 3). Even in this case, the total WSS subsidy till cost recovery is
reached in the year 2022 will amount to 534.7 crores.
After implementation of the 24 X 7 project, the WSS subsidy till the year 2022 will
reduce to Rs 792.8 crores. This is due to a) reduction in O & M expenses, b)
increased base of paying customers assuming that the 0-5 Marla households will
also be charged after completion of project and c) volumetric tariff. With nominal tariff
increases of 10% in the year 2017-18 and 6% thereafter (Scenario 5), the subsidy
requirement will reduce marginally to Rs 740 crores. In order to achieve full cost
recovery, annual tariff increase has to be 17% p.a (Scenario 6) and even in this case
the WSS subsidy till cost recovery is reached in the year 2022 will be Rs 473.6
crores.



                                                                                       13
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana




              Figure 3 - WSS subsidy at different levels of tariff revision

                     1,034


                                        899

                                                                        793
                                                                                        740




                                                        535
                                                                                                        474




                  1. As is basis    2. Nominal       3. 26% p.a     4. Base case     5. Nominal      6. 17% p.a
                                   Tariff increase                                 tariff increase


Note: Figures indicate total WSS subsidy till March 2022 in Rs Cr.
The financial analysis indicates that on a standalone basis, the cost structure after
implementation of the proposed project is affordable (Figure 4). The average
monthly water bill for a household is expected to be Rs 510 in the year 2022. It may
be noted that this is at 185 litres per person per day consumption. If the consumption
is at the normative levels prescribed by CPHEEO (135 lpcd), the average bill per
month would be Rs 372 in the year 2022. If these are converted to 2014 prices
(assuming an inflation of 6% p.a), the average monthly bill for consumption of 135
lpcd would be Rs 233, which compares well with the current recoveries in Karnataka
where 24 X 7 projects have been implemented. Similarly, the cost Per KL would be
Rs 11.53 in 2022 prices and Rs 7.23 at 2014 prices.
          Figure 4 - Comparison of monthly bills and tariff for cost recovery

            Rs/ month                                                                                                    Rs/ KL
                                                                     In nominal terms
            550                                                                                      11.53                   12
                           510                                       In 2014 prices
            500                                                                                                              11

            450                                                                                                              10

            400                                                                                                              9
                                                              372
                                                                                                                             8
            350                                                                                                   7.23
                                        320
                                                                                                                             7
            300
                                                                                                                             6
            250                                                         233
                                                                                                                             5
            200
                                                                                                                             4
            150                                                                                                              3
            100                                                                                                              2
             50                                                                                                              1
              0                                                                                                              0
                             Monthly Bill               Monthly Bill @ 135 lpcd                         Tariff per KL



                                                                                                                                  14
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


Therefore, it would be possible for LMC to target cost recovery in the year 2022. It
would require the following measures;
a) Introducing charges for the currently exempted households on completion of the
   project
b) Introducing an increasing block volumetric tariff structure
c) Regular tariff revision linked to increases in input costs

3.2 Financing agenda
Any contribution from private sector or commercial borrowing towards capital
expenditure will need to be recovered, either through tariff or through repayments
from LMC. As noted earlier, O & M cost recovery itself is a medium to long term
agenda in WSS. Therefore recovery can only be through revenue surpluses from the
general budget of LMC.
The financial analysis indicates that the ability of LMC to finance the proposed WSS
investments is limited; at present 74% of available surplus is being used to finance O
& M deficit in WSS. This is expected to worsen in the future years. The available
revenue surplus (Item 1 in Table 3 below) is adequate to cover existing loan
repayments (Item 2) and anticipated WSS deficits(Item 3). The tariff structure used
for this scenario is comparable to the tariff followed in small cities in Karnataka for 24
X 7 water supply. After meeting these requirements, there would be a residual
surplus of only Rs 238.0 Crores which is inadequate to finance the water supply
capital expenditure of approximately Rs 2100 crores.
        Table 3 - Projected general budget revenue surplus and utilization, Rs Mn

 “As is” scenario on municipal                                         Mar-     Mar-     Mar-     Mar-     Mar-
 finance                                 Total     Mar-15   Mar-16      17       18       19       20       21     Mar-22

 1. General budget revenue surplus        7759.6   1004.6   1149.4    1150.8    996.3    938.5    908.4    845.7    765.9

 2.   Committed        capex       and    1863.4    288.2    272.4     256.6    240.8    225.0    209.2    193.5    177.7
 repayments

 3. WSS deficit to be subsidised          3516.0    910.6   1,039.7    935.9    688.9    473.0   -216.4   -206.4   -109.4

 4. Residual surplus for financing        2380.2   -194.2    -162.7    -41.7     66.6    240.4    915.6    858.6    697.6
 WSS capex

 With revenue improvement

 5. General budget revenue surplus       17137.2   1065.1   1267.3    1570.8   1770.3   2129.3   2588.2   3095.2   3650.9

 6.   Committed       capex        and    1863.4    288.2    272.4     256.6    240.8    225.0    209.2    193.5    177.7
 repayments (same as Item 2)

 7. WSS deficit to be subsidized          3516.0    910.6   1,039.7    935.9    688.9    473.0   -216.4   -206.4   -109.4
 (same as Item 3)

 8. Residual surplus for financing       11757.8   -133.6     -44.8    378.3    840.6   1431.3   2595.4   3108.1   3582.6
 WSS capex


                                                                                                                     15
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


If the growth in municipal finance is health (own revenue growing at 8% and share of
VAT growing at 13%), the available revenue surplus will increase to a total of Rs
1714 Crores till the year 2022 (Item 5). This would improve the ability of LMC to
finance committed capital expenditure, repayments and WSS deficit. From the year
2017 onwards, LMC would have a residual surplus. The total surplus that is available
to support capital expenditure is approximately Rs. 1175 crores (Item 8), which
could meet approximately 57% of the projected capital costs.
       Figure 5 – Surplus available to support WSS capital expenditure, Rs Crores

                                                                                                           358

                                                                                              311

                                                                                 260




                                                                   143


                                                       84

                                          38



               -13           -4

              2015         2016         2017          2018         2019         2020         2021         2022


Overall, it is likely that LMC could contribute to the financing of the proposed WSS
investments. This could be in the form of upfront commercial borrowings by LMC
which could be repaid through the surplus available, as indicated in Figure 5.



3.3 Governance agenda
Improving the governance of WSS4 is the third critical institutional agenda in
Ludhiana.
WSS governance in Ludhiana is similar to that of other Indian cities. Structurally,
WSS services are performed by a municipal department, like in many Indian cities.
The level of autonomy to the WSS services is weak. WSS operations are not
subjected to performance standards and oversight of operations is limited to

4
 Characteristics of well performing public water utilities; Aldo Baietti, William Kingdom and Meike van Ginneken; Water Supply
  and Sanitation Working Notes, May 2006
Template for Assessing the Governance of Public WSS Service Providers; A. Locussol and M. van Ginneken; World Bank,
  2010




                                                                                                                          16
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


ensuring availability of water on daily basis. WSS operations are not permitted to set
tariff  near cost recovery levels; investment support for WSS is ad hoc.
Governmental HR systems do not enable hiring of technically capable staff.
WSS operations are also not focused on performance or customer service. Staff
capacity is weak and staff are not rewarded or promoted for performance; operating
performance is not documented; and there is little effort to benchmark and improve
performance. Internal processes and systems are weak, like in many WSS
operations in India.
Improving WSS governance in Ludhiana will require actions in both directions –
firstly, the external policy environment and institutional structure for WSS
governance will need to improve and secondly WSS operations will need to be
focused on results and customer service. Each of these is necessary to improve
performance and neither of them is individually sufficient.
Key changes required in the external environment are summarized in Figure 6.
The current situation is shaded in blue and the desired status is shaded in green.
Given the current status of WSS in Ludhiana, the best possible solution may not be
practical at this point of time.




                                                                                   17
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana




                     Figure 6 - Key changes required in external environment
                                                            Intermediate stages
Area of Governance      Weak mechanisms                 ----------------------------------->        Best possible solution
Legal Structure          Departmental        Ring fenced operations           Authority under Law     Corporate Utility
                                                  Responsible for         Source to tap                 Source to tap
                                              distribution only; Bulk   responsibility for            responsibility for
                                             operations and capex by operations; investment            operations and
Mandate for the ULB    WSS not under ULB          separate entity      by separate entity               investments
                      Well below costs, ad
                          hoc revisions,                                Near O & M costs,      Cost recovery tariff
                     supported with ad hoc Near O & M costs, with     regular revisions and     with hard budget
Tariff setting               subsidy             ad hoc subsidy        transparent subsidy         constraint
                                               Clear performance
                         No performance          standards; no          Clear performance
Accountability for     requirements; weak       consequence for     standards; consequences       Independent
performance                monitoring               shortfalls             for shortfall      regulatory oversight
                                              Largely public sector
                       Governed by public       rules with some        Within public sector    Market linked with
                     sector rules; no linkage     provision for     rules, but with adequate     incentives for
Staff salaries          with performance           contracting       incentives and rewards       performance
                                                                      Objective framework    Enabled through tariff
                                                Need based and         linked to needs and     and objective Govt
Investment framework Ad hoc and inadequate         negotiated              performance               support

Legal structure: The desirable status for Ludhiana would be to establish a
corporatized water utility. The option of setting up an entity under law, such as an
authority or a Board, has limitations and is no longer a necessity since utilities under
corporate law have been well accepted in India, such as in the electricity sector.
Mandate for the ULB: Ludhiana is already in a relatively better position since it is
fully responsible for operations. The Government has decided in principle to devolve
the responsibility for capital expenditure also to LMC and this should be
implemented.
Tariff setting: Ludhiana is in a weak position in tariff setting practices. Due to the
low levels of tariff, it would continue to require support from the municipal budget and
therefore the best possible status may not be achievable in the medium term.
Ludhiana should target to achieve O & M cost recovery with transition support from
the general budget in the next six to eight years.
Accountability for performance: Though the SLB framework is used for planning
purposes, there are no consequences for poor performance. In the medium term,
Ludhiana should move to a situation where tariff revisions are linked to the WSS
operations achieving pre-decided efficiency targets. As and when the State
Government decides on establishing a regulatory framework, Ludhiana would also
be subject to it.


                                                                                                                           18
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


Staff salaries: Governments and Government agencies have a natural limitation in
accessing talent, due to rigid pay structures and lack of performance linked reward
systems. This is aggravated in the WSS context which is not considered as an
attractive career choice. This situation is unlikely to change without larger reforms in
Government HR rules. Therefore, the focus in Ludhiana should be to maximize the
possibilities for incentives and rewards within the Governmental system and to
tactically cope with this limitation to atleast attract a small set of functionally
competent staff.
Investment framework: At present, the investment framework is ad hoc with no
clear responsibilities to be shared between WSS operations, the ULB and the State
Government. In the near term, the responsibility for financing will rest largely with the
State Government (due to the financial condition). The State should target
establishing a framework for future capital expenditure that relies on a mix of WSS
revenues, ULB finances and State Government support. The need and extent of
capital investment should also be linked to performance.
While changes in the external environment are well recognized and the willingness
to implement them are also relatively high, the key challenge Ludhiana will face is in
internal performance orientation. WSS operations require urgent improvements. The
gap between existing capabilities and requirements are high. The ability of
Government owned entities to attract talent and to inculcate a performance
orientation within is still not proven. While there are examples in the electricity
distribution sector, the performance and skill gap in water sector is much wider as
compared to electricity sector.
Given these limitations, it is necessary for Ludhiana to examine outsourcing as an
alternative to building internal performance orientation. An appropriate PPP
arrangement will help Ludhiana outsource project implementation and service
delivery; and bye-pass the key limitations of Government owned operations –
inability to attract talent and inability to create a performance culture.




                                                                                      19
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


4 Institutional and PPP models for Ludhiana
In addition to pursuing various institutional options for WSS, different models of PPP
are also possible. Three broad models are commonly recognized based on domestic
experience;
   Based on parallels in electricity where unbundled, regional distribution utilities
    have been created; these are fully owned by the Government with one or two
    exceptions.
   In other infrastructure sectors, PPP projects have been implemented through an
    SPV framework. Such SPVs are generally fully owned by the private sector.
   Some PPP projects, especially in the airport sector have been implemented
    through SPVs which are jointly owned by the Government and the private
    partner.
These can be seen in two dimensions as below:
Institutional model for WSS: The options under this are i) the current ULB
structure, ii) a fully ULB owned SPV and iii) an SPV jointly owned with private sector
and iv) divestment.
PPP dimension: For simplicity, the PPP options can be seen as i) the current
system which has negligible private sector involvement, ii) limited outsourcing, iii) a
short to medium term PPP option with no private financing and iv) a long term option
like a concession which also includes some extent of private finance.
These are plotted in Figure 7 below and relevant examples in India (from water and
other sectors) are highlighted. These models are elaborated in the later sections. It
may be noted that so far, there hasn’t been any integrated water and sewage PPPs
in India. In Ludhiana, the models being explored also include the potential for
integrated water and sewage operations.
The models in the red shaded box (1a and 1b) have selective or no involvement of
private sector. Model 1a applies to most Indian cities where the operations are fully
Government owned and there is no private sector involvement. Ludhiana follows this
model. An improvement over this model would be the initiatives in Mumbai(ULB
dept) and Bangalore(Board). In these cities, selective private sector involvement has
been pursued; the private sector assists the WSS agencies in carrying out WSS
operations, but the responsibility for service delivery remains with the public
agency. In the case of Bangalore, the private sector is responsible for NRW
reduction whereas in Mumbai, the private sector has been contracted to provide a
variety of services including reduction of leakages and continuous supply.




                                                                                    20
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


                                                 Figure 7 - Options for structuring WSS in Ludhiana

                                                              Options for structuring WSS in Ludhiana
                                                                     a                    b                 c              d
   Substantial,                                                                                          Alicante      Delhi Power
                                                                 Khandwa
   including private 3                                                              NESL (Nagpur)       Cartagena       [JV Power
                                                                Aurangabad
     finance                                                        DJB                                  Airports       Licensee]
                   Level of private sector involvement




   Significant                                                   KUWASIP
     but for                                                   Latur (stalled)       Algiers + 3
   short term                                            2        Mysore             other cities
                                                                   Patna


  Selective and                                               Bangalore NRW,
                                                                                    Johannesburg
   short term                                                    Mumbai

                                                         1                         NWSC Uganda,
                                                                                     Madrid
                                                                                   Power Discoms
  Insignificant/
       Zero                                                      Ludhiana           STEM Water

                                                             ULB/Dept/Board       100% publicly      Joint ownership    Transfer of
                                                                                 owned company                           function
                                                                                  Institutional Structure


Model 1b refers to 100% Government owned companies with no significant private
sector involvement. Over the past ten years or so, integrated electricity Boards in
several States in India have been unbundled and corporatized. In most States
corporatized, regional electricity distribution utilities have been set up. They have the
same features as in this option, but have some additional features such as a) they
are generally unbundled and depend on power supplied by another upstream utility
and b) they are subject to independent regulation.
There are several international examples of this model, including Madrid (Spain) and
National Water Supply Corporation (Uganda). Annexure 1 provides further details of
these models. There aren’t any examples of such utilities in water supply in India yet.
An isolated example of this model in the water sector is STEM Ltd (in Maharashtra),
which is a company owned by ULBs to which it provides bulk water. STEM is not
involved in water distribution and therefore is not a c lear parallel to the “Utility” term
that is being used to define an organisation that serves end users directly.
The models in the green shaded box (2a and 2b) involve private sector in a short
term contract. Model 2a refers to arrangements where the ULB contracts with the
private sector to improve services. The 24 X 7 demonstration projects in Karnataka
in the three cities of Belgaum, Hubli-Dharwad and Gulbarga (KUWASIP) follow this

                                                                                                                                      21
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


model. The institutional structure of the WSS operations remained the same and
under the control of the ULB. A similar arrangement in Latur in Maharashtra failed in
implementation and has been suspended.
Model 2b refers to similar short term private sector arrangements, but under a ULB
owned utility. The private sector would be responsible for improving operational
performance. Where the existing utility is reasonably mature, the private sector
would work with the existing utility to improve performance in a management
contract. If the existing utility is not mature and does not have capacity, the private
sector may build its own operational setup. Capital expenditure is supervised by the
private sector but is financed by Government authorities. The private sector will also
be responsible for building the capacity of the publicly owned utility.
There are no examples of India of a similar approach in the water sector.
International examples of this model are Johannesburg in South Africa and Algiers in
Algeria (and in three other cities in Algeria). The Government corporatized the WSS
operations and established a fully Government owned company. A short term
contract was signed with private sector to improve utility performance.
Models 3a to 3d involve private sector finance. Model 3a is the usual practice in
infrastructure PPPs in India. A PPP project is housed in a Special Purpose Vehicle
which is fully owned by the private sector. The private sector mobilises all or
significant part of the finance required for capital expenditure, implements and is
responsible for operations and maintenance. At the end of the contract term, the
assets would be transferred to the Government agency; staff may be absorbed by
the private sector parties elsewhere; databases and other systems may be available
to the Government agency. There is no ownership relation between the SPV and
the Government agency; the relationship is entirely contractual. Examples of
such a model in water sector are the PPPs in Khandwa, Shivpuri, Delhi Jal Board
and Aurangabad, where 10% to 50% of the capital investments are being mobilized
by the private sector.
Model 3b is similar to 3a, except that the city also establishes a fully owned utility.
Nagpur Municipal Corporation has set up Nagpur Environmental Services
Limited(NESL) as a fully owned utility. Water and environmental services have
been delegated to the utility. The Executive Engineers handling the water supply
operation, elected officials and the Commissioner of the Corporation form the Board
of NESL. A few other officers from the corporation have been appointed to NESL.
NESL in turn has signed a PPP arrangement and has contracted all treatment and
distribution activities. NESL will only operate bulk water offtake and transmission
assets and supply raw water to NESL.
Model 3c is a joint ownership model, where the water operations are housed under a
Special Purpose Vehicle, which is jointly owned by the ULB and the private sector.

                                                                                    22
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


The special purpose vehicle mobilises finance from the market and is responsible for
all WSS capital expenditure and operations. This form is generally seen when ULB
involvement in the project company is considered necessary to ensure protection of
Government interests or to provide comfort of Government support to investors. This
design also has an additional benefit; the project company would survive the term of
the contract. Therefore, the operational staff, assets and systems housed under the
SPV would be available to the new set of shareholders (or) to the Government if it
assumes full ownership. This model is generally more suitable for a long term PPP
arrangement which has a full fledged capital structure. Examples of such a structure
in India in other infrastructure sectors are Airport PPP models in Mumbai, Delhi,
Bangalore and Hyderabad.
Model 3d is an extension of 3c, where the WSS operations are divested from
Government ownership through a statute and licenses are provided to private,
Government or joint venture companies. An example of this is the Delhi power
privatization model where distribution responsibilities were divested from
Government ownership and were transferred to a joint venture company through a
license.

4.1 Relevance to Ludhiana
In the context of Ludhiana, significant private sector involvement is necessary to
implement the agenda of capital investments and service delivery improvement.
Therefore, models 1a and 1b that rely only on public utility led improvements are not
advisable, since the existing WSS operations in Ludhiana lack the capacity.
Models 2a and 2b are possible in Ludhiana. Model 2a contracts out to private sector
on a short term contract, with all finance provided by LMC or GoP. However, it is not
recommended as a first choice since it does not build any long term sustainable
entity to provide services at the ULB level, and leaves the ULBs exposed in the
event of failure of the PPP contract for whatever reason.
Model 2b is relevant, but substantial freedom needs to be provided to private sector
to bring in own staff and systems since the WSS operations in Ludhiana are not
mature. Implementing 2b would involve the following steps:
1. Creation of a 100% ULB owned company(utility), which owns the system assets,
   employs limited senior staff (directly or under deputation)
2. The company contracts with the private sector through a Performance Based
   Management contract (6 to 10 year duration) to build the capacity of the new
   company and improve service to 24/7 across the city.
3. Capital finance will be mobilized by LMC and GoP. The operator will be paid a
   performance linked management fee for a range of services specified in the
   contract (e.g. the design, purchase, and operationalization of a GIS system).

                                                                                  23
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


In the context of Ludhiana, models 3a and 3b are possible, provided the surplus from
the general budget is made available for repaying the private investments. Within
these two, it is desirable to pursue Model 3b, since it involves the creation of a utility
which can take up the agenda for long term water supply and sewage planning. It
may be noted that in the case of 3b, since private financing will require a long term
PPP, the utility owned by the municipal corporation will be a lean utility which largely
undertakes strategic planning for water supply and sewage in the city as a whole.
Unlike in Model 2b, the private operator may not be tasked with creating operational
capacities within the utility in the Model 3b.


Models 3c and 3d require that the Joint Venture companies (or) Licensees are
allowed to recover the investments in WSS through user charges. Theoretically it is
also possible to provide the surplus available in the general budget to the joint
venture company or the licensee as a subsidy (like it is provided in electricity
distribution sector). These models require high level of maturity within the public as
well as the private sector. Moreover, since tariffs are expected to recover only O& M
costs, public and political acceptance has to be built up for providing transparent
subsidies from the general budget to the Joint Venture company or the licensee.




                                                                                       24
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


                                                   Table 4 - Benefits and limitations of options

               Model                                Benefits                                           Limitations                                 Remarks

Mode 1a: Status quo                    Familiar model;     natural    political   Limited autonomy; poor customer focus; poor                Not recommended
                                       oversight     and    high      political   financial resources; rigid procedures; inability to hire
                                       acceptability                              talent

Model 1b: Utility with no PPP.         Provides      autonomy,       improves     Without PPP, the desired performance improvements          Not recommended
                                       accountability                             are unlikely;
Most power distribution companies in
India.
STEM Ltd which is a municipal
owned (multi ULBs) bulk water
supplier incorporated as a company.

Model 2a: Short term PPP               Provides private sector skills for         Without creation of a utility, capacity of the ULB does    Recommended           if
                                       performance improvement.                   not improve; ULB will continue to depend on private        utility creation is not
Examples: KUWASIP, Mysore
                                                                                  sector for operations.                                     possible

Model 2b: Utility with short term      Provides      autonomy,       improves     Not possible to mobilise private sector finance.           Recommended
PPP.                                   accountability.
                                                                                  Sustainability after completion of PPP needs careful
Examples: None                         Provides private sector skills for         planning.
                                       performance improvement.

Model 3a: Traditional SPV              Provides private sector skills for         Does not create a ring fenced utility operation.           Does            not
                                       performance improvement.                                                                              accommodate Utility
Example: Water PPP in Khandwa,                                                    Does not create any capacity in the public body to
                                                                                                                                             concept in any way.
Shivpuri and Aurangabad                Preferred if private finance          is   manage water supply function.
                                                                                                                                             Not recommended for
                                       necessary and possible.
Malviya Nagar and Nangloi in Delhi                                                                                                           the project.
(12-15 years)




                                                                                                                                                                 25
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


               Model                                 Benefits                                      Limitations                             Remarks

Model 3b: Utility with long term PPP.   Provides      autonomy,    improves    No major limitations. Since the PPP is long term in    Recommended
                                        accountability.                        nature, there may not be any urgency in creating
NESL in Nagpur.
                                                                               operating capacity within the utility initially.
                                        Provide private sector skills for
                                        performance      improvement     and
                                        possibly private sector finance.

Model 3c.     3d:   Joint   ownership   Primarily to ensure Government         Public and political acceptance to provide subsidies   Not recommended
model.                                  involvement. Also enables continuity   from the general budget to the joint venture company
                                        of operations in events of dispute.    or licensee, is untested.
Airport PPP in Bangalore, Mumbai,
Delhi.                                                                         Liabilities and contracts need to be approved at
                                                                               Board level since a) there is joint ownership and b)
Power privatisation in Delhi
                                                                               the liabilities may continue with the company even
                                                                               after contract duration.
                                                                               May not be possible to formally delegate water
                                                                               supply function to the utility if it has private
                                                                               ownership.




                                                                                                                                                        26
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana



4.2 Recommended institutional models for Ludhiana
The recommended institutional models for Ludhiana are Model 2b and 3b.
Under Model 2b a fully owned utility is set up by LMC. Separately, a short term
contract is signed with a private sector operator. The Government and LMC jointly
provide the finances that are required for the capital expenditure. The private sector
oversees the implementation of the capital expenditure programme and provides O
& M for a short term (6-10 years in addition to the construction period). The
institutional relationships and the functions of agencies at different levels are
summarized below.
     Figure 8 - Institutional relationships, ULB owned utility with short term PPP
                                       arrangement
         2b. Short term PPP with commercial borrowing                                                       Ratifies delegation of water supply function
                                                                                                            to Utility
                                                                   State Government                         Provides security for commercial borrowing
                                                                                                            Ratifies the project , PPP arrangement,
                                                                                                            procurement and contract.
                                                       Repayment




                                                                                                            May provide grants and devolution as per
                              Security Mechanism for
                              commercial borrowing




                                                                                                            formulae to the Utility
            World Bank Loan




                                                                                                            Provides additional grants / operational
                                                                      Municipal                             subsidies to the utility if needed
                                                                     Corporation                            Sets/ approves tariff
                                                                                                            Sets long term performance targets for Utility
                                                                                                            Repays commercial borrowings
                                                                     Delegation of function
                                                                                                            Houses the water supply function
                                                                         Utility                            Signs a short term PPP contract
                                                                                         Utility capacity




                                                                                                            Oversees contracts, receives all financial flows,
                                                                                             building




               Upfront capex                                                                                maintains financial sustainability
                mobilisation                                                                                Plans long term improvements
                                                                                                            Private operator implements performance
                                                                   Private operator                         improvement project on fee basis.
                                                                                                            Private operator also trains utility staff and
                                                                                                            builds organisational capacity


                                                                                                            Are entitled to receive services/utilise facility as per
                                                                      Consumers                             terms under the contract




If a publicly owned utility cannot be formed in Ludhiana due to legal constraints or
other unavoidable reasons, the same structure as above would be relevant without
the utility. In such a case, the WSS operations can be ring fenced within the LMC as
much as legally permissible. The institutional relationships as shown above could still
be made applicable so as to ensure autonomy for WSS operations.


Under Model 3b, a publicly owned utility is set up by the LMC. This utility will have
the responsibility for long term planning for WSS. However, unlike in Model 2b, no
operations capacity will be built into the utility, since it would enter into a long term
PPP arrangement, where the private sector would also be responsible for mobilizing

                                                                                                                                                                       27
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


part of the finance required for the project. The repayment of the private investment
would be the responsibility of LMC; LMC may set up a security mechanism. Under
this mechanism GoP will commit to intercept the VAT related revenues that are due
to LMC from the GoP, in case LMC does not meet the repayment obligations to the
private sector.
     Figure 9 - Institutional relationships, ULB owned utility with long term PPP
                                       arrangement


                                                                                       Ratifies delegation of water supply function
         3b. Long Term PPP
                                                                                       to Utility
                                                                                       Ratifies the project , PPP arrangement,
                                                                      State Government procurement and contract.
                                                                                       Provides security mechanism for SPV
                                                                                       May provide grants and devolution as per
                                 Security Mechanism for




                                                                                       formulae to the Utility
                                  private sector capital
               World Bank Loan




                                                                                                  Provides additional grants / operational
                                                                    Ludhiana Municipal subsidies to the project, if needed
                                                                       Corporation     Retains right to approve tariff
                                                                                                  Sets long term performance targets for Utility
                                                           Capex Component




                                                                             Delegation of function
                                                              repayment




                                                                                                  Houses the water supply function
                                                                                 Utility          Outsources performance improvement through
                                                                                                  a PPP arrangement
                                                                                                  Oversees contracts, receives all financial flows,
                                                                                                  maintains financial sustainability
             Capital Expenditure                                                                  Plans long term improvements

                                                                                                      Fully owned by private sector which appoints
                                                                         Privately owned              Board and top management
                                                                               SPV                    Mobilises part of capex
                                                                                                      The SPV adopts Private Sector commercial and
                                                                                                      operating practices.
                                                                                                      The SPV is governed by the terms of the contract
                                                                             Consumers                to provide services and receive revenue.
                                                                                                      SPV is wound up after contract ends.




                                                                                                                                                         28
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana



5 Annexure 1 – Institutional Models


Model 1b: Fully ULB owned utility with no PPP
In this model, the ULB establishes 100% ULB owned utility SPV. The ULB formally
delegates water supply operations to the SPV. The city will appoint the top
management of the utility. It is likely that existing senior officers of the city (or even
the water board) handling water supply are appointed as the top management to the
utility. It may compromise some of the performance expectations, especially since
existing staff are not familiar with distribution improvement. In the normal course, the
top management appointment should be by the city; but it’s also possible that the
State appoints some officers to the utility (administratively persuading the city to
appoint the State nominees). It would distort power equations and the purpose for
which the utility is set up; this may need to be addressed in the project design. The
city will play the regulatory role; it would set performance standards and approve
cost recovery tariff.
              Figure 10 – Model 1b: Fully ULB owned utility with no PPP

                                  Ratifies tariff, if required under law
            State Government      Sets public procurement guidelines
                                  Sets borrowing limits
                                  Provides devolution as per formulae

                                  Appoints top management of the Utility
                Municipal         Approves water supply bye laws
               Corporation        Oversees service delivery
                                  Approves cost recovery tariff (or)
                                  Provides transparent and defined subsidies to cover gaps

                                  Hires and retains competent staff
                                  Procures from vendors and service providers
                  Utility         Borrows from market as necessary
                                  Sets operational and commercial procedures
                                  Plans improvements and implements capital investments
                                  Is a standalone financially sustainable entity

                                  Understand service entitlements
                                  Are able to hold utility accountable for service
                Consumers         Are able to engage with utility in planning
                                  Are able to access performance information


Over the past ten years or so, integrated electricity Boards in several States in India
have been unbundled and corporatized. In most States corporatized, regional
electricity distribution utilities have been set up. They have the same features as in
this option, but have some key differences such as a) they are generally unbundled

                                                                                             29
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


and depend on power supplied by another upstream utility and b) they are subject to
independent regulation.
There aren’t any examples of such utilities in water supply in India yet. An isolated
example of this model in the water sector is STEM Ltd (in Maharashtra), which is a
company owned by ULBs to which it provides bulk water. STEM is not involved in
water distribution and therefore is not a clear parallel to the “Utility” term that is being
used to define an organisation that serves end users directly.



Example: National Water and Sanitation Corporation (NWSC) of
Uganda5
The National Water and Sanitation Corporation (NWSC) of Uganda was created by
decree in 1972. Twenty-three years later, the NWSC Act of 1995 revised its
objectives, powers, and structure to require, among other things, that NWSC’s
revenues be sufficient to cover all costs, including debt service, depreciation, and a
return on investment. As of July 2004, NWSC was providing water supply services to
about 1.5 million people in 15 urban service areas throughout the country and
operating the few sewerage systems that exist therein.
Between 1988 and 1998, bilateral and international development agencies financed
substantial investments in rehabilitation and expansion of fixed assets, but some of
the investments were ill-conceived and resulted in excess capacity. Part of the funds
was on-lent to NWSC at near-market rates. Despite the legal reform, by 1998
NWSC’s performance was unsatisfactory. Unaccounted for water (UfW) stood at 51
percent, and collection efficiency was only 60 percent. The corporation was severely
overstaffed; only three of its service areas were able to meet their costs, and NWSC
could no longer service the debt that resulted from its investment boom.
In late 2000, a comprehensive study of urban water supply and sanitation services
identified the key challenges and sources of inefficiency in the services. That year,
the government of Uganda (GOU) agreed to a three-year Performance Contract
(PC1) with NWSC under which the latter’s debt service obligations were suspended
in return for a commitment to operational and financial improvements and an
increase in coverage, reflecting GOU policy objectives. A second Performance
Contract (PC2) was signed in 2003. PC2 allowed for the continued temporary
suspension of debt service and specified that NWSC’s debt would be restructured to
a sustainable level.




5
    Extract from Case Studies of Bankable Water and Sewerage Utilities Volume: II

                                                                                         30
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


NWSC Uganda has, during the period 2000-2004 has shown good results and
achieved significant improvements in operational performance, financial health, and
compliance with contracts agreed with the government of Uganda. By 2004, the
corporation had begun to generate an operating surplus.

Example: Metropolitan region of Madrid, Spain
Institutional arrangement: Since 1951, the water supply services in the region of
Madrid have been provided by a 100% publicly owned company called Canal de
Isabel II. Over a period of time, the company had entered into several agreements
with the municipalities in the region to manage the water supply and sewage
services. These agreements cover both the technical requirements and customer
service requirements. At present the Company has about 1.4 million customers.
The group was fully owned by the Community of Madrid till 2011. Since 2012, a new
company Canal de Isabel II Gestion has been created to enable other municipalities
to own the business. At present 82.4% of the equity is owned by the Community of
Madrid through the parent company and the rest are owned by the municipalities
which are served. The restructuring also provides for potential dilution of public
ownership in favour of a private partner upto 49%.
Operational results: The Company is managed professionally and is supervised by
the Board of Directors who are appointed by the municipalities and the community of
Madrid. The Vice President of the Community of Madrid chairs the Board of
Directors. The company delivers water to all its customers on a 24 X 7 basis. NRW
levels are 18% out of which physical losses are estimated to be about 7%. The
Company has consistently generated profits and currently earns about Rs 7200
crores annual revenue; profits after tax are approximately 20% of revenue. The
Company pays significant dividends to its shareholders and in the current year
expects to issue approximately Rs 710 crores as dividend. The Company prepares
tariff proposals based on financial projections. These are approved by the regional
Government. The Company has a two part tariff like other Spanish utilities
comprising of a fixed charge and a telescopic variable charge. In addition, during dry
season, the Company also imposes a higher tariff of upto 50% to discourage
excessive consumption. This has helped the utility manage water supply during dry
seasons; Consumption per capita has reduced by 25% over the recent years due to
demand management.
Over a period of time, the Company has also expanded its services. The Group
companies now serve customers in other regions of Spain, Colombia and Ecuador.
The group also provides technical services in Panama and Dominican Republic. As
on the year 2011, the group was providing water services to 16 municipalities in
Latin America and to 185 municipalities in Spain.


                                                                                   31
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana



Model 2B: ULB owned SPV entering into a short term PPP
In this model, the 100% ULB owned SPV contracts with a private operator under a
short term arrangement. In addition the operator may also be required to train the
ULB staff and build the required systems of the SPV. Thus, at the end of the contract
period, in addition to physical improvements in distribution, the Utility/SPV would
have also been strengthened and would have gained capacity.
                                        Figure 11 - Model 2b

                                                 Ratifies delegation of water supply
                                                 function to Utility
                                State Government Ratifies the project , PPP arrangement,
                                                 procurement and contract.
                                                 May provide grants and devolution as per
                                                 formulae to the Utility

                                                        Provides additional grants / operational
                                    Municipal           subsidies to the utility if needed
                                   Corporation          Sets/ approves tariff
                                                        Sets long term performance targets for Utility
                                   Delegation of function
                                                        Houses the water supply function
                                       Utility          Signs a short term PPP contract
                                                        Oversees contracts, receives all financial flows,
             Utility capacity                           maintains financial sustainability
                 building                               Plans long term improvements
                                                            Private operator implements performance
                                Private operator            improvement project on fee basis.
                                                            Private operator also trains utility staff and
                                                            builds organisational capacity


                                                            Are entitled to receive services/utilise facility as per
                                   Consumers                terms under the contract




Example: SEAAL, Algiers
PPP arrangement: The Government of Algeria recognised growing water problems
after a series of drought in the early 2000’s. The Government initiated a PPP
arrangement for the capital city Algiers (3.2 mn current population) with the Suez
Group. The staff and assets of the State owned operations were transferred to a new
water utility company (SEALL) wholly owned by Government shareholders.
Parallelly, the Government awarded a management contracted to Suez. The
objectives of the management contract were two fold, a) to deliver continuous water
supply in the city of Algiers within 42 months and b) to build the strength of the State
owned company SEAAL.




                                                                                                                       32
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana



                            Public shareholders



                            Board of Directors
                                                         MANAGEMENT CONTRACT


                                                                                 Obligations and
                                                                               remuneration of SE



                      Stock company of algerian law    Management of SEAAL
                                                       Transfer of know-how
                          Management of water          27 Expatriates + Technical Assistance
                         and wastewater services




The state owned operations had approximately 5800 employees. All the employees
were to be retained in the new arrangement. As per the contract, Suez was
permitted to bring in only 27 of its own employees to manage the utility out of which
9 were in management positions and 18 were in operational positions. In addition,
Suez was permitted to bring in specific expertise for short periods of time. The CEO
of SEAAL would be nominated by Suez. All large scale capital investments, including
bulk water capacity additions will be implemented by the Government. Water tariff is
set by the Government and is not influenced by SEAAL or Suez. There have been
no tariff revisions since 2005. Any subsidy requirements are met by a direct transfer
from the Government shareholders to SEAAL. In addition the Government also
meets the revenues due to SUEZ under the management contract.
Achievements: Public investments have improved bulk water availability by 50%.
Within four years, SEAAL had achieved 24 X 7 supply for 100% of its consumers, up
from 6% when the management contract was signed. This improvement was
achieved replacing only 289 kms out of the total network of approximately 4000 kms.
NRW in the intermittent regime was 62% and this has been reduced to 52% under
continuous regime.
Utility strengthening targets were fully achieved. These targets were set using the
WIKTI (Water Industry Knowledge Transfer Initiative) framework of Suez under
which 38 critical processes of the utility are benchmarked against international
standards. Annual targets were set for each year of the contract and improvements
were audited by both Suez staff and external experts. All the knowledge transfer
targets have been achieved. Day to day operations of the utility are now being run by
the staff themselves.
The management contract was extended in the year 2011 for an additional five years
to a) deepen the utility strengthening and b) to improve performance in an adjacent
area of about 0.8 million people. This contract will be completed in the year 2016.




                                                                                                    33
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


Example: Johannesburg Water6
Johannesburg Water(JW) was incorporated on 20 November 2000 by the City of
Johannesburg(CoJ) and started operating as a business on 1 January 2001. Its core
business is distributing potable water, and collecting and treating of wastewater; this
includes infrastructure provision and maintenance, quality control, and customer
services.
It entered into an arrangement with a private sector company, Johannesburg Water
Management (JOWAM), which was a joint venture between the Suez Group of
France, and its subsidiaries in the UK and SA. JOWAM was brought in to assist JW
with its operations for five years from 1 April 2001 until June 2006. JOWAM was
responsible for the day-to-day management of many aspects of JW’s functioning; the
JW Board were accountable to the CoJ, with the CoJ responsible for investment
funding and potential funding shortfalls. The objectives of the management contract
were to leverage private-sector expertise to build a financially viable and efficient
water and sanitation entity through a structured skills transfer programme. A key
aspect of the skills transfer programme was that JOWAM would over time reduce the
number of its managers deployed within JW.
 JOWAM started the management contact in April 2001 with 13 managers/experts,
and this was reduced to four in year three, and two in the last two years of the
management contract. The indicators for monitoring of and remuneration for
JOWAM’s performance were set out in the management contract. Monitoring of
JOWAM’s performance was overseen by the Board and the MD of JW, with an
independent auditor contracted by the Board to assess JOWAM’s performance.
Remuneration paid to JOWAM was based on both a fixed fee and an incentive
scheme.




6
    Extracted from Johannesburg Case Study, Water Dialogues Synthesis Report 2009

                                                                                    34
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana



Model 3a: Privately owned Special Purpose Vehicle
This is the usual practice in infrastructure PPPs in India. A PPP project is housed in
a Special Purpose Vehicle which is owned by the winning bidder. An SPV becomes
necessary in case the winning bidder is a consortium and is practically necessary
due to project finance reasons even when the winning bidder is a single company.
The relationships are depicted below;
        Figure 12 – Model 3a: Traditional SPV Model in Infrastructure PPPs


                                     Respective         Ratifies the project , PPP
                                    Government          arrangement, procurement and
                                                        contract
                                                        May provide grants to the project

                                                        Signs and oversees the contract
                                  Concessioning/        May also be the offtake agency in certain
                                    contracting         situations
                                     authority          Makes performance linked payments, if
          Consortium                                    relevant, under the contract
                                 Concession Agreement
           partner 1
                                                        Is joint owned by winning consortium
          Consortium                                    Provides service under the contract
                                        SPV             terms
           partner 2      100%
                                                        Receives payment for services as per
                                                        agreed revenue model
          Consortium                                    Is generally wound up or defunct after
           partner 3                                    the term of the agreement

                                                        Are entitled to receive services/utilise
                                                        facility as per terms under the
                                    Consumers
                                                        contract


At the end of the contract term, the assets would be transferred to the Government
agency; staff may be absorbed by the private sector parties elsewhere; databases
and other systems may be available to the Government agency. There is no
ownership relation between the SPV and the Government agency; the
relationship is entirely contractual.




                                                                                                    35
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana



Model 3b: A fully ULB owned SPV with long term PPP
The difference between this and Model 2B is only the duration of the PPP
arrangement and that some amount of private finance may be coming through
the private operator. The specific features of this model are
a) Formal delegation of the water supply function to the Utility by the municipal
   corporation, if permitted under the laws; ratified by the State Government if
   necessary.

b) Formal expectation that the Utility will be a standalone financially sustainable
   entity; to this extent, financial support to the utility will be formalised; The State
   may provide devolutions and grants to the Utility, nominally routed through the
   corporation. The corporation may provide additional annual operating subsidies
   that are pre-determined. The corporation also sets long term performance goals
   for the utility.

c) The utility contracts with the private sector partner for a long term to achieve
   performance improvement targets. Some amount of private finance may be
   mobilised by the private partner. The Utility may provide some amount of
   concessional public finance, in the initial stages and if necessary for future
   expansions. The utility also undertakes long term performance planning, which
   may go beyond contract scope of the private operator.

After the contract duration ends, the Utility may retender the project or absorb the
assets into itself, becoming an operating public utility.
This arrangement is depicted below:
                Figure 13 - Model 3b – Long term PPP arrangement

                                                      Ratifies delegation of water supply
                                                      function to Utility
                                     State Government Ratifies the project , PPP arrangement,
                                                      procurement and contract.
                                                      May provide grants and devolution as per
                                                      formulae to the Utility

                                                             Provides additional grants / operational
                                         Municipal           subsidies to the project, if needed
                                        Corporation          Retains right to approve tariff
                                                             Sets long term performance targets for Utility
                                        Delegation of function
                                                             Houses the water supply function
                                            Utility          Outsources performance improvement through
                                                             a PPP arrangement
                                                             Oversees contracts, receives all financial flows,
               Consortium                                    maintains financial sustainability
                partner 1                                    Plans long term improvements

                                                                 Fully owned by private sector which appoints
               Consortium                                        Board and top management
                                     Private owned SPV The SPV adopts Private Sector commercial and
                partner 2     100%
                                                                 operating practices.
                                                                 The SPV is governed by the terms of the contract
               Consortium                                        to provide services and receive revenue.
                partner 3               Consumers                SPV is wound up after contract ends.



                                                                                                                    36
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana




Example: Nagpur Municipal Corporation
A close parallel to this model is the SPV, Nagpur Environmental Services
Limited, set up by Nagpur Municipal Corporation. Water and environmental
services have been delegated to the utility. The Executive Engineers handling the
water supply operation, elected officials and the Commissioner of the Corporation
form the Board of NESL. A few other officers from the corporation have been
appointed to NESL. However, NESL in turn has signed a PPP arrangement and has
contracted all treatment and distribution activities. NESL will only operate bulk water
offtake and transmission assets and supply raw water to NESL. The key difference
is that, instead of developing as an operating utility, NESL has outsourced
distribution functions.
                  Figure 14 - Model 2C as implemented in Nagpur



                                                       State Government

                                           Approves setting up of SPV and transfer of
                                                        function to SPV


                                                                NMC

                                                            Fully owned SPV

                                                                NESL

                                                    PPP for treatment and distribution


                          NESL’s own
                                                          PPP Operator
                          operations   Bulk water
                                         supply



                                                            Consumers




                                                                                         37
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana



Model 3c: Joint ownership model
In the joint ownership model, the project is housed under a Special Purpose Vehicle,
which is jointly owned by the ULB and the winning bidder(s). This form is generally
seen when ULB involvement in the project company is considered necessary to
ensure protection of Government interests or to provide comfort of Government
support to investors. This design also has an additional benefit; the project company
would survive the term of the contract. Therefore, the operational staff, assets and
systems housed under the SPV would be available to the new set of shareholders
(or) to the Government if it assumes full ownership.
Thus, this structure ensures that transition from private ownership to public
ownership is relatively smoother; the project company can operate as a “going
concern7” even though ownership would change at the end of the contract . It
allows the Government to easily continue operations if there is a dispute with
the Operator, since staff, systems and procedures are built considering the SPV as
a “going concern.”
                                 Figure 15 - Model 3c - Joint Ownership Model

                                                                              Ratifies the project , PPP arrangement, JV
                                                                              arrangement procurement and contract.
                                                    State Government
                                                                              May provide grants and devolution as per
                                                                              formulae to the corporation.
                          Shareholders’ Agreement

                                                                              Signs and oversees the contract
                                                       Municipal              A minority interest in the SPV.
                 Winning bidder(s)                                            Makes performance linked payments, if
                                                      Corporation
                                                                              relevant under the contract.
                                                                              Delegation of water supply function may not
                           74%            26%         Transfer of function/
                                                                              be possible.
                                                      License as per Act
                                                                              Board is jointly appointed by the owners.
                                                                              Top management is appointed by the Private
                                                            SPV               partner.
                                                                              The SPV adopts Private Sector commercial and
                                                                              operating practices.
                                                                              Some decisions will require Board approval, but
                                                                              operations are delegated to the management
                                                                              The SPV is governed by terms of the contract to
                                                                              provide services and collect revenue
                                                                              Are entitled to receive services/utilise facility as
                                                                              per contract terms
                                                       Consumers




7
    “Going concern” implying a company that indefinitely continues operations as opposed to an SPV that is designed for a limited
     purpose and duration of operations; does not imply “going concern” as per accounting principles

                                                                                                                                     38
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


There are normally two contractual relationships in such structures, a) a concession
agreement between the ULB and the jointly owned SPV that provides service and b)
a shareholder’s agreement between the ULB and the private sector shareholders.
The municipal corporation has a minority shareholding in the project SPV-Utility. The
shareholding agreement will specify mutual rights, matters that require Board
approval, and mutual rights to appoint members of the Board and the top
management. All matters related to service provision such as service obligations,
tariff, responsibility for expansion etc are governed by the Concession Agreement
which is signed between the ULB and the SPV-Utility.
Unlike in the earlier model, there could be legal restrictions to delegate the
water supply function under the laws to the SPV-Utility, since it is partially
privately owned.
On expiry of the Agreement, full ownership of the SPV-Utility may be assumed by
the municipal corporation. It could retender for a similar arrangement. Alternatively,
at this point of time, the water supply function may be delegated to the SPV-Utility,
making it a formal Public Utility.
This model is generally more suitable for a long term PPP arrangement which has a
full-fledged capital structure; however, even under a short term management
contract, this model could be followed, with suitable adjustments.
Examples of such a structure in India in other infrastructure sectors are a) Airport
PPP models in Mumbai, Delhi, Bangalore and Hyderabad and b) Power privatisation
model in Delhi.

Example: Alicante city utility (Spain)
PPP arrangement: The Alicante city (population of 520,000) is served by a mixed
ownership model. Under this model, a legal mixed capital company, generally having
upto 50% private capital is formed. The local Governments can award long term
contracts to such a mixed capital company. The private investor in the company is
selected through a tender process which is standardised and considers both
technical and financial requirements. The contract durations are 25 years (for service
contracts) and upto 75 years (when it involves hydraulic works).
Aguas De Alicante (AA) is one such mixed capital company. A Spanish incorporated
water company Agbar holds 50% of the equity. Alicante Municipal council holds 50%
of the equity. The Mayoress of the city council is the head of the Board of Directors.
The company was first set up in the year 1953 and in the year 2006 the municipal
council extended the contract until 2036.
The right to use public assets are contributed as equity by the council; the private
partner brings in cash equity that may be required for further investments. Within the

                                                                                   39
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


mixed capital company, the private investor is in charge of appointing the managing
director and area managers. The private partner is also responsible for operations,
technical and commercial policies. Regular decisions require a simple majority of the
Board. Specific decisions, such as bye law modification, credit operations,
investment plans and financial statement approvals require a three fourth majority.
Tariff proposals are prepared by the company and submitted to the regional
Governments which alone have the authority to approve them. Every year the
Company (AA) prepares financial projections. Dividends to equity holders are
considered and projected in the financial statements. The private partner (Agbar) is
also paid a small management fee (generally 2% to 6% of annual revenues, not
necessary in all contracts). The city council considers the financial projections and
approves the tariff proposals which are further approved by the regional community
rate commission.
Achievements: The entire city receives continuous water supply; NRW levels are
around 10% and is the best in Spain; the city has a fixed monthly tariff and a
telescopic variable charge; the city is in financial surplus. Current initiatives are to
improve reuse (currently at 2.5%), storm water management (due to irregular
rainfall), waste to energy ( a co- generation plant is already operating) and citizen
education. AA has been able to manage its scarce resources well; it supplies 114
lpcd at present and has not resorted to bulk water capacity addition since 1991. The
utility reports that there is a common interest among partners to ensure financial
viability and all issues have been resolved amongst the partners without seeking
recourse to arbitration (which is permitted under the contract).

Example: Cartagena, Colombia
PPP arrangement: The mixed ownership model of Alicante has also been followed
in Colombia to improve services in the city of Cartagena. Agbar is the common
private partner in both Alicante in Spain and in Cartagena in Colombia. Cartagena
has a population of approximately 1 million. The water services when the PPP was
pursued were poor and very similar to Indian water utilities; network was old and
dilapidated, service was intermittent, coverage was low, commercial efficiencies
were poor and there was under recovery. The mixed ownership model was pursued
in Cartagena by transferring the water operations from the district utility to Aguas de
Cartagena, a new company. The public ownership was 50%, Agbar owned 45.91%
and another private operator owns the rest of the shareholding. Board comprises five
members and decisions require 80% agreement. The private operator appoints the
CEO. Investments were made in bulk water capacity, treatment capacity and in
distribution management.
Achievements: The mixed ownership company has delivered significant
improvements. Number of customers has increased by about 140%, coverage has

                                                                                     40
Institutional agenda and PPP options in Ludhiana


reached 99.9% from an earlier 73.6%, water is provided 24 X 7, number of meters
has increased by almost 300%, metered billing has increased to 99.67% as
compared to the earlier 58.6% and collection efficiency has increased from 69% to
96.6%. Utility capacity has significantly increased; several processes of the utility
have an ISO certification; significant investments have been made into utility
processes, technology and information systems have been established; asset
maintenance culture has been introduced.




                                                                                  41
