                                                                                                                        98050

           Governance Development Marketplace in
                         Cameroon
                      Lessons Learned


TABLE OF CONTENTS

TABLE OF CONTENTS ..................................................................................................... i
ACRONYMS ...................................................................................................................... ii
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE .............................................................................. 1
GDM OBJECTIVE AND STRUCTURE ........................................................................... 1
DM PROCESS .................................................................................................................... 2
DM FUNDED INITIATIVES ............................................................................................ 2
DM ACHIEVEMENTS ...................................................................................................... 7
DM CHALLENGES ........................................................................................................... 9
OTHER GDM ACTIVITIES ............................................................................................ 10
LESSONS LEARNED...................................................................................................... 10
CONCLUSION ................................................................................................................. 12
ANNEX 1: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS INTERVIEWED ............................................ 13
ANNEX 2: DEVELOPMENT MARKETPLACE OUTPUTS AND OUTCOMES ........ 15
ACRONYMS

CAS    Country Assistance Strategy

CHOC Changing Habits Opposing Corruption
CRS    Catholic Relief Services
CSO    Civil Society Organization
CSRC   Civil Society Resource Center
DM     Development Marketplace
DP     Development Partner
GoC    The Government of Cameroon

IGA    Income Generating Activity
GDM    Governance Development Marketplace
GPF    Governance Partnership Facility
GOC    Government of Cameroon

PTA    Parents-Teachers Association




                                            ii
INTRODUCTION AND OBJECTIVE

1.     Governance is a major challenge to Cameroon's development. Weak
governance affects most economic transactions and hampers delivery and quality of
services. Based on Cameroon’s development strategy (as expressed in the 2035
Vision and the 2009 Growth and Employment Strategy), the objective of the World
Bank 2010-2014 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) is to boost inclusive growth,
through increased competitiveness and improved service delivery. Governance is a
cross-cutting theme in the CAS and for World Bank operations. To support the
governance agenda in Cameroon, the World Bank has mobilized funds through the
multi-donor Governance Partnership Facility (GPF) for the Banking on Change
Governance Program in Cameroon (hereafter the “Governance Program”), which
became active in March 2010.
2.      The objective of the GPF-funded Governance Program is to increase
transparency, accountability, and participation related to key governance issues in
selected sectors in Cameroon. As outlined in the CAS, the World Bank’s governance
entry points in Cameroon are at three levels: macroeconomic, sector-specific, and
demand-side. One of the activities financed under the GPF Governance Program
included small grants provided for the third governance entry point level: innovative
demand-side civil society activities through the Governance Development
Marketplace (GDM) component of the Governance Program.
3.      This report describes output, lessons, and conclusions from the GDM
component. GDM’s main output, the Development Marketplace (DM), is described
in detail and results and lessons learned are described for both the DM and the GDM
as a whole. Other activities under the GDM include a large knowledge sharing event,
support to a South-South exchange and seven DM finale debates. Sources for the
report include written material (e.g. Catholic Relief Services’ (CRS) evaluation report
of GDM, summaries of financed activities, feature stories, GDM Finale event guide)
and interviews with GDM participants and World Bank staff.

GDM OBJECTIVE AND STRUCTURE

4.       The objective of the GDM component of the Governance Program was to
support civil society organizations (CSOs) in Cameroon to engage in innovative
activities aimed at generating and articulating demand for better governance and
accountability. Activity examples include enabling citizens to become more actively
engaged in demanding better quality of public services and more transparent
government. GDM would finance 10 to 15 small grants with up to $25,000 annually
per activity.

5.      The proposal for the GDM component envisages that funds would be granted
to successful CSOs following a funding proposal competition. The most promising
proposals were to be invited to the DM finale, planned as a high profile exposition in
Yaoundé. At the exposition, finalists would exhibit their proposals to a diverse set of
invitees and a jury of reviewers. The jury members were selected from the
Government of Cameroon (GoC), the donor community (including the World Bank),
and civil society.



                                                                                     1
6.     CSOs supported by the GDM were to implement their activities within an
agreed timeframe. CSOs would also increase their coordination, collaboration and
information-exchange relative to governance and integrity-related activities.

7.     GDM financing would incorporate support from the World Bank's Civil
Society fund, which the World Bank’s Country Office in Cameroon participated in
from 2008 to 2010. Further, the GDM was planned as a joint event with the Changing
Habits Opposing Corruption (CHOC) Program and to be taken over by CHOC after
completion of the GDM component through the support of CHOC by other
Development Partners (DPs).

DM PROCESS

8.      DM objectives were to identify and fund innovative grassroots projects with
potentially high development impact; share knowledge and ideas; and stimulate
public debate around community-driven solutions to governance issues.

9.     Preparations for the GDM component's activities began during the first year
(2010) of the Governance Program. A local partner, the CRS, was hired (under a
standard, competitive World Bank procurement process) to manage the DM-process
throughout the country.

10.     Interest in the DM was strong: in all, 230 CSOs submitted proposals and 30
projects were selected for a final competition held in July 2011 in Yaoundé. At the
event, 15 CSOs were awarded grants to implement their activities. The activities are
described individually below in the section DM funded activities.

11.    The DM finale was held in connection with the 2011 Governance Forum,
which included seven governance debates on the following issues (1) infrastructure,
demography, and institutions; (2) challenges to fiscal decentralization; (3) corruption
in the health sector; (4) management of forest resources; (5) cost of Primary
Education; (6) developing citizens' voice using ICT, and; (7) participation and local
development. All DM finalists were invited to present their activities using stands at
the Governance Forum, allowing for interaction between DM finalists and
Governance Forum participants.

12.    CRS further provided training in the areas of communication, presentation,
and financial reporting to all 30 finalists. This work resulted in CSO activity flyers
handed out to participants during the Governance Forum. The events benefited from
high-level participation from the World Bank, the Government of Cameroon (GoC),
as well as elected representatives, CSO leaders, and representatives from workers
unions and business associations. In all, about 400 visitors attended the DM finale.

DM FUNDED INITIATIVES

13.     The DM finale identified fifteen proposals for GDM funding. A description of
each activity is available in Annex 2. The main part of the report will describe aspects
of those activities that had the greatest impact and where scaling up or relevance to
other projects and programs is high. Selected activities include IFRIQIA, AFCIG, and



                                                                                      2
ZENU, which made a noticeable dent in relation to corrupt practices and improved
efficiency of health care facilities and schools.

14.      GDM's support of 15 CSO activities resulted in support to schools, health
facilities, and villages across Cameroon. The DM has also served to deepen and
improve World Bank relations with Cameroons civil society.




15.    For the purpose of this report and analysis, the 15 DM winners have been
divided into three broad groups. The first group consists of one activity (Plan Estuaire
2011), which did not, based on information obtained and evaluations made, have a
discernible impact and did not demonstrate relevance to other projects or programs
nor potential for scaling up. The second group consists of four activities that had some
impact but where questions can be raised with regards to how outcomes were
1
 Location of DM activities: 1) ANTI-CORRUPTION, 2) IFRIQIA, 3) AFCIG, 4) FISS, 5) ZENU, 6)
GMM, 7) KFC, 8) CCREAD, 9) BEKUME, 10) Plan Estuaire 2011, 11) ACREST, 12) CAMGEW, 13)
GEAD, 14) ADECOL, 15) ADD.


                                                                                        3
achieved. In addition, relevance to other projects and potential for scaling up is
unclear. These activities are ADECOL, ANTI-CORRUPTION, FISS, and GEAD.
The third and largest group consists of ten activities that according to Governance
Program record both had an impact and where it may be useful to take the activities
into account for relevant sectors as well as scaling up the activities. Activities
belonging to the third group identified by this report are ACREST, ADD, AFCIG,
BEKUME, CAMGEW, CCREAD, GMM, IFRIQIA, KFC, and ZENU. The activities
that are deemed to both have an impact and relevance to other sectors and scaling up
are presented and discussed below.

ACREST
Title: “projet de vulgarisation des techniques de production et de consommation du charbon
ecologique.” Budget: CFAF12m (~$24,700). Target: villagers in Bangang, Mbouda, East Region.

16.     ACREST’s objective was to provide a solution to households in relation to
easy access to sustainably produced charcoal (carbonized powder briquettes), by
introducing charcoal production techniques based on agricultural waste. Achieving
the objective would indirectly mitigate deforestation and free up household resources.
ACREST activities include knowledge transfer and training, organizing and
incentivizing suppliers and consumers of charcoal to use sustainable charcoal
briquettes.

       ACREST results include establishing a supply chain for carbonized powder
and a market for the end product (briquettes) that covers both rural and urban areas.
90 percent of beneficiaries interviewed express satisfaction with ACREST’s results
and acknowledge a lower consumption of charcoal and lower environmental pressure
on the forests. Farmers have put revenues from ACREST to good use by covering
school fees and fertilizers. Last, ACREST’s services are in demand throughout the
East Region as well as other countries in Central Africa.

ADD
Title: “projet de renforcement de transparence dans la gestion des recettes forestières annuelles dans
la commune de Dimako: strengthening transparency in forestry revenue management. ” Budget:
CFAF11.98m (~$24,700). Target: villagers in Dimako, East Region.

18.     ADD’s objective was to strengthen transparency in forestry revenue
management through institutional capacity building of forestry business stakeholders
and support to better governance practices via stronger control and surveillance,
accountability, and fight against corruption. ADD’s activities included broadcasting
of information via radio, distribution of relevant legal documents in relation to
forestry management, and creation of village committees for oversight of the forestry
sector. As a result of ADD activities, the municipal executive now communicates the
amount of forest revenue shares for communities (10 percent of annual forestry fees).
Elements of ADD’s activities include whistleblowing, when illegal logging occurs
and the use of media (radio).

19.     ADD shows how radio can play an important role in improving governance of
natural resources, and more generally in relation to reaching the greatest number in a
target population in the most cost-effective manner.

AFCIG


                                                                                                    4
Title: “Your health your say project.” Budget: CFAF11.99m (~$24,700). Target: health care
recipients in Bamenda city, North-West Region.

20.     AFCIG’s objective was to stimulate citizen demand, according to their needs
and rights, for health care services from health care facilities in and around Bamenda
in the North-West Region of Cameroon. Methods used include a whistleblowing
mechanism, media, and empowerment of health users. Like in the ADD activity
described above, radio was used along with the distribution of written materials. In
addition, ADD deployed an SMS-based platform for distribution and collection of
user feedback on the health care facility in Bamenda and raised awareness with local
journalists. Results of the AFCIG activity include improved delivery of health care
services as illustrated by an increase in staff punctuality, improved hygiene, and a
reduction in the sale of drugs that should be offered free of charge to patients.

BEKUME
Title: “projet d’approvisionnement en eau de Bekume.” Budget: CFAF8.428m (~$17,345). Target:
pupils and villagers in Bekume, South-West Region.

The objective of BEKUME was to provide clean and safe water to the Bekume public
school in order to prevent public health risks such as cholera. The activity leveraged
the interest of the public in better access to clean water to bolster the community’s
participation in relation to education and health issues. This approach included
involving the water management committee, the Parents-Teachers Association (PTA),
and the traditional Council in the clean water and sanitation activity. Methods
employed by BEKUME include community works in preparation for the new water
and sanitation infrastructure and training in good practices relating to water and
sanitation. BEKUME’s results are well illustrated by CRS’ survey of the area, which
finds that all respondents are excited about the BEKUME activity and believe the
activity will resolve many of the issues currently faced due to shortage of clean water.
Teachers interviewed believe that BEKUME’s work reinforces their regular lessons
on water hygiene and sanitation. There is agreement among respondents that there
will likely be a reduction in medical problems experiences by the population as a
result of the installation of the new water points and sanitary facilities.

21.     BEKUME illustrates how higher-level outcomes, such as community
participation and – capacity building, are achievable via first level outputs such as
installation of a water point. In addition, BEKUME’s achievements were leveraged
through the mobilization of additional financing on top of the grant from the
Governance Program.

CCREAD
Title: “promouvoir la participation effective des communautés locales dans la gouvernance scolaire
durable.” Budget: CFAF9.1m (~$19,000). Target: pupils and villages in Kupe Muanenguba, South-
West Region.

22.     CCREAD’s objective was to improve community participation in
management and governance at the secondary school in Kupe Muanenguba in the
South-West region of Cameroon. The objective would be achieved through the
establishment of a control system, information campaigns focusing on villagers’ and
students’ rights, support to Parents and Teachers Associations (PTAs), and trainings
focused on anti-corruption, accountability, and transparency. Reporting on


                                                                                                     5
CCREAD’s achievements include several student protests against corruption and
illicit demands for payment. CCREAD has also had a positive impact on the PTAs,
which have become more active in school activities. The PTA of Tombel further
agreed to pay an allowance to teachers whose salaries have been delayed in order to
encourage teachers to remain with the school. It is further assumed that corruption
diminished during the activity.

CAMGEW
Title: “projet de gestion des forets de la communauté Oku pour la distribution des bénéfices.” Budget:
CFAF11,454m (~$23,572). Target: villagers in Oku ward, North-West Region.

23.     CAMGEW’s objective was to reinforce collective management of forest
resources in the Oku Ward community in the North-West region of Cameroon. The
activity included the following elements: beekeeping through subsidizing colonized
beehives, training and radio broadcasting of the benefits of apiculture, community
participation, and tree planting. Achievements under CAMGEW include the
production of 19,612 liters of honey (of which 16,314 liters were sold), the planting of
7,000 native trees, extra income for 20 honey production groups, and a reduction in
relation to slash and burn, which is one of Oku’s Ward’s main problems.

24.      CAMGEW also managed to secure financing under the rogramme de etites
 nitiatives -      -      - rogramme ires rot g es d frique du entre et de
l'Ouest – to continue CAMGEW activities.

GMM
Title: “l’education des enfants par l’autonomisation des femmes . Budget: CFAF6.71m (~$13,800).
Target: female heads of households in North-West Region.

25.      GMM’s objective was to empower female heads of households in certain parts
of the North-West region of Cameroon in order to raise capital for education. GMM
facilitated the creation of groups focusing on Income Generating Activities (IGAs)
such as bulk purchase of palm oil for resale to consumers by offering training in
accountability and the principles of revolving funds and financing of a micro credit
system. In all, ten groups of ten women were supported by GMM. By the end of the
project, all micro credits were repaid, and the IGAs had further contributed to the
financing of 313 scholarships in 2012/13 - equivalent of USD77,000

26.     GMM is noteworthy because of its relatively small budget, which is about half
of the majority of DM finalists. In addition, GMM’s approach is based on small-scale
support to private sector development with a 100 percent success rate for repayment
of microloans. GMM’s cost of slightly more than USD30 per capita in the pilot setup
excluding repayment of microcredits appears particularly relevant for scaling up at a
low cost to GoC and DPs.

IFRIQIA
Title: “projet d’optimisation des rendements de l’hopital central de Maroua.” Budget: CFAF11, 903,
635 (~$24,700). Target: targeted health care recipients, staff, and management at Maroua Central
Hospital, Far North Region.

27.   IFRIQIA’s objective was to use information technology to counter leakage
and improve efficiency at the Maroua Central Hospital in the Far North region of



                                                                                                     6
Cameroon. By installing a financial management system and training staff at the
hospital in its use, control within both Maroua hospital and oversight from the
municipality have improved. This has led to greater transparency regarding drug
prices and management of the hospital’s pharmacy and health care materials.
Moreover, the overall level of corruption is believed to have diminished as a result of
the IFRIQIA activity.

KFC
Title: “Projet des livres inscrits au programme.” Budget: CFAF11.47m (~$24,000). Target: pupils in
North-West Region.

28.     KFC’s objective was to improve the quality of education to 15 schools in the
North-West region of Cameroon through the distribution of books and the provision
of information and training. The activity used a revolving fund to finance the stocking
of 15 primary school libraries with books. In addition, KFC held training and
information sessions on the KFC activity for parents and pupils as well as staff at the
15 schools targeted. During KFC’s support to the 15 schools in the North-West
Region, no pupils were rejected in the 2011/12 and 2012/13 school years. This
compares to a rejection rate of 40 percent in the 2010/11 school year. KFC will
continue financing the activity for an additional three years.

ZENU
Title: “ rojet de conception d’un mécanisme de protection des dénonciateurs d’actes de corruption en
milieu scolaire dans la région de l’Ouest.” Budget: CFAF11.98m (~$24,700). Target: high school and
college students and teachers.

29.      ZENU’s objectives were to fight corruption in 16 high schools across 8
districts in the East region of Cameroon. Fighting corruption was believed to help
strengthening pupil performance and promote interest among citizens in the quality of
higher education. The activity focused on victims of corruption and provided a
whistleblowing mechanism, while also putting pressure on authorities to prosecute
corrupt behavior. Other elements under the ZENU activity include the implementation
of a whistleblowing code of conduct, the establishment of 16 whistleblowing boxes in
the ZENU activity area, and the establishment of eight corruption observatories (one
observatory in each ZENU district) and eight clubs for citizens against corruption
building on existing Parents Teacher Associations.

30.    ZENU’s achievements were rather impressive: the whistleblowing system
generated 112 claims of corrupt or indecent behavior during 2013 and led to the firing
of four staff. Cases were brought against a total of 15 staff, who were subject to
administrative sanctions in 2013. A second important result of the ZENU activity is
the reduction in students dismissed from Dschang College - declining from 141 in
2011/2012 to 46 in 2012/2013.

DM ACHIEVEMENTS

31.     The description of the ten DM activities that could potentially be scaled up
provides a view of which sectors have been targeted and which methods have been
used. The sectors for the ten activities are: health, education, water & sanitation, and
forestry & private sector development. Improvement on governance in these sectors
have used the following methods:


                                                                                                  7
              a. improved service delivery through upgrading of systems and
                 processes;
              b. improved service delivery through information and awareness;
              c. improved service delivery through information, awareness, and
                 participation;
              d. improved service delivery through information, awareness, and
                 whistleblowing;
              e. improved service delivery through co-financing and support;
              f. co-financing and support for private sector development
              g. information, awareness, and training for private sector development


                                Improved service delivery                    Private sector development
                  Systems and   Information, awareness, and   Co-financing and subsidies   Information,
                   processes              training                                          awareness,
                                                                                           and training
                                            Whistleblowing
 i) ACREST                                                                        X             X
 ii) ADD                                           X                                            X
 iii) AFCIG                        X
 iv) BEKUME                        X                              X
 v) CAMGEW                                                                        X             X
 vi) CCREAD            X           X                              X
 vii) GMM                                                         X               X             X
 viii) IFRIQIA         X           X
 ix) KFC                                                          X
 x) ZENU                           X               X


32.     World Bank staff interviewed find the DM concept a useful approach for
addressing Cameroon's governance challenges. They also find that the DM helped
boost the World Bank's visibility in Cameroon - among stakeholders that are
traditionally not directly involved in project implementation (or receiving direct
financial support). Representatives from all DM participant segments find that the
DM approach allowed for a useful exchange of views and ideas between the GoC and
CSOs, as well as serving as a platform for CSO interaction and interaction between
CSOs and Development Partners (DPs). One interviewee observed that the DM rules
and bureaucracy were relatively easy to navigate for CSOs in comparison to rules and
bureaucracy of other DPs.

33.    Interviewees from the World Bank, CSOs, and DPs found that workshops
were an important part of the DM's program and helped bring stakeholders together.
A GoC interviewee pointed out the usefulness of providing a space for CSOs to
express ideas and concerns.

34.    Concrete examples of DM's value include the use of GDM flyers for the 2013
Governance Forum, which discussed citizens' participation in relation to public
service delivery. More broadly, DM activities also helped improve transparency,
accountability, and integrity in Cameroon. DM activities helped bring information to


                                                                                           8
activity recipients (e.g. information about citizens’ rights and rules governing use of
natural resources) thereby increasing awareness and social control, which in turn has
led to more accountability and integrity. Examples include activities in the health
sector (IFRIQIA) and forestry (ADD). Some activities provided participants and
citizens with a space to report misconduct and corruption, which led to sanctions
against a number of individuals. Examples include the Education sector (ZENU) and
Health sector (AFCIG).

35.     One interviewee expressed that the DM progressed well because the activities
provided the GoC with concrete results (e.g. orderly and managed meetings with civil
society and small-scale pilot activities). The same interviewee pointed out that
Cameroon’s political dynamics require an incremental approach to institutional
reform. This finding is similar to the fact that the most successful DM activities are
linked to a practical activity (e.g. installation of improved water and sanitation or
stocking a library with books) suggesting that addressing higher-level objectives (e.g.
building community capacity) can best be achieved in combination with addressing
everyday needs in communities, thus directly addressing outcome three of the World
Bank CAS. For the World Bank’s project portfolio pipeline (as well as for other
partners), the lesson is important as it illustrates that governance project components
in Cameroon stand a good chance of success when integrated into communal
infrastructure activities. Similarly, the GoC has shown demand for further World
Bank work in specific areas related to governance.2

36.    A very strong indication of DM’s success is the fact that several DPs have
expressed interest in co-funding a second DM. Some CSOs have also, subsequent to
DM funding, received additional funding from other DPs.

37.    More broadly, GDM is perceived by all main governance stakeholder
segments in Cameroon as an excellent tool for stimulating debate around and demand
for good governance. In fact, the GoC’s participation in the GDM is a first in
Cameroon and GDM is seen – according to one GoC representative – as a tool that
prepares GoC for discussions in relation to e.g. Development Policy Financing.

DM CHALLENGES

38.    While DM's achievements are overall very positive, it should be noted that the
DM did face certain challenges. One such challenge relates to delays in implementing
the grants schemes with CSOs. The delay was caused by a combination of low
capacity related to financial and narrative reporting in the CSOs and the geographic
spread of projects across Cameroon with many activities taking place in very isolated
areas. With limited connectivity and means of communication, this made follow-up
and support from CRS and the World Bank difficult and time-consuming.

39.    A second challenge to DM was communication about the event via the World
Bank's website - a result of limited connectivity or access to the internet by CSOs
across Cameroon. The team also explains that reporting into French was severely
hampered by delays in having documents translated into French. The team adjusted to

2
 An area requested by one senior GoC representative is the study of the inflationary effects of a
withdrawal of energy subsidies.


                                                                                                    9
the situation by creating a Facebook page for the event. This approach worked well
and could easily be replicated elsewhere.

40.      A third and very pertinent challenge - raised notably by Government
representatives interviewed for this report – relates to sustainability of the fifteen DM
activities (it should be noted that all activities are regarded as pilots so sustainability
was not an objective of the DM activities). While Government representatives
interviewed were not dismissive of the DM approach it is clear that, going forward,
more can be done to monitor activities and discuss with the GoC how successful
approaches can be included in GoC programs.

OTHER GDM ACTIVITIES

41.    In addition to the DM, the GDM included the following activities:

           a. DM launch.
           b. DM finale debates and Governance Forum: Seven successful and very
              well attended public debates on topics related to citizen participation,
              decentralization, social accountability and development - with national
              and international experts.
           c. Large-scale Knowledge sharing event co-organized with the GIZ,
              disseminating results from the CSO initiatives funded through the DM.
           d. 2013 Governance Forum


42.     The planning for Component 2 included funding of a Civil Society Resource
Center (CSRC). The rationale for CSRC was the World Bank CAS (2010) for
Cameroon, which promised the transformation of the World Bank's Public
Information Center (PIC) into a CSRC. The Center would provide a meeting space for
civil society and improve coordination, cooperation, and deliberation on governance
issues. However, during the Governance Program's first year it became clear that the
CSRC would not see much use by CSOs putting into question the sustainability of the
center post GPF funding. In addition, the CSRC would be duplicating activities
financed by GIZ and the EU.

43.     Over the following year (2011-2012) an alternative to CSRC was identified,
namely financial support to the CSO Bridge Afrika to pilot a dissemination/training
strategy for its interactive CSO platform. The CSO platform succeeded in connecting
more than 2,000 individuals and organizations in ten regions and Bridge Afrika has
mobilized further support from EU’s civil society support program (PASC), the cell
phone operator MTN, and Cameroon’s power utility AES-SONEL. The support was
provided for dissemination, free access to Wi-Fi, and in cash.

LESSONS LEARNED

44.     The GDM component holds a number of important lessons learned, both with
regards to overall aid effectiveness, in relation to project operations, and in relation to
an improved development debate between the Government of Cameroon, Cameroon
civil society, and DPs (including the World Bank).



                                                                                        10
45.      In relation to overall aid effectiveness, one lesson drawn from the review of
the GDM component of the GPF-funded Governance Program in Cameroon is that
attention is needed in order to weigh pros and cons in relation to program reach and
impact versus practical limitations to efficient monitoring and follow up. DM
activities under the GDM were spread geographically across Cameroon, but the
budget for the implementing NGO and availability of World Bank staff meant that
monitoring and follow up was not always at the desired level. The GDM
component’s first lesson is therefore to carefully balance geographic spread of
activities with available budget.

46.     The GDM component illustrated that activities aimed at improving
governance seem to have a high degree of success when linked to concrete and
practical activities or outcomes (e.g. installation of improved water and sanitation or
stocking a library with books). This suggests that addressing higher-level objectives
(e.g. building community capacity, increasing transparency etc.) can best be achieved
in combination with addressing everyday needs in communities. The second
important lesson derived from the GDM is that governance project components
in Cameroon stand a good chance of success when integrated into communal
infrastructure activities and when integrated with concrete service delivery
objectives.

47.     GDM activities have shown that they can contribute and inspire new ideas and
approaches. The DM education activities show how teacher accountability can be
radically improved with modest support, thus providing a solution to the issue raised
by CCMU and AFTED (2012) that describes how “The current system for ensuring
teacher accountability for instruction is weak.” Similar approaches to fighting
corruption have also been used in the forestry sector DM activities with success. The
third lesson of the GDM component is thus that DM activities are rich sources of
inspiration for sector operations.

48.    A fourth important lesson learned from the GDM component is that DPs
can play a catalyzing role for accelerating reforms and the general development
debate in Cameroon. The DM finale is a great example of this insight.

49.    In addition to geographic spread and effectiveness, the GDM raises the issue
of how to achieve the greatest impact with different target populations. It is clear that
certain activities targeted recipients that are not necessarily at the bottom of
Cameroon’s society, such as high school students. However, it may be exactly thanks
to the relatively stronger target population that the activities focusing on anti
corruption saw a reversal of corruption in their activity areas. The GDM
component’s fifth lesson is that systemic challenges such as corruption may be
addressed through targeting of more than one population segment.

50.     Last, the GDM component illustrates the importance of communication and
creativity when traditional communication does not add up. Use of freeware
communication platforms (e.g. Facebook) is a great alternative to the World Bank's
website. Similarly, this report notes that activities making use of radio as a means of




                                                                                      11
mass communication have high success rates. This corroborates the finding3 of radio
as a cost-effective means for communication notably in environments where
illiteracy, distance, and poverty are challenges to economic development. The last
GDM lesson is thus that multiple communication channels are needed to
communicate with all potential beneficiaries and stakeholders and that the
communication tools used need to be carefully adapted to the local context.

CONCLUSION

51.     This report describes results and processes under the GDM component of the
GPF funded Governance Program in Cameroon. The main results are linked to the
pilot activities under the DM. The majority of these activities have proven to have
potential for scaling up and use in sector work, projects, and program. Moreover, the
report finds that per capita expenses of many of the DM activities were low (notably
since the activities were in the pilot phase and therefore can be further streamlined in
addition to savings related to economies of scale).

52.     A second important finding of this report is that DPs can contribute very
meaningfully to the development debate within Cameroon. In some cases, DPs may
even be catalyzers and guarantors for free and constructive debates, because DPs are
seen as non-partisan and acceptable to both the Government and CSOs.

53.     Finally, the GDM component of the Governance Program is a good example
of collaboration and knowledge sharing between CSOs and DPs. As such, several
CSOs have continued funding of DM activities beyond the Governance Program’s
funding, and DPs have expressed interest in co-financing a future second DM.




3
 Francken, N., Minten, B. and J. Swinnen, 2009, “Media, Monitoring, and Capture of Public Funds:
Evidence from Madagascar”, World Development, Volume 37, Nr. 1, pp. 242-255.


                                                                                                   12
ANNEX 1: LIST OF STAKEHOLDERS INTERVIEWED

Government of Cameroon
Mr. Egbe A. Hillmann, Avocat Général, Cour Suprême
Mr. Enandjoum Bwanga, Coordinateur National, Ministère de la Santé Publique
Mr. Penda Apollinaire, Secrétaire Permanent, Conseil National de Décentralisation
Mr. Guillaume Mananga, Coordonnateur, Projet des Capacités dans le Secteur Minier (PRECASEM)
Mr. Emmanuel Djoulde, Head of Division, Ministry of Public Health
Mr. Alphonse Boyogueno, Responsable National Suivi Évaluation, Programme National de Développement Participatif, MINEPAT
Ms. Marie Madeleine Nga, National Coordinator, Programme National de Développement Participatif, MINEPAT
Mr. François Anoukaha, Vice-Président, Commission Nationale Anti-Corruption (CONAC)
Mr. Jean Tchoffo, General Secretary, Ministry of Procurement, President CTS (MINEPAT)
Ms. Alim Youssouf Hadidja, Minister of Basic Education, Ministry of Basic Education
Mr. Ivo Leke Tambo, Secretary General, Ministry of Basic Education
Mr. Charles Nanga, Inspector General, Ministry of Basic Education

World Bank staff
Mr. Vincent Perrot, Consultant, Yaoundé
Mr. Daniel Murphy, Senior Operations Officer, Washington, DC
Mr. Serge Menang, Senior Environment Specialist, Yaoundé
Ms. Cia Sjetnan, Senior Operations Officer, Yaoundé
Mr. Raju Singh, Lead Economist, Washington, DC
Mr. Abel Bove, Governance Specialist, Yaoundé
Mr. Jérôme Bezzina, Senior Regulatory Economist, Yaoundé
Mr. Gregor Binkert, Country Director, Yaoundé
Mr. David Abouem, Short Term Consultant, Yaoundé
Mr. Benjamina Randrianarivelo, Operations Officer, Washington, DC
Ms. Victoire Ngounoue epse Ngum, Short Term Consultant, Yaoundé




                                                                                                                           13
Mr. Carlo del Ninno, Senior Economist, Washington, DC
Mr. Benoît Bosquet, Lead Carbon Finance Specialist, Washington, DC
Ms. Diletta Doretti, Extended Term Consultant, Washington, DC
Ms. Kirsten Hund, Sustainable Development Specialist, Washington, DC
Mr. Remi Pelon, Senior Mining Specialist, Washington, DC
Ms. Shilpa Banerjee, Communications Consultant, Washington, DC
Ms. Fadila Caillaud, Senior Economist, Washington, DC
Ms. Shobhana Sosale, Senior Operations Officer, Washington, DC
Mr. Piet van Heesewijk, Senior Program Officer, Washington, DC

DPs
Mr. Nicolas Maistre, Assistant Technique, PADDL-Deutche Gesellschaft für International Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Yaoundé
Ms. Anja Heuft, Coordinatrice, PADDL-Deutche Gesellschaft für International Zusammenarbeit (GIZ), Yaoundé
Ms. Vijitha Eyango, Chief Education, UNICEF, Yaoundé
Mr. Carl Frosio, Attaché, European Commission, Yaoundé
Mr. Mamy Raboanarijaona, Chef d'équipe, Appui de la COMIFAC en développement organisationnel/GIZ, Yaoundé
Mr. Benoit-Pierre Laramée, Haut-commissaire du Canada, Yaoundé
Ms. Bianca E. Menendez, Political-Economic Chief, U.S. Embassy, Yaoundé
Mr. Paolo Cerutti, Forester, Center for International Forestry Research, Nairobi

Civil society
Mr. Duncan Campbell, Country Director, SNV, Yaoundé
Mr. Oliver Mokom, Head of Programs, CRS Cameroon
Mr. Brendan Schwartz, Forest Campaigner, Greenpeace
Mr. Wirsiy Emmanuel, Director, Cameroon Gender and Environment Watch (CAMGEW)

Media
Mr. Idris Linge, Journalist




                                                                                                                       14
ANNEX 2: DEVELOPMENT MARKETPLACE OUTPUTS AND OUTCOMES

This table has been color coded for easy overview using the following system: Green = satisfactory implementation, Yellow = marginally
satisfactory implementation, Red = unsatisfactory implementation.
      Activity           Budget      Beneficiaries                   Selected output                             Outcome                   Comments and lessons
                                     and location                                                                                                   learned
1) ANTI-               CFAF6,682m    Health care      Collaboration with 32 CSOs initiated            Change in some hospitals      Malaria tests for children
CORRUPTION -           (~$13,832)     recipients in    Distribution of 1,184 posters, 1,075 flyers      and clinics in regards to     provided for free by
Projet de                             Région du         and 685 stickers                                 provision of free drugs and   Government still sold at Limbe
monitoring citoyen                    Centre and       Launch of phone line for complaints about        tests financed by the         Regional Hospital. Evidence of
pour l’am lioration                   Litoral           corruption in the Health sector                  Government                    malaria treatment kits
de l’accès aux                                         Launch of website for corruption complaints                                    disappearing, but no
médicaments                                                                                                                            identification of leak(s)
essentiels                                                                                                                             location in the distribution
                                                                                                                                       chain. Rated below average by
                                                                                                                                       CRS
2) IFRIQIA - Projet    CFAF11,       Health care      Climate protection of sensitive equipment at    Increased transparency in     Success of activity can be
d'optimisation des     903, 635       recipients,       pharmacy and payment system                      management of the hospital    linked to the well-defined area
rendements de                         staff, and       Establishment of intranet facilitating          Better tracking of receipts   of intervention (1 hospital,
l'hôpital Central de                  management        communication between director, payment         Increased transparency in     targeting specific areas such as
Maroua                                at Maroua         system, and pharmacy                             pricing of services           IT) and well-defined baseline
                                      Central                                                           Improved HR management        study
                                      Hospital
3) AFCIG- Your         CFAF11.99m    Health care      Training and awareness sessions on rights of    Increased community           Success of activity can be
Health, Your Say       (~$24,700)     recipients in     citizens in relation to health care              participation                 linked to the well-defined area
                                      Bamenda          Launch of ranking system for quality of         Improvement in quality of     of intervention (1 city, targeting
                                      city, Région      service delivery                                 health services at Bamenda    specific areas such as
                                      du Nord-         Launch of website and phone service for         Increased staff punctuality   increasing awareness and
                                      Ouest             feedback on health services                     Improved hygiene              creating a feedback system)
                                                       Construction of new toilets and incinerator     Reduction in sale of free
                                                                                                         drugs
4) FISS - Les          CFAF12m       HIV/AIDS         Study published by FISS-MST/SIDA                Increased awareness around    Rated unsatisfactory by CRS,
réseaux sociaux        (~$24,700)     patients in      2 conferences held                               HIV/AIDS and                  but World Bank flyer suggests
(Facebook/Twitter)                    Yaoundé,         600 posters produced and distributed to 4        understanding of patient      good progress. CRS evaluation
au service de la                      Région du         hospitals                                        rights                        raises real issues but




                                                                                                                                                                            15
      Activity          Budget      Beneficiaries                   Selected output                              Outcome                    Comments and lessons
                                    and location                                                                                                     learned
Transparence dans                    Centre          Social network for raising awareness of           Better planning and            acknowledges that many goals
les unités de prise                                   patients' rights launched                          management of HIV/AIDS         have been achieved. Lesson
en charge du                                         Training of CSO staff in defending                 drugs as well as               learned is that Facebook may
VIH/SIDA dans la                                      HIV/AIDS patients' rights                          implementation of policies     not be the best communication
ville de Yaoundé                                     Advocacy campaign targeting hospital              Improved health care service   means in Cameroon in the
                                                      management in 4 hospitals                         Improved communication         current situation. Outreach of
                                                                                                         between health care            the social network is very low.
                                                                                                         providers and receivers
                                                                                                        Strong stakeholder
                                                                                                         mobilization
5) ZENU -             CFAF11.98m    High school     Study on corruption in the West Region            General improvement in         CRS rates the activity
Conception d'un       (~$24,700)     students and     education sector                                   stance against corruption      satisfactory and makes the
mécanisme de                         teachers in     Establishment of 8 citizens' associations and                                     observation that ZENU benefits
protection des                       West Region      8 corruption monitoring units                                                     from established project
dénonciateurs des                                    Identification and co-opting of resource                                          management practices. The
actes de corruption                                   persons in the region in the fight against                                        target group (likely not made
en milieu scolaire                                    corruption                                                                        up of the poorer population
dans la Région de                                    Participative corruption denouncement code                                        quintiles) begs the question
l'Ouest                                               developed                                                                         how governance and poverty
                                                     112 corruption cases exposed                                                      reduction is best addressed
                                                     15 teachers and school management staff
                                                      reported to have been engaged in corrupt
                                                      practices and sexual harassment
6) GMM -              CFAF6.71m     170 women       All women from the initial groups have been       Target group experiences       CRS rates the activity as below
l'éducation des       (~$13,800)     in 17 groups     able to meet education fees for their children     improved autonomy,             average, but World Bank flyer
enfants par                         313 primary      for the academic year 2012/2013                    confidence, and financial      is very positive. Outputs and
l'autonomisation                     and             Target group members have access to                independence                   outcome are solid and
des femmes                           secondary        subsidized loans                                                                  according to World Bank flyer
                                     pupils                                                                                             the activities have shown good
                                                                                                                                        degree of sustainability
                                   North-West
                                   Region




                                                                                                                                                                          16
      Activity          Budget      Beneficiaries                    Selected output                                Outcome                      Comments and lessons
                                    and location                                                                                                          learned
7) KFC - Projet des   CFAF11.47m    Pupils in        962 books delivered (against target of 3,007       Number of pupils with            CRS rates this activity as
livres inscrits au    (~$24,000)     North-West        books)                                              access to textbooks has risen    satisfactory. It should be noted
programme                            Region           15 library created (against target of 15            by ten percentage points         that this activity runs on a five
                                                       libraries)                                          from 15 percent to 25            year basis so delivery of books
                                                      co-financing (parents/CSO) system in place          percent.                         and CSO plus parent co-
                                                                                                          No pupil was turned away         financing will pick up as the
                                                                                                           during school year 2011/12       activity advances
                                                                                                           and 2012/13 due to lack of
                                                                                                           textbook thanks to the library
                                                                                                           created and stocking of
                                                                                                           libraries under the project
                                                                                                          In the academic year 2012-13
                                                                                                           173 students raised funds for
                                                                                                           purchase of an additional 20
                                                                                                           textbooks. KFC reciprocated
                                                                                                           with a grant of 99 textbooks
8) CCREAD -           CFAF9.1m      Communities      8 training sessions delivered to 5,352             Students and parent-pupil        Activity rated satisfactory by
Promouvoir La         (~$19,000)     and               students                                            associations’ capacities         CRS. High-school students are
Participation Des                    Secondary        4,000 good governance leaflets distributed          increased. Associations now      likely not to belong to poorest
Communautés                          School           200 manuals on good governance for                  better informed on their         segments of population
Locales Dans La                      pupils,           education distributed to management in 8            rights and deeper involved in
Gouvernance                          Département       high schools                                        management of their schools
Scolaire Durable                     de Kupe          Course delivered to 25 members of                  Corruption and other forms
                                     Muanenguba,       management committees in 8 schools                  of dysfunctional governance
                                     South-West       2 meetings of management committees                 has dropped
                                     Region            during academic year 2012-2013
                                                      Tools developed for better and more
                                                       transparent management of the high schools
9) BEKUME -           CFAF8.428m    Villagers and    Upgrade of water and sanitation at high-           Generally improved hygiene       Success of activity can be
Bekume Water          (~$17,345)     students in       school facilities in Bekume (replacement of        Increased access to clean        linked to well-defined area of
Supply Project                       Bekume,           toilets, rehabilitation and installation of new     water in Bekume and              intervention
                                     Région du         water reservoirs, installation of water filter,     environs
                                     Sud-Ouest         chlorification of water                            Rare example of co-
                                                      Training of students and personnel in water         management of service
                                                       and sanitation good practice                        delivery between two
                                                      Installation of electricity generator               communities




                                                                                                                                                                                17
       Activity          Budget        Beneficiaries                    Selected output                              Outcome                     Comments and lessons
                                       and location                                                                                                      learned
10) Plan Estuaire      CFAF11.995      Orphans and      Re-inscription, payment of school fees, and      N/A                             Outcome unclear. Approximate
2011: Cursus           m (~$24,628)     street            books for target children in Education                                            cost of $1,000 per child
spécial d'initiation                    children in       program                                                                           removed from streets. Number
préscolaire                             Douala and       22 children removed from the streets and                                          of children reached by the
                                        surroundings,     reconnected with their families                                                   program only at 22 percent of
                                        Littoral                                                                                            target. CRS rates this activity
                                                                                                                                            unsatisfactory. The World Bank
                                                                                                                                            has no flyer for the activity
11) ACREST -           CFAF12m         Villagers in     288 people trained in eco-friendlier charcoal    Value chain established         Targeted approach increases
Projet de              (~$24,700)       Bangang,          production                                       Reduction of consumption of     chances for successful
Vulgarisation des                       Mbouda,          Input for charcoal powder and briquette           wood for charcoal production    implementation. Rated
Techniques de                           Région de         making procured                                  Revenue for production used     satisfactory by CRS
Production et de                        l’Ouest          7 tons of charcoal powder produced                to finance Primary Education
consommation du                                          Scheme setup for guaranteed purchase of           and agricultural input
Charbon                                                   charcoal powder                                  Raised awareness of value of
Ecologique                                               Charcoal powder turned into briquettes for        agri-biomass
                                                          sale in urban areas
12) CAMGEW -           CFAF11,454      Villagers in     7,000 trees planted                              Increased awareness of the      The activity reached most
Projet de gestion      m (~$23,572)     Oku ward,        Training of 166 villagers                         importance of forests and       targets. Achievements include
des forets de la                        North-West       Forum for forest stakeholders dialogue set up     certain tree types              advance in relation to slash and
communauté Oku                          Region           Part of Kilum forest regenerated                 Increased awareness of          burn, which is one of the area’s
pour la distribution                                     Active engagement of women in forestry            sustainable farming practices   main problems. Success in
des benefices                                             activities                                                                        relation to radio campaign is
                                                                                                                                            noteworthy and a method worth
                                                                                                                                            considering for similar
                                                                                                                                            activities. Rated satisfactory by
                                                                                                                                            CRS
13) GEAD -             CFAF10.2m       Villagers in     Seed price established                           Greater awareness on local      Some results (e.g. tree planting)
Création d'une         (~$21,000)       Makak,           Seed vault constructed                            political level of importance   below target, but activity has
banque de grains                        Région du        Purchase of plants and seeds implemented          of ecological balance           had an impact. CRS rates
forestières                             Centre           M&E training of GEAD staff                       Emergence of village tree       activity unsatisfactory
                                                         Training of 60 villagers for participation in     nurseries
                                                          the project 2011-2013
                                                         150 trees planted




                                                                                                                                                                                18
      Activity           Budget      Beneficiaries                  Selected output                              Outcome                     Comments and lessons
                                     and location                                                                                                     learned
14) Appui à la         CFAF11.44m    Villagers in    6 workshops and trainings held                   Increased awareness in          Some results achieved, but
gestion responsable    (~$23,543)     Mbalmayo,       310 people trained                                communities around the          awareness target of 90 percent
des forêts                            Région du       M&E system established                            APV FLEG framework              cannot be confirmed and status
communautaires                        Centre                                                            Increased awareness around      appears to be well below. CRS
opérationnels de                                                                                         forest management in            rates activity unsatisfactory
Mbalmayo, en                                                                                             communities
préparation à la
mise in oeuvre des
APV-FLEGT
Cameroun
15) ADD -              CFAF11.98m    Dimako,         Village committees established for the           Increased awareness around      Activity has had substantial
Renforcement de la     (~$24,700)     Région de        monitoring of revenues from local forests         management of forest            impact and could be model for
Transparence dans                     l’Est           Capacity building for village committees          revenues                        future interventions. Success in
la Gestion des                                         through workshops and awareness campaigns        Villages better equipped to     relation to radio campaign is
Recettes Forestières                                  Creation of committees for planning and           manage forest revenues          noteworthy and a method worth
Annuelles (formerly                                    monitoring of forest revenue management          Active and committed village    considering for similar
known as: Projet de                                   Distribution of flyers on legal framework for     committees                      activities. Rated satisfactory by
Renforcement de la                                     forestry management in Cameroon                  Citizen control of forestry     CRS.
Transparence dans                                                                                        exploitation has risen and
la Gestion de la                                                                                         gained efficiency
redevance forestière                                                                                    10 percent of forest revenues
annuelle dans la                                                                                         now reach the villages
Commune de
Dimako, en abrege
PRTG-CD)




                                                                                                                                                                             19
