                                     98064




              Turn Down
                 Heat
              the




                    Confronting
                    the New Climate Normal




THE CLIMATE
CHALLENGE FOR
CENTRAL ASIA
KAZAKHSTAN KYRGYZ REPUBLIC    TAJIKISTAN
TURKMENISTAN UZBEKISTAN
                                                                    FACING THE NEW CLIMATE
                                                                    NORMAL
WE ARE HEADING TOWARDS A                                            THE REALITY TODAY
                                                                    We are experiencing human-induced climate change at a rate unprecedented

MUCH HARSHER CLIMATE                                                in human history. Weather extremes are already affecting people everywhere,
                                                                    damaging crops and coastlines and putting livelihoods at risk.
                                                                     •	   The world is already 0.8°C above pre-industrial times, with observed
In a sobering assessment Turn Down the Heat: Confronting                  climate change impacts such as sea-level rise (up 19 centimeters
the New Climate Normal documents that if no further action                between 1901 and 2010), disappearing glaciers and extreme weather
is taken, there is a 40% chance to exceed four degrees                    events on the rise;
Celsius (4ºC) warming before 2100—within our children’s              •	   Losses from extreme weather events increased from US$50 billion a
and grandchildren’s lifetime.                                             year in the 1980s to just under US$200 billion over the last decade;
                                                                     •	   Warming of close to 1.5°C above pre-industrial times is already locked
The report paints a grim picture of what that world will look             into the Earth’s climate system because of past and projected
like. As weather extremes become the new normal and risks                 greenhouse gas emissions (such as carbon dioxide and methane). It
                                                                          means that climate change impacts such as heat-waves, droughts,
to food, water and energy security increase, everyone will
                                                                          storms and other weather extremes may be unavoidable;
feel the impact—particularly the poor.
                                                                     •	   To underscore the numbers, scientists announced that 2014 was the
                                                                          hottest year in recorded history.
Prepared in collaboration with the Potsdam Institute for
Climate Impact Research and launched by the World Bank
Group (WBG) in November 2014, the report reviews the latest
scientific evidence on climate change risks to development.         THE GLOBAL FUTURE—4°C AND CLIMBING
                                                                    Despite efforts until now, global greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise
The third in the Turn Down the Heat series, this report
                                                                    unabated. Scientists and researchers have concluded that with ‘business as
examines climate scenarios in three regions, Latin America          usual’ we will hit that new climate regime—4°C or even higher—before
and the Caribbean, the Middle East and North Africa                 2100, with alarming consequences:
and Europe and Central Asia, including the prospects
                                                                     •	   Unprecedented heat extremes becoming more frequent;
and implications for the countries of Central Asia in that
                                                                     •	   Changes in rainfall patterns impacting water availability;
challenging climate regime.
                                                                     •	   Reduced crop yields with resulting rising food security concerns;
But the good news is that this future does not have to be our        •	   Accelerated loss of biodiversity and species extinction;
destiny. Solutions exist. First we have to accept the reality of     •	   Prospects of ocean acidification affecting marine ecosystems, fisheries
what scientists are telling us and to truly understand that we            and tourism;
are the last generation that can save the planet. It will require    •	   Sea level rise continuing for centuries, possibly rising two meters for
                                                                          every degree of warming;
a concerted effort and change in every aspect of human
life—substantial technological, economic, institutional and          •	   The West Antarctic Ice Sheet dislodging adding to abrupt sea level rise;
behavioral change. But most of all, it will require leadership at    •	   Carbon sinks like forests and permafrost holding methane becoming
                                                                          greenhouse gas emitters that could be disastrous game-changers for
every level of society.
                                                                          the climate of the planet.
THE CLIMATE CHALLENGE                                                                 RISING TO THE CLIMATE
FOR CENTRAL ASIA                                                                      CHANGE CHALLENGE
As we head towards the next century, Central Asia will find itself confronting        That 4°C or higher scenario doesn’t have to be the future for Central Asia
hard choices between two critical needs—water for agriculture or water for            or the world. With a concerted effort we can turn down the heat. Many of
energy, aggravating a problem already faced today by countries in the                 the worst projected climate impacts outlined in Turn Down the Heat could
region. The threat of water scarcity will intensify in Central Asia as                be avoided by holding warming below 2°C. In the meantime, efforts to
temperatures climb towards 4°C. Melting glaciers and shifts in the timing of          build resilience and manage risks must also redouble to cope with already
water flows will lead to less water available in summer months. Given its             locked-in climate change over the coming decades.
high dependence on irrigation, Central Asia’s agricultural sector will be
                                                                                      There are many opportunities to improve climate resilience in Central
significantly impacted by climate change. Hydropower generation will also
                                                                                      Asia. Legacy issues—for example, aging infrastructure or unsustainable
be at risk, particularly for small, unregulated water catchments.
                                                                                      land and water management—are important drivers of climate
 •	   The glaciers of Central Asia hold about 1,000 cubic kilometers of ice,          vulnerability but at the same time offer significant potential for “no
      equivalent to 10 years’ supply from the area’s two main rivers, the Amu         regrets” actions that will enhance climate resilience, reduce carbon
      Darya and the Syr Darya. Central Asia’s glaciers have already seen a            emissions and generate net economic gains, such as:
      one-third reduction in volume since the beginning of the 20th Century.
                                                                                       •	   Address increased variability in water resources and related risks for
      Their volume is further projected to decline by as much as 80% in a
                                                                                            food and energy security as well as for rural livelihoods;
      4°C warmer world—a reliable water resource disappearing into thin air.
                                                                                       •	   Help expand and modernize energy infrastructure, tackling losses,
 •	   Just as ominous, the timing of peak flow of key rivers will shift
                                                                                            increasing efficiency on both supply- and demand- sides, and
      towards spring with a 25% reduction in flow during the critical
                                                                                            revitalizing regional trade;
      summer growing season.
                                                                                       •	   Support the rehabilitation of irrigation systems and capacity for
 •	   Droughts could further push land degradation and desertification.
                                                                                            improved water management;
      Droughts are already a major problem in Kazakhstan affecting up to
      66% of the country’s land. By the turn of the century, desertification           •	   Promote more sustainable natural resource management, notably to
      could affect up to half of Kyrgyz Republic’s territory (from roughly                  increase the resilience of rural, and poor, communities.
      15% in the 2000’s) and large stretches of Turkmenistan and                      Given connections in water and land systems within the region as well as
      Uzbekistan would emerge as arid areas.                                          similarities in climate change challenges across countries, there is much to
 •	   Reduction in water availability is projected to occur along with a 30%          gain from a coordinated and integrated approach toward climate change. In
      increase in irrigation demand. Combined with increased heat                     particular, it could help improve the effectiveness of national climate actions
      extremes that negatively affect crop productivity, substantial risks for        through (i) economies of scale—for example, shared research and knowledge
      irrigated and rainfed agricultural systems can be expected.                     efforts; (ii) faster learning through experience-sharing for replication and
                                                                                      scaling-up across countries of successful climate innovation; (iii) strategic
 •	   Central Asia, especially Kazakhstan, is likely to be a future hotspot of heat
                                                                                      planning and financing—for example, access to climate finance, collaboration
      stress for wheat, a major crop in the area. Agricultural yields could drop
                                                                                      with development partners; and (iv) complementarities—for example,
      by as much as 30% in some parts of Tajikistan by the turn of the century.
                                                                                      risk-management mechanisms in agriculture.
 •	   Livestock would also be impacted, through increasing pressure on
      pastures (often already subject to overgrazing and degradation) as well
      as by health effects from higher temperatures;.
 •	   Greater variability and uncertainty in the timing and amount of water
      available is also raising concerns for power security, particularly for
      hydropower plants in small, unregulated catchments. Output could
      decrease by up to 20% in some locations.
 •	   The higher temperatures of a 4°C hotter world will bring with it higher
      incidence of tick-borne encephalitis and mosquito-transmitted
      malaria and dengue fever. Malaria is endemic in Tajikistan and
      reoccurring in Uzbekistan, the Kyrgyz Republic and Turkmenistan.
TOWARDS CLIMATE-SMART
REGIONAL COOPERATION
The World Bank Group’s regional work in Central Asia aims to help
countries build upon the benefits of cooperation while pursuing national
priorities. Nowhere is that more evident than in dealing with the threats of
climate change. Central Asian countries have the opportunity to look to
the future together with a number of major initiatives. Some highlights:




PREVENTING DISASTERS—BUILDING RESILIENCE
Central Asian countries suffer recurrent devastating disasters associated
with floods and droughts, which climate change is expected to exacerbate.
The Central Asia Regional Hydromet Modernization Project is helping
National Hydromet Services of the five countries to work together, share
data and expertise, and rebuild infrastructure and human capacity to
reduce disaster risks, manage consequences of climate variability and
support economic development in agriculture, water resources and energy
throughout the region.


A major component of the project will ensure that each of the National
Hydrometeorological Services in the region can share, use, exchange and
archive common hydromet data and information, and that each agency has
a comparable level of expertise in the production of information and
delivery of hydromet services.
WORKING TOGETHER TO TACKLE CLIMATE CHANGE
The Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Program for Aral Sea Basin
(CAMP4ASB) is prepared in response to a call from all five Central Asian
countries for a regional program to strengthen dialogue and collaboration
on climate action. The Program seeks to help these countries build upon
the benefits of cooperation while pursuing national priorities for climate-
smart development.


The Program will support access to improved climate change knowledge
services—for example, data, knowledge, tools, and capacity-building for
climate assessment and decision making—as well as support investments to
address climate change and improve productivity and livelihoods in rural
areas. The Program will also support the systematic evaluation of these
climate investments and dissemination of lessons learned to a broad range
of stakeholders to facilitate learning, replication, and scaling-up of such
good climate practices in the region. As a result, CAMP4ASB will enhance
regional dialogue and collaboration to address climate change challenges,
which transcend national borders in Central Asia, and provide a platform
to mobilize and leverage additional resources for climate action.
MANAGING WATER AND ENERGY IN CENTRAL ASIA
Central Asia is endowed with water and abundant and varied energy
resources. However, these resources are highly unbalanced across the
region and access to them is uneven. In some cases there is a lack of
physical infrastructure and the outdated systems that exist are unreliable
and inefficient. Some communities cannot meet citizens’ electricity needs
during certain times of the year, while others lack adequate water supply.
Climate change can only aggravate this situation and further strain
resources with implications for food and energy security and for Central
Asia’s development aspirations.



Both energy and water security depend on actions within each country and
at the regional level. The Central Asia Energy-Water Development
Program (CAEWDP) recognizes that strengthened cooperation at the
national and regional levels for smart management of shared resources can
lead to increased incomes, sustainable development and political stability
across the region. The Program delivers substantial technical expertise,
analytics, and diagnostics for informed decision making and smart
investments at the water-energy nexus:
 •	   Energy Development: to promote high value-added energy investments,
      focusing on winter energy security, energy efficiency, trade and
      accountability, infrastructure planning and institutional development.
      Right now for example, two million households across the region as
      affected by winter heat and power shortages every year.
 •	   Water Productivity: to enhance the productive and efficient use of water
      in both agriculture and energy sectors through capacity and institutional
      strengthening as well as investment planning for irrigation efficiency,
      rehabilitation of infrastructure and promotion of new technologies. For
      example, a 10% increase in water pumping efficiency would result in
      regional savings of $188 million per year.
 •	   Energy-Water Linkages: to improve the understanding of linkages
      between energy and water at the national and regional levels through
      dialogue, energy-water modeling, regional hydrometeorology and
      exploring the future impact of climate change.


Dialogue, consultations and regional cooperation will be key to tackling
climate change and making the best use of water and energy for the
countries of Central Asia as they work to prevent a 4°C world. CAEWDP
fosters dialogue across borders in order to reap the benefits of regional
coordination and cooperation. It aims to strengthen security in the context
of a changing global environment through partnerships with all five
Central Asian countries plus Afghanistan in regional initiatives and with
development partners. Regional dialogue has been significantly bolstered
by the transparent knowledge platform the Program provides.
“  Our response to the challenge of
climate change will define the legacy
of our generation. The stakes have
never been higher.
                  ”
          Dr. Jim Yong Kim, President,
                     World Bank Group




         www.worldbank.org/climatechange
