                                             98220




              Turn Down
                 Heat
              the




                    Confronting
                    the New Climate Normal




THE CLIMATE
CHALLENGE FOR
THE WESTERN BALKANS
ALBANIA BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA KOSOVO
FYR MACEDONIA MONTENEGRO SERBIA
WE ARE HEADING TOWARDS
A MUCH HARSHER CLIMATE
In a sobering assessment Turn Down the Heat: Confronting
the New Climate Normal documents that if no further action
is taken, there is a 40% chance to exceed four degrees
Celsius (4ºC) warming before 2100—within our children’s and
grandchildren’s lifetime.

It paints a grim picture of what that world will look like. As
weather extremes become the new normal and risks to
food, water and energy security increase, everyone will feel
the impact—particularly the poor.

Prepared in collaboration with the Potsdam Institute for
Climate Impact Research and launched by the World Bank
Group in November 2014, the report reviews the latest
scientific evidence on climate change risks to development.

The third in the Turn Down the Heat series, this report
examines climate scenarios in three regions, Latin America
and the Caribbean, the Middle East and North Africa, and
Europe and Central Asia, including the prospects and
implications for the Western Balkans in that challenging
climate regime.

But the good news is that this future does not have to be our
destiny. Solutions exist. First we have to accept the reality of
what scientists are telling us and to truly understand that we
are the last generation that can save the planet. It will require
a concerted effort and change in every aspect of human
life—substantial technological, economic, institutional and
behavioral change. And most of all, it will require leadership
at every level of society.




                                                              1
FACING THE NEW CLIMATE
NORMAL
THE REALITY TODAY                                                                   THE GLOBAL FUTURE—4°C AND CLIMBING
Weather extremes are already affecting people everywhere, damaging                  We are experiencing human-induced climate change at a rate
crops and coastlines and putting livelihoods at risk.                               unprecedented in human history. Despite efforts until now, global
                                                                                    greenhouse gas emissions continue to rise unabated. Scientists and
•	        The world is already 0.8°C above pre-industrial times, with observed
                                                                                    researchers have concluded that with ‘business as usual’ we will hit that
          climate change impacts such as sea-level rise (up 19 centimeters
                                                                                    new climate regime—4°C or even higher—before 2100, with alarming
          between 1901 and 2010), disappearing glaciers and extreme weather
                                                                                    consequences:
          events on the rise;
•	        Losses from extreme weather events increased from US$50 billion a          •	   Unprecedented heat extremes becoming more frequent;
          year in the 1980s to just under $200 billion over the last decade;         •	   Changes in rainfall patterns impacting water availability;
•	        Warming of close to 1.5°C above pre-industrial times is already locked     •	   Reduced crop yields with resulting rising food security concerns;
          into the Earth’s climate system because of past and projected              •	   Accelerated loss of biodiversity and species extinction;
          greenhouse gas emissions (such as carbon dioxide and methane).
                                                                                     •	   Prospects of ocean acidification affecting marine ecosystems, fisheries
          It means that climate change impacts such as heat-waves, droughts,
                                                                                          and tourism;
          storms and other weather extremes may be unavoidable;
                                                                                     •	   Sea level rise continuing for centuries, possibly rising two meters for
•	        To underscore this data, scientists announced that 2014 was the hottest
                                                                                          every degree of warming;
          year in recorded history.
                                                                                     •	   The West Antarctic Ice Sheet dislodging adding to abrupt sea level rise;
                                                                                     •	   Carbon sinks like forests and permafrost holding methane becoming
                                                                                          greenhouse gas emitters that could be disastrous game-changers for
                                                                                          the climate of the planet.




     2	                                                                                                                                                       3
THE CLIMATE CHALLENGE FOR                                                         RISING TO THE CLIMATE CHANGE
THE WESTERN BALKANS                                                               CHALLENGE
                                                                                  That 4°C or higher scenario doesn’t have to be the future for the Western
The dominance of rain-fed agriculture in the Western Balkans makes the            Balkans or the world. With a concerted effort we can turn down the heat.
agriculture sector especially vulnerable to changing rainfall patterns and        Many of the worst projected climate impacts outlined in Turn Down the
increasing temperature. The climate extremes of a 4°C warmer world in             Heat could be avoided by holding warming below 2°C. In the meantime,
the Western Balkans would pose major risks not only to agriculture, but           efforts to build resilience and manage risks must also redouble to cope
also to energy and population security. They include:                             with already locked-in climate change over the coming decades.
 •	        The Western Balkans emerges as one of the planet’s Warming Hot         Countries in the Western Balkans are already taking action in that
           Spots, with more frequent heat waves, escalating to as much as 80%     regard, including through collaborations with several development
           of summer months in a 4°C warmer world.                                partners. This brochure highlights some examples of the World Bank
 •	        The mean average summer temperature in the Western Balkans could       Group’s support for climate action. These include addressing risks for
           actually climb to 7.5°C above pre-industrial times. As climate warms   water resources and agriculture, and tapping opportunities for energy
           the area’s Small Glaciers will be gone within decades.                 efficiency and infrastructure modernization for cleaner, more efficient
                                                                                  and competitive growth.
 •	        Rainfall is projected to decline 20–30% in the Western Balkans at
           4°C warming.                                                           The findings from Turn Down the Heat tell us however that a major push is
 •	        The increasing occurrence (by 20%) of Drought Days will be a           required for the Western Balkans to fully rise to the climate change
           major threat to agriculture.                                           challenge. Today’s policy investment decisions will significantly shape the
                                                                                  region’s future climate vulnerability and carbon intensity. Many issues,
 •	        Water Availability in summer is expected to decrease through the
                                                                                  particularly those related to adaptation capacity, water resources
           century. Annual river discharge could be reduced more than 45% by
                                                                                  management or energy infrastructure, have strong regional dimensions—
           2100 in a 4°C world.
                                                                                  especially given geographic and economic interconnections. The challenge
 •	        Winter and Spring Flood Risk is expected to increase, particularly     for the countries of the Western Balkans will be to leverage their actions at
           along the Danube, Sava and Tisza rivers.                               the national level into a concerted regional approach to climate change.
 •	        Crop Yields in FYR Macedonia alone could drop by 50% by 2050
           as the temperature climbs.
 •	        Hydropower which plays an important role in the region’s electricity
           supply, will be at risk. In Albania for example the annual average
           output from large hydropower plants could be reduced by 15% and
           20% for smaller plants.
 •	        Health Risks will grow as the climate warms with the growing threat
           of dengue fever. Heat-related mortality would increase 20% to
           1,000 per million people.




       	
      4	                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                 UTILIZING ALBANIA’S FORESTS FOR CLIMATE
                                                                 AND PROFIT
                                                                 More trees mean more money for Albania. Albania is one of the
                                                                 first countries to sequester carbon on eroded land. It is planting
                                                                 trees and helping forests to regenerate without interference from
                                                                 man or animals. Under a recently completed World Bank tree
                                                                 planting program, 60% of Albania’s forests are now managed by
                                                                 local governments. Each community receives over $2,000 from
                                                                 sequestered carbon. The country is selling emission reductions—
                                                                 from carbon trapped in the growing trees—worth an estimated
                                                                 US$11 million to the World Bank’s BioCarbon Fund.



     ALBANIA
     RACING AGAINST CLIMATE CHANGE
     Reducing Vulnerability in the Agriculture Sector
     through Adaptation: More than anything else,
     agriculture anchors the lives of the people of
     Albania—providing the income basis for most of the
     population and serving as an employment safety net.
     All of that is at risk as the climate changes. Adaptation
     is key to the future, including: utilizing afforestation
     and barriers to protect arable land from soil erosion;
     introducing drip irrigation and modernizing existing
     systems; planting native crops that would be resistant
     to changes in climate; improving field and soil
     management including minimum tillage and contour
     cropping to slopes.

     Focusing on Environmental Services: A newly
     approved project for environmental services—such
     as carbon sequestration, protection of watersheds,
     the supply of water for power generation, irrigation,
     drinking and sanitation—will support sustainable land
     management practices in erosion-prone rural upland
     areas and help to build resilience (both income and
     livelihoods) in communities in those areas.




6	                                                                                                                      ALBANIA |     7
BOSNIA AND
HERZEGOVINA
STRENGTHENING RESILIENCE AND
ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE
Irrigation Development Project: One fifth of
Bosnia and Herzegovina’s workforce is employed
in agriculture. The aim of the project is to improve
performance of irrigation systems and support
farmers. It focuses on high-priority investments
targeting the rehabilitation and modernization of
irrigation systems. The largest irrigation investment to
date in the country, it will support efforts to align with
European Union irrigation policies and address issues
of climate variability.

Protection against Flooding: The increasing
occurrence of extreme rain and flood events as
the climate changes also poses risks to agriculture
and livelihoods. In May 2014, the worst flood in the
country’s recorded history made an estimated 15%
dent in national income in damages and losses. It
                                                             FLOOD EMERGENCY RECOVERY PROJECT
also destroyed lives and livelihoods. Rivers swelled,
mountains eroded, and disaster struck the country.           In response to the May 2014 flood in Bosnia and Herzegovina the
Flooding ravaged towns and inundated newly-plowed            World Bank Group launched the $100 million Flood Emergency
fields. Landslides destroyed roads and other vital           Recovery Project. The project will meet critical needs and restore
infrastructure. People fled their homes, seeking dry         functionality of infrastructure essential for public services and
land and shelter. It was a preview of what’s to come.        economic recovery—such as rural development, energy, transport,
                                                             water and sanitation. But just as important, with projections of
                                                             increased flooding as the climate changes, the project will provide
                                                             technical assistance and capacity building to help build resilience
                                                             against disasters.




  8	                                                                                              BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA      |    9
                                                              ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY
                                                              PROJECT (KEEREP)
                                                              Energy efficiency and renewable energy can help mitigate
                                                              Kosovo’s projected power shortfalls, while enhancing Kosovo’s
                                                              energy security and environmental sustainability. The KEEREP
                                                              project focuses on energy-efficiency, renewable energy
                                                              investments in public buildings as well as policy and regulatory
                                                              support for renewable energy and energy efficiency.

                                                              This is consistent with the government’s National Energy
                                                              Efficiency and Renewable Energy Action Plans, which call for a
                                                              cumulative energy savings of 9% by 2018 and a 25% renewable
                                                              energy target by 2020.
KOSOVO
RECONCILING GROWING ENERGY NEEDS
WITH CLIMATE CHANGE ACTION
Country Environmental Assessment (CEA): The
Kosovo CEA is a World Bank analytical tool used
to integrate environmental issues into development
assistance strategies, programs and projects. It
is a valuable tool for dealing with climate change.
The environmental priorities of the country for
the next five years are to harmonize Kosovo’s
environmental legislation with that of the EU. This
will mean incorporating environmental legislation
and methodologies into all sectors; and setting up
and expanding institutions for the implementation
of environmental policies. The CEA supports the
government’s plan to focus on, among other things,
monitoring major industrial pollutants and hotspots;
increasing access to clean water; creating programs
for recycling wastewater and solid waste; and applying
energy-efficient concepts in economic sectors.

Building Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy
into Kosovo’s Future: Currently, Kosovo’s electricity
system cannot meet the demand that is needed to
fuel the country’s economic growth. Power production
relies on two aging, unreliable lignite-fired power plants,
one of which is scheduled to be decommissioned
in 2017. This, along with the unsustainable heating
of buildings, mostly from unmanaged, unregulated
firewood and lignite-based electricity, is neither
economically nor environmentally sustainable.


  10	                                                                                                              KOSOVO |      11
                                                          A ROADMAP TO GREEN GROWTH
                                                          The Green Growth Country Assessment takes a practical
                                                          approach to identifying specific challenges and opportunities
                                                          FYR Macedonia faces in building its green growth future and
                                                          presents them in a form useful for decision makers. The report
                                                          addresses mitigation, adaptation, and the most immediately
                                                          challenging resource sustainability issue, clean air. The report
                                                          summarizes analytic work undertaken in sectors and on issues
                                                          selected as critical for defining and understanding the green
                                                          growth path of the country, with an emphasis on climate action.




FYR MACEDONIA
LOOKING TO A GREEN FUTURE
Reducing Vulnerability of FYR Macedonia’s
Agricultural Systems to Climate Change:
Turn Down the Heat points out that in FYR Macedonia
climate change is an immediate and fundamental
threat because agriculture is one of the most-climate
sensitive of all sectors and the livelihoods of rural
communities are at risk. The report states that there
must be a clear plan for aligning agricultural policies
with climate change, developing the capabilities
of key agricultural institutions, and making needed
investments in infrastructure, support services and
on-farm improvements.

Achieving Green Growth in FYR Macedonia:
The Green Growth and Climate Change Analytic and
Advisory Support Program was launched in 2011,
with funding support from the World Bank and the
governments of Norway and Sweden.




  12	                                                                                                 FYR MACEDONIA    |   13
                                                        MPROVING ENERGY-EFFICIENCY PERFORMANCE
                                                        MEEP is investing in energy-saving retrofits in about 28 schools
                                                        and hospitals. It is insulating roofs and buildings and upgrading
                                                        heating systems, substations and networks. Facilities were
                                                        selected for retrofits based on their energy savings potential,
                                                        geographic distribution, number of users and social and
                                                        demographic impact. To date, eight schools, a student
                                                        dormitory and six hospitals have been retrofitted. Savings in
                                                        heating energy range between 30 and 60%.




MONTENEGRO
FOCUSING ON GREEN AND RESILIENT
GROWTH
The Industrial Waste Management and Cleanup
Project will help protect Montenegro’s natural
resources and reduce public health risks from
exposure to selected industrial waste disposal sites
that have significant environmental impacts.
Industrial waste site remediation and sustainable
waste management are key underlying principles
of future economic growth in the tourism sector
of Montenegro. The partnership between the
government of Montenegro and the World Bank on
this project will help Montenegro address some of the
most critical environmental hot spots in the country.
The $50 million, five-year project got underway in
November 2014.

Energy Efficiency Project: Studies in the mid-2000s
determined that energy consumption in Montenegro
was very high and the awareness of ways to achieve
energy efficiency low when compared to trends
and practices in European Union countries. The
government developed the Montenegro Energy
Efficiency Plan (MEEP) for 2008–12, supporting the
development of energy-efficiency programs in all
economic sectors. To complement this, the Ministry
of Education and the Ministry of Health initiated
programs to improve energy efficiency in public
facilities, namely schools and hospitals.



  14	                                                                                                  MONTENEGRO |     15
                                                           FLOOD EMERGENCY RECOVERY PROJECT
                                                           The US$300 million Flood Emergency Recovery Project loan is
                                                           supporting the country in meeting critical needs in the power and
                                                           agriculture sectors, repairing damaged flood control infrastructure,
                                                           and helping Serbia better respond to natural disasters.

                                                           Specifically, the operation helped close the financing gap for
                                                           energy purchases to ensure power during the winter of 2014. It will
                                                           recover and strengthen critical power sector infrastructure, and
                                                           finance investments in energy efficiency.  In the agriculture sector,
                                                           the project will provide farmers in affected areas with the income
                                                           security needed to invest in their farms. The project will also help
                                                           improve resilience to disasters through the repairs to critical flood

SERBIA
                                                           prevention infrastructure.




FLOOD CONTROL, IRRIGATION
AND DRAINAGE
Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation Project:
Following a decade of declining maintenance
budgets in the 1990s, the flood control and drainage
infrastructure in Serbia deteriorated. This recently
completed project supported the priority rehabilitation
of the drainage and irrigation infrastructure. It helped
reduce the risk of damage from flooding to people,
land, crops, property and infrastructure, and helped
as well to improve water resources management in
Serbia. In total, 45 flood control and drainage systems
were rehabilitated, with over 440,000 hectares
countrywide protected from floods, providing an
increased level of protection to over one million
people. Over 20 Water User Associations were
established and two irrigation systems rehabilitated.
  
Flood Control: Unprecedented rainfall in May 2014
caused massive floods in Serbia as in other Western
Balkan countries. The heavy rainfall led to a rapid
increase in water levels in eight of the country’s
main rivers. Flash floods destroyed houses, bridges
and sections of roads. The disaster claimed lives,
forced massive evacuation from people’s homes in
flood-affected areas, and cut power to thousands of
households. It was an omen of what lies ahead with
climate change.




  16	                                                                                                              SERBIA    |   17
“  Our response to the challenge of
climate change will define the legacy
of our generation. The stakes have
never been higher.
                  ”
          Dr. Jim Yong Kim, President,
                     World Bank Group
