                       98266

BUILDING SYSTEMS FOR UNIVERSAL
HEALTH COVERAGE IN SOUTH KOREA
DISCUSSION PAPER       MARCH 2015




Sanggon Na
Soonman Kwon
BUILDING SYSTEMS FOR UNIVERSAL HEALTH
       COVERAGE IN SOUTH KOREA




       Sanggon Na and Soonman Kwon




               March 2015
       Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP
topics to encourage discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be
attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members
of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use
of material presented in this series should take into account this provisional character.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor,
Martin Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2015 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                           ii
        Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

         Building Systems for Universal Health Coverage in South Korea

                              Sanggon Naa Soonman Kwonb

a
    Health, Nutrition & Population Global Practice, World Bank, Washington, DC USA
b
    School of Public Health, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea


    Paper prepared for the conference: “Building Systems for Universal Health Coverage:
             South-South Knowledge Exchange with Korea,” organized by the
    World Bank/Knowledge Sharing Program and Korea Development Institute School in
                              Seoul, Korea, Dec 10-12, 2014

Abstract: This paper broadly examines the development process of Korea’s health care
system toward the achievement of Universal Health Coverage. Korea implemented a
series of health care reforms after a rapid expansion of population coverage to improve
efficiency and equity in financing and delivery of health care. The authors also
investigate changes in the governance structure of Korea’s national health Insurance,
which is now represented by two agencies: National Health Insurance Service (NHIS)
and Health Insurance Review and Assessment Service (HIRA). Health insurance
agencies have improved the accountability and transparency of the health insurance
system, thanks to the ICT-based centralized claim review and assessment. Lessons and
challenges from Korea’s experiences and achievements on the road to UHC could
provide valuable policy implications to low- and middle-income countries.

Keywords: Universal Health Coverage, Health Insurance, Health Information System,
Health Care Reform

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in the paper are
entirely those of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its
Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.

Correspondence Details: Sanggon Na, The World Bank, 1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA; telephone: +1 (202) 458-5144; fax: +1 (202) 522-0638;
email: sna2@worldbank.org.




                                            iii
iv
                                           Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .................................................................................... VII

PART I – INTRODUCTION ................................................................................... 9

PART II– DEVELOPMENT OF KOREA’S HEALTH INSURANCE AND ROAD
TO UNIVERSAL HEALTH COVERAGE (UHC) ................................................. 10
   POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT .................................................................... 10
   INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURE AND IMPLEMENTATION OF KOREA’S NATIONAL HEALTH
   INSURANCE........................................................................................................ 11
   ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND CHALLENGES ................................................................. 12
PART III – HEALTH CARE REFORM AND FISCAL CRISIS ............................. 14
   CONTEXT OF HEALTH CARE REFORM .................................................................... 14
   IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REFORMS ..................................................................... 15
   COST CONTAINMENT/FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY STRATEGIES...................................... 16
   ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND CHALLENGES ................................................................. 18
PART IV – GOVERNANCE AND HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEMS (2000–
PRESENT) .......................................................................................................... 20
   CONTEXT .......................................................................................................... 20
   GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE.................................................................................. 20
   HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEM ........................................................................... 21
PART V – LESSONS LEARNED AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS FROM THE
KOREAN EXPERIENCE .................................................................................... 24
   POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC ELEMENTS................................................................... 24
   RISK POOLING AND COVERAGE ............................................................................ 24
   PRIVATE HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND REFORM POLITICS .................................... 25
PART VI – FUTURE CHALLENGES .................................................................. 26
   IMPROVE FINANCIAL PROTECTION ........................................................................ 26
   EXPAND THE BASE OF INSURANCE CONTRIBUTION FOR FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY ... 26
   COPE WITH POPULATION AGING ........................................................................... 27
REFERENCES ................................................................................................... 28
vi
                             ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors would like to thank the following World Bank staff: Joy Antoinette De Beyer,
Senior Knowledge Management Officer, GHNDR; Leonardo Cubillos-Turriago, Senior
Health Specialist, GHNDR; Tania Dmytraczenko, Senior Economist, GHNDR; and
Roberto F. Iunes, Senior Economist (Health), GHNDR, for their inputs and support. The
authors are also grateful to all the participants of “Building Systems for Universal Health
Coverage: South-South Knowledge Exchange with Korea” in Seoul, Korea, Dec 10-12,
2014, hosted by the World Bank, Knowledge Sharing Program of Korea, and KDI
School, for all the comments and questions.

Finally, the authors are grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP
Discussion Paper.




                                            vii
viii
                           PART I – INTRODUCTION

The advances and challenges experienced by Korea’s health system in the last forty
years can provide many important lessons for low and middle- income countries. From
the late seventies to the first years of the new century, Korea implemented measures
that led to a rapid expansion of population coverage and to the achievement of universal
health coverage (UHC) in only twelve years. The country instituted major health reforms
aimed at ensuring efficient and equitable delivery of services and improving financing
structures of its health system. UHC is a continuous process that requires building a
sustainable financial protection system; the Korean government implemented a series of
reforms even after health insurance covered the entire population.

While these objectives were largely achieved, and as it was to be expected, the reform
faced important political opposition from key stakeholders. Some of the measures
introduced to deal with these challenges had negative fiscal “side effects” causing the
government to introduce a comprehensive set of policies and actions with the goal of
preserving the fiscal and financial sustainability of the system.

The next section reviews the historical development of the Korean health insurance
system and the 1977-1989 road to UHC. It also examines the process and outcomes of
two major health care reforms in 2000: the merger of health insurance societies into a
single insurer, and the separation of the processes of prescribing and dispensing
medicines. Then the development of governance and health information systems to
improve transparency and accountability is examined. It discusses lessons and policy
implications relevant for developing countries. The report concludes by examining future
challenges for the Korean health insurance system.




                                           9
     PART II– DEVELOPMENT OF KOREA’S HEALTH INSURANCE
       AND ROAD TO UNIVERSAL HEALTH COVERAGE (UHC)
                                  POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC CONTEXT

Korea’s health insurance scheme was formally established in December of 1963 with
the enactment of the Health Insurance Law by the military government immediately after
its coup d’état. The law, however, did not require compulsory enrolment due to the weak
economic and social development of the country at the time. Mandatory social health
insurance was not implemented until the mid-1970s, with the significant revision of the
Law in December of 1976 that included mandatory enrolment in the health insurance
scheme.

The need for political legitimization of an authoritarian (military) political regime played
an important role in the introduction and extension of social health insurance in Korea
(Kwon, H., 1999). Contrary to western welfare states, labor movements, leftist parties or
class struggles played no role in the development of health insurance in Korea. There
was no labor party or social democratic political party, and labor unions became active
only in the late 1980s. With an authoritarian top-down policy process driven by elite
bureaucrats and political leaders, the government led the introduction of health
insurance in Korea (Kwon, 2009). Government expected that health insurance for
employees would help stabilize the labor market by keeping skilled workers in the
workforce, which was an important policy concern in an era of rapid economic
expansion.

The rapid pace of economic growth and improvement of well-being was generated by
the export-driven industrial policy through a series of five-year Economic Development
Plans that started in the early 1960s. Then the government recognized the country’s
need for a welfare system, leading to the emphasis placed on social development
policies by the Fourth Economic Development Plan of 1977-1981, which aimed at
distributing the fruits of economic development to the people. In fact, a combination of
political and economic factors contributed to the rapid extension of health insurance
coverage to unprotected population groups, particularly to the self-employed and
workers in the informal sector, who constitute a major challenge for achieving universal
coverage (Kwon, 2009).

On the political side, the 1987 presidential election, the first free national-scale
presidential election in about 20 years, prompted President Chun Doo Whan and the
presidential candidate of the ruling party, Roh Tae Woo, both former military generals,
to seek political support and legitimacy by proposing UHC. The ruling party used the
expansion of social welfare programs as a major item on its campaign agenda and in
1986 the Government announced a UHC plan to include the self-employed in the
National Health Insurance (NHI).1 On the economic side, the booming economy of the
late-1980s, with Korea experiencing record-high annual growth rates of about
12 percent between 1986 and 1988, substantially improved the capacity of the self-
employed to pay for social insurance contributions. It also provided the government with


1   The national pension scheme and the minimum wage system were also introduced at this time .



                                                    10
the fiscal capacity to subsidize health insurance for the self-employed, the last group to
join the NHI in 1989.

     INSTITUTIONAL STRUCTURE AND IMPLEMENTATION OF KOREA’S NATIONAL HEALTH
                                    INSURANCE

The implementation of Korea’s National Health Insurance scheme began with those
population groups that were easiest to reach and enroll. Accordingly, employees of large
corporations with more than 500 workers were the first group to be covered by health
insurance in 1977. Health insurance then was extended to workers in firms with more
than 300 employees in 1979. It was further extended to firms with more than 100
employees in 1981 and to those with more than 16 employees in 1983. A Medical Aid
program (Medicaid) for the poor was also introduced in 1977, and public-sector
employees and school teachers joined the health insurance in 1979. To extend health
insurance to the self-employed, the government implemented pilot programs in three
rural areas in 1981 and in one urban area and two additional rural areas in 1982. Those
pilots were targeted for the self-employed and included premium setting and collection,
benefit package, and social marketing for enrolees and providers in the community
level. The health insurance program achieved universal coverage of the population by
including the rural self-employed in January 1988 and the urban self-employed in 1989
(Table 1).

Table 1 Expansion of Population Coverage in Korea (Unit: 1,000 persons)
                     1977      1980          1985           1990     1995     2000     2005     2011
   Health
                     5296      11368         21254          44110    45429    47466    49154    50909
   Insurance +
                     (100%)    (100%)        (100%)         (100%)   (100%)   (100%)   (100%)   (100%)
   Medical Aid

   Health            3200      9226          17995          40180    44016    45896    47392    49299
   Insurance         (60%)     (81%)         (85%)          (91%)    (97%)    (97%)    (96%)    (97%)

   Employee          3140      9161          16425          20759    21559    22404    27233    33257
   Health Ins.       (59%)     (80.4%)       (77.5%)        (47%)    (47%)    (47%)    (55%)    (65%)

   Self
                                             375            19457    22457    23492    20159    16043
   Employed          -         -
                                             (2%)           (44%)    (49%)    (49%)    (41%)    (32%)
   Health Ins.
   Occupational
                     - /60     - /65         954(4.5%)/
   /Voluntary                                               -        -        -        -        -
                     (1%)      (0.6%)        241(1%)
   Medical Ins.

                     2095      2142          3259           3930     1413     1570     1762     1609
   Medical Aid
                     (40%)     (19%)         (15%)          (9%)     (3%)     (3%)     (4%)     (3%)
  Source: Statistics Korea, various years.

Contrary to the rather smooth extension of health insurance to formal sector employees,
its extension to the self-employed faced tough resistance (Kwon, 2009). Farmers
requested government subsidies for their contribution and the expansion of health care
facilities in rural areas to improve their access to medical care. Consequently,
government subsidized health insurance for the self-employed and provided financial
incentives and loans for private hospitals to open in rural areas. The subsidy was initially
about half of the total revenue of the health insurance scheme for the self-employed,

                                                       11
and was later reduced incrementally. As government tightly regulated the fee schedule
for (both public and private) providers through health insurance, lower fees (than
customary fees) were applied to enrollees of health insurance, which provided an
incentive to join health insurance.

From the beginning, the health insurance system adopted family-based membership,
and dependents became members of the scheme in which their household head was
enrolled. A well-established family registry system made family-based coverage easier
to implement. The NHI also used a pluralistic system with multiple insurance societies
(funds), which were based on either firms (for the formal sector) or regions (for the self-
employed). For the employee health insurance scheme, large corporations had
individual firm-level insurance societies, while small and medium-sized firms and the
self-employed were pooled to join an insurance society in their geographic area. In the
society (fund)-based health insurance, risk pooling was limited as it was only up to the
level of each insurance society. Each insurance fund was responsible for revenue
collection, enrollment, and limited amount of ancillary benefits, and government set
uniform statutory benefits and fee schedule for providers.

The government’s decision to structure the health insurance financing through
decentralized multiple funds rather than a centralized single fund, was to encourage the
sustainability among the insured and to minimize government financial involvement. The
rationale to cover employees and the self-employed in separate insurance societies was
to avoid the problems associated with different levels of income assessment and
contribution collection between the two groups. It was much easier to assess income
(ability to pay) and collect contribution from employees than the self-employed.

Health care provision under the NHI was dominated by private providers, who were
reimbursed by fee-for-service payment. The fee schedule was determined by the
government rather than negotiated, and providers complained that the fee level was too
low. Fee for service payment for all types of care, from primary care to tertiary inpatient
care, have had the potential for inefficiency and demand inducement. All these
characteristics of the Korean health system would greatly impact its development as will
be seen in Section III.

                                ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND CHALLENGES

Korea has achieved big improvements in health outcomes such as life expectancy and
mortality since the development of health insurance (Kwon, 2009)2. But health outcomes
are determined by many factors other than health care, such as economic development
and other socio-political factors, and it is difficult to estimate the contribution of health
insurance itself to the improvement in health outcomes. Health care utilization has
increased substantially, along with both the economic growth of the country and the
development of health insurance.

However, important challenges remained after the achievement of universal population
coverage. The priority given to rapid extension of population coverage has resulted in
relatively low contributions and limited benefit coverage (for example, benefit ceiling of
total 90 days of utilization per year). Out-of-pocket payment still represented more than

2
    For example, life expectancy increased by 12.6 years between 1977 (64.8) and 2003 (77.4).



                                                     12
half of the sources of financing by 1990, which meant that the country still presented
insufficient levels of financial protection (Figure 1). The multiple insurance societies
resulted in high administrative costs, inequity across societies, and limited risk pooling,
and many funds in rural areas suffered from fiscal deficits. For example, the proportion
of the administrative cost in total expense was the lowest (4.8 percent) in the health
insurance scheme for government and school employees (single insurance fund) and
the highest (9.5 percent) in the health insurance scheme for the self-employed (NHIC,
1999). Health insurance contribution for the self-employed as a proportion of income in
poor rural areas was higher than that in rich urban areas. These concerns became the
major motivation for the health care reform to merge all funds into a single fund in 2000.

Figure 1 Source of Financing for Health Care in Korea




Source: OECD Health Statistics, 2012.

Finally, the rise in medical care utilization was met by a rapid increase in the supply of
private-sector providers. While private providers are keen to ensure consumer
satisfaction, very strong profit motivation and the fee-for-service payment mechanism
have resulted in demand inducement and cost increases. For example, the numbers of
physicians and hospital beds per 10,000 persons increased from 5 and 17 in 1981 to 8
and 30 in 1989, respectively. The number of physician visits per capita increased from
3.7 in 1977 to 6.2 in 1989 (further increased to 10.6 in 2002) (OECD, 2006). As will be
seen below, private providers also became important sources of opposition to health
care reform measures, such as changing the payment system from fee-for-service to
prospective case-based payment, when these became necessary.




                                            13
      PART III – HEALTH CARE REFORM AND FISCAL CRISIS
                           CONTEXT OF HEALTH CARE REFORM

In 2000, two major health care reforms were implemented simultaneously to solve some
of the key challenges generated by the implementation of the NHI financing structure.
The high administrative costs created by the proliferation of insurance societies, the
inequity in contributions across them and the limited cross-subsidization from the better
off to the poor led to the merging of insurance funds into a single insurer system. The
perverse financial incentives that existed for physicians and pharmacists to prescribe
more medicines in order to increase their income led to the separation of drug
prescribing and dispensing.

The organization of the NHI in decentralized funds led to the creation of more than 350
quasi-public insurance societies until the late 1990’s. These health insurance societies
were divided in three categories and were subject to strict regulation by the Ministry of
Health and Welfare (MOHW): (i) the more than 100 health insurance societies for
industrial workers and their dependents; (ii) a single society for government employees,
teachers, and their dependents, and (iii) the more than 200 societies for the self-
employed. Beneficiaries were assigned to insurance societies based on their type of
employment (for employees) and residential area (for the self-employed), and health
insurance societies did not compete.

Creating a single payer aimed to increase the efficiency of risk pooling and minimize
administrative costs (Kwon, 2003a). The differences in contribution rates across
insurance societies, in spite of identical statutory benefits, also raised concerns about
equity. Members of insurance societies in poor or rural areas had to pay a greater
proportion of their income in contributions, compared to people in wealthy areas. The
merger was expected to improve equity by applying national level contribution rates.
Before the merger, risk sharing mechanisms among insurance societies based on
expenditure and the proportion of old population in each fund did not address the fiscal
insolvency of many regional insurance societies in poor or rural areas.

Before the pharmaceutical reform, physicians and pharmacists in Korea both prescribed
and dispensed medicines. This created financial incentives for physicians and
pharmacists to dispense more drugs and to select those with greater profit margins
(Kwon, 2003b), a phenomenon aggravated by the fact that physicians were able to
purchase drugs at prices that were much lower than the reimbursement rates set by the
health insurance. In addition, because the government strictly regulated fees for medical
services through a fee schedule, dispensing drugs was more profitable for physicians
than providing medical services. The perverse financial incentives for physicians and
pharmacists and easy consumer access to drugs contributed to the high proportion of
total health expenditure spent on pharmaceuticals in Korea. The proportion of
pharmaceutical spending in health care expenditure in Korea was 31%, whereas that in
OECD countries was below 20% on average in the mid 1990s (NHIC, 1997; OECD,
1995). More importantly, the system resulted in misuse and/or overuse of drugs such as
antibiotics. In addition, doctors’ explanation about medications to patients were often
found wanting. Because the separation reform forced physicians to disclose the
prescription to patients and pharmacists, pharmacists could have a chance to double-
check prescriptions and give more explanations to patients.


                                            14
                           IMPLEMENTATION OF THE REFORMS

The two reforms introduced major structural change to Korea’s health care system. The
progressive government, the president’s keen interest in social policy, and active
participation of civic groups played important roles in the two reforms, which were
discussed for a long time but not implemented due to opposition of vested interest
groups. The new president used to be a famous leader of democratic movements in the
former authoritarian regimes. He was keen to ensure social solidarity and
socioeconomic reforms to improve equity and invited progressive civic groups in the
policy process.

With two reforms, a paradigm change in health policy making toward a pluralistic model
with active participation of stakeholders (Kwon and Reich, 2005) happened. The labor
unions of workers (officers) in the self-employed insurance funds supported the merger
while those in employee insurance funds opposed it. Both labor unions represented the
interests of their members (that is, enrollees in their funds) (Kwon, 2003a): (formal
sector) employees were not supportive of the merger as it would potentially increase
their contribution because their income was easier to assess, compared with the self-
employed. Furthermore the merger would provide a better and nation-wide career path
for those working in the self-employed insurance system. Before the merger, health
insurance funds for the self-employed were small and localized with little mobility of
personnel.

It should be noted that the Korean health insurance system, although fragmented with
multiple insurance funds, had favorable conditions for merger such as centralized claim
review, uniform statutory benefits coverage, and a uniform payment system for
providers (fee schedules). The uniformity across insurance funds before the merger was
made possible because government played a key role in the initial design and
implementation of the health insurance system of Korea.

Physicians concerned with the potential loss of income from the dispensing of medicines
strongly opposed the medicines reform (Kwon, 2003b), while pharmacists wanted to
keep the right to prescribe. Physician and pharmacist lobbies were powerful influences
in health policy and effectively blocked change for a long time (since the universal
coverage of population). Despite these pressures and because of the strong support of
civil society, the pharmaceutical reform separating the prescribing and dispensing roles
was finally adopted in 2000. Civic groups actively participated in the policy reform
process, supporting the measures proposed by the government, as they were political
allies of the progressive government. The end of the authoritarian regime and the
democratization in public policy making opened a critical window of opportunity for a
major change in Korea’s health policy process, which had been dominated by the
medical profession and elite bureaucrats (Kwon and Reich, 2005). New groups – most
importantly, civic groups and labor unions – could participate in the policy process and
became deeply involved in the design of health care financing reform and
pharmaceutical reform. Civic groups quickly and actively pursued opportunities for
health reform, making it possible to adopt policies that threatened vested interests.

However, the implementation of the new policies was not easy. The country faced a
series of nationwide strikes by physicians, which led to changes and distortions to the



                                           15
reform package.3 In fact, physicians gained strong bargaining power after their nation-
wide strikes, as these had an important negative impact in a health care system in which
more than 90 percent of hospitals are private. As a result, the government agreed to a
substantial increase in physicians fees in order to compensate for their loss of income, a
measure that greatly contributed to the 2001 fiscal crisis of the health insurance system
(Kwon, 2007), as will be discussed below. The physicians also succeeded in pushing the
government to defer its planned national extension of the DRG payment system to all
health-care providers (Kwon, 2003c).


Table 2 Fiscal Status of Health Insurance in Korea (Unit: 100 Million Korean Won)
                        1990        1995        1997         1999        2000         2001          2006          2012

    Revenue            24,321      54,354      72,967       86,923    95,294        116,423      223,876         418,192


    Expenditure        21,641      50,537      76,823       95,614    105,384       140,511      224,623         388,035


    Annual Surplus     2,680       3,817       -3,856       -8,691    -10,090       -24,088      -747            30,157


    Accumulated
                       7,326       41,200      37,851       22,425    9,189         -18,109      11,798          45,757
    Surplus
Source: NHIC, Health Insurance Statistics, various years.

                     COST CONTAINMENT/FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY STRATEGIES

The aging of the population, fee-for-service payment system, increasing demand for
healthcare, and low contribution rates had all contributed to the accumulating financial
pressures on Korea’s health system. It was, however, the rapid and sharp increase in
medical fees – of 44 percent from November 1999 to January 2001 – adopted to end
the physicians’ strike against the pharmaceutical reform (Table 3) that ultimately
triggered the fiscal crisis of 2001, when the national health insurance system
experienced fiscal deficit after depleting all accumulated surplus.4 Before the reforms,
the Korean government had strongly controlled medical fees without fully including the
medical profession in the fee setting process.5 However, with the separation reform,
direct cost control with tightly regulated fee scheduling became less effective as fee
scheduling became a collective bargaining process rather than a one-sided government
decision.




3 For example, physicians opposed the obligation of generic prescription and were allowed to continue with
brand-name prescription.
4 The general public strongly criticized the government, putting the blame for the financial crisis on the two

reforms. The separation reform definitely accelerated the crisis with the rapid fee rise. However, the impact
of the integration reform was neutral given the decrease in administrative costs and potential purchasing
power of the single insurer (National Health Insurance Corporation)
5 Physicians were reimbursed according to a fee schedule established by the MOHW after approval by the

Ministry of Finance and Economy. The medical fee was regarded as a public utility charge like the electricity
rate.


                                                     16
Table 3 Rate of Increase for the Medical Fee (Unit: %)
  1998    1999     2000     2000    2000    2001       2002                       2003         2004
                   (Apr)    (July)  (Sep)
  3.50    9.00     6.00     9.20    6.50    7.08       -2.90                      2.97         2.65
  2005    2006     2007     2008    2009    2010       2011                       2012         2013
  2.99    3.58     2.30     1.94    2.22    2.05       1.64                       2.20         2.36
Source: NHIC, Health Insurance Statistics in various years.

Faced with a fiscal crisis, in May of 2001 the government announced a comprehensive
policy package of short and long-term financial stability measures and a Special Act to
support their authority.6 The financial stability measures aimed to share the burden of
the adjustment among the government, insurers, providers, and the insured. The short-
term measures consisted of a physician fee freeze, dropping some medicines from the
benefits package, decreased drug prices, increased copayments, and tightening of
physician claims review (Kwon, 2007). The government plan also included the
suspension of benefit coverage expansion and a 9 percent annual increase in the
contribution rate until 2006.7 The long-term measures included strengthening the health
information management system, payment system reforms, introduction of public long-
term care insurance (to reduce social admissions to acute care hospitals), and the
expansion of public-sector health institutions.

Two measures in the Special Act deserve special attention: (i) the increase in the
government subsidy and (ii) the introduction of a Health Insurance Policy Review
Committee. The Act temporarily increased the government subsidy to the self-employed
fund from 28 percent to 50 percent, significantly contributing to the fiscal health of the
health insurance system and changed the trend of steadily declining tax subsidies for
health insurance. The government subsidy incrementally decreased as the fiscal health
of health insurance was restored. A major portion of the government’s subsidy came
from the health promotion fund which was based on the taxation of tobacco products.8
However, this use of the fund to rescue the health insurance from the financial crisis has
been criticized for diverting fund resources away from its original purpose of supporting
health promotion programs.

The single insurer system that emerged after the merger of the many health insurance
societies meant that major decisions on health insurance became major items in the
national agenda, requiring a new policy framework and institutional arrangement. In this
sense, a Health Insurance Policy Deliberation Committee (HIPDC) was created in 2001
with the mandate to approve major decisions on health insurance, such as contribution
rates, benefit packages, pricing, etc. The most striking feature of this committee was its
ability to coordinate and synchronize decisions related to the contribution rate and the
medical fee, which were previously determined through separate mechanisms, limiting
the government’s ability to balance the major revenue and expenditure components of
the health insurance system. Two insurance agencies, the NHIS (National Health
Insurance Service) and HIRA (Health Insurance Review and Assessment Service) were


6 The Special Act for the Financial Stability of National Health Insurance was enacted in January 2002.
7 In March 2002, the contribution rate was increased by 6.8 percent, lower than the 9.0 percent planned. In
the same year the medical fee was also decreased by 2.9 percent, the only cut in the health insurance
history.
8 Cigarette prices were increased in 2002 to fund the increased government subsidy to the self-employed

insurance fund.


                                                    17
created after the merger of insurance societies, and they have provided evidence and
technical inputs to the Health Insurance Policy Deliberation Committee.

The Committee consists of 24 members with the Vice Minister of Health and Welfare as
its chair. It is a tripartite committee of payers, providers, and public agencies, coupled
with technical experts. Membership is designated by representative organizations: 8
members from payers (labor unions, employer associations, civic groups, patient
groups, etc.), 8 from providers (physician association, hospital association, dentist
association, pharmacist association, nurse association, traditional physician association,
etc.), 4 members representing the public interest (MOHW, Ministry of Strategy and
Finance, NHIS and HIRA), and 4 experts appointed by the government. These four
experts are usually academics and are supposed to provide neutral technical opinion,
but health care providers often complain that the four experts tend to support the
government position, neglecting the providers’ perspective.

                               ACCOMPLISHMENTS AND CHALLENGES

The two reforms of 2000 were an important step that helped to improve efficiency and
equity in financing and delivering health care in Korea. The new single payer system
increased the pooling capacity and potential bargaining power of the insurer as the
purchaser, as well as equity in health insurance contributions. Now health insurance has
a uniform contribution schedule and people with the same income (capacity to pay)
contribute the same amount regardless of where they work or live. As was expected, the
separation reform seemed to help control the overuse of drugs. According to Jones
(2010), the percentage of claims containing an antibiotic prescription declined by 26
percentage points between 2000 and 2007. From a political economy perspective, the
introduction of the single insurer system and the experience of fiscal crisis put health
insurance issues (for example, fiscal status, contribution, benefits, provider payment) on
the national policy agenda.

As already noted, the two health care reforms introduced a paradigm change in the
politics and process of health policy making in Korea (Kwon and Reich, 2005). The
change of government and the president’s keen interest in health policy led to a
democratization in public policy process and more pluralist context, which opened a
window for policy reform. The government, for example, surveyed public opinion on
some of the possible policy measures for fiscal stability before adopting a policy.9 Civic
groups played an active role in the policy process by shaping the reform proposals, a
major change from the previous authoritarian policy process that was dominated by a
closed group of experts, bureaucrats, and medical professionals. The reforms also
reflected the important roles played by the different interest groups. Strong support by
the rural population and labor unions contributed to the financing reform. In the
pharmaceutical reform, civic groups quickly succeeded in setting the reform agenda; the
medical profession was unable to block the adoption of the reform but their strikes
influenced the content of the reform during its implementation. Future reform efforts in
Korea need to consider the political management of vested interest groups and effective
reform strategies.



9Examples of questions in the survey: (i) what do you think about the argument that the medical fee should
be lowered? (ii) Do you think the government should keep expanding the benefit coverage in spite of the
current fiscal instability?


                                                   18
Health care delivery in Korea, which is dominated by private providers paid by a fee-for-
service system, is vulnerable to cost increases and fiscal crisis. Fee-for-service gives
medical providers incentives to increase the volume and intensity of services (for
example, the amount of medical care provided per visit or hospital admission, or the
number of visits to providers for a given episode of care) and to choose treatments with
a greater revenue margin. The inefficiency of fee-for-service payment is exacerbated by
private providers’ strong incentive for profit.

To this day, the single insurer agency still does not fully exercise its monopsonistic
bargaining power, deterred by the threat of strike by physicians in the health care
system where more than 90 percent of hospitals are private. For example, the proposal
of changing the current fee-for-service payment system to a prospective, case-based
payment mechanism has faced tough oppositions from health care providers. This is a
major challenge for the system, as the future financial sustainability and efficiency of
Korea’s health insurance system hinges on the policy makers’ and regulators’ capacity
and willingness to effectively use their purchasing power to introduce new effective
payment systems other than the existing fee-for-service model (Kwon, 2009).

Another legacy of the initial policies that structured Korea’s health insurance scheme in
the late seventies was the requirement that all health care providers participate in the
health insurance system. Because the government was then concerned that providers
would not want to join the health insurance program due to the tight fee schedule, it
mandated that all medical providers had to treat insured patients. However, Korea may
now need to re-consider the contractual relation between the insurer and medical
providers. Korea no longer needs to require all providers to join the NHI, as it has a
sufficient supply of providers who depend on the health insurance program. In fact, this
current mandate limits the ability of the single insurer to exercise its purchasing power,
since it cannot selectively contract with providers based on their performance. To the
contrary, the change into a contracting model may have the risk of two-tiered system if
better providers opt out of the national health insurance system.




                                           19
              PART IV – GOVERNANCE AND HEALTH INFORMATION
                          SYSTEMS (2000–PRESENT)
                                                 CONTEXT

The merger of the health insurance societies introduced a new single insurer agency
(NHIC10: National Health Insurance Corporation) and created a new insurance review
agency (HIRA: Health Insurance Review and Assessment Service). Even before the
merger, claims were reviewed by a central agency, which was under the association of
health insurance funds for employees. Centralized claim review and an integrated
information system have been an important element of the Korean health insurance
system, and contributed to the rapid merger of the health insurance societies.

The association of employee insurance funds, which was responsible for the centralized
claim review for the entire health insurance system (including the self-employed), was
against the merger, and maintained that the insurance system should have a separate
agency for claim review and medical assessment, independent of the new single insurer
agency. For a long time, health care providers complained that claim review was
frequently driven by the fiscal concerns of the insurer (because the claim review
department was in the employee insurance fund). They requested that medical claims,
instead, be reviewed on the basis of the appropriateness of the services provided.
Consequently, health care providers strongly supported the idea of a separate
independent health insurance review agency, independent of the NHIC. The
government, on the other hand, expected that a separate agency specializing in claim
review, quality management programs, and the assessment of the appropriateness of
care would be able to more rapidly increase its assessment capacity and contribute to
improve the quality of health care.

Management of the health insurance system is divided between the two agencies based
on their specific functions. NHIS handles premium collection, fund pooling, and
reimbursement to providers, and HIRA handles issues related to purchasing such as
benefits coverage, payment system design, and claim review. For example, HIRA has
technical committees for evaluating if a new service or medicine should be included in
the benefit package. Since 2011, contributions to all social security programs (pension,
unemployment insurance, work-place injury) were collected by NHIS. The integrated
information system and nationwide availability of all health insurance information is a
key factor contributing to effective communication between NHIS (for collection and
pooling) and HIRA (for purchasing).

                                       GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE

HIRA plays an important role in determining the payment structure of the NHI. 11 But the
fees-for-service payments are determined by negotiation between the NHIS and each
provider association such as the Korean Medical Association, Korean Hospital
Association, etc. If the negotiation fails, the Health Insurance Policy Committee decides
the fee. In the case of pharmaceuticals, HIRA handles the (positive) listing of new

10   Now called NHIS (National Health Insurance Service)
11   For example, HIRA determines relative values of individual medical services under the Resource Based
        Relative Value (RBRV) system



                                                     20
medicines based on economic evaluation (cost effectiveness) through aforementioned
technical committees. Then NHIS and the pharmaceutical manufacturer negotiate the
reimbursement price of medicines.

One of the positive aspects of the division of functions between the two insurance
agencies is the potential for checks and balances. HIRA, as a new and highly technical
agency, has helped to introduce a new management culture into the health insurance
system. The NHIS is, however, a very large organization, and as the monopolistic
provider of health insurance, it may not have a strong incentive to respond to enrollees’
needs quickly, which can also result in an insufficient effort to enhance managerial
efficiency.

On the other hand, the existence of two separate agencies may lead to some
duplication of functions and/or divergence between them. The NHIS often complains, for
example, that the HIRA’s committee responsible for the decisions related to the benefit
package does not pay enough attention to fiscal implications and consumer preference.

The relationship between NHIS and HIRA is heavily affected by the Ministry of Health
and Welfare. The strong power of MOHW in monitoring the behavior of the two
insurance agencies comes from its role in approving their budget. MOHW also
influences the appointment of key top-level officers of the two agencies. Furthermore,
the Bureau of Health Insurance in the MOHW plays a key role in the formulation of
health insurance policy, which is implemented by the two insurance agencies.

                                     HEALTH INFORMATION SYSTEM

HIRA has increased the accountability and transparency of the health insurance system
thanks to an IT-based centralized claim review and assessment. Claim review based on
explicit criteria makes the review process more transparent and makes clear to
providers what is not paid and why. IT-based claim submission and review expedites the
payment process, contributing to low administrative cost. NHIS also depends on IT for
the management of enrollees (for example, income, health care utilization, out-of-pocket
payments). All health care providers send their claims to HIRA for reimbursement
(usually monthly). The review process is defined by detailed guidelines (for example,
which services, how many times a given service can be used,12 etc.). After a
computerized check for errors, omissions, and miscalculations, HIRA performs an
indicator-based review (Figure 2). In case of outliers, a stricter review is performed.
When the review is over, HIRA sends the results to the NHIS, which then pays the
providers. Thanks to the use of IT, the entire process – from claim to reimbursement –
takes a maximum of 15 days. In addition to regular staff, HIRA has various committees
of medical experts from different specialties.




12   For example, how many time a given cancer medicine can be provided to a cancer patient .



                                                     21
Figure 2 Claim Review by HIRA (Health Insurance Review and Assessment)




Source: HIRA



The fact that HIRA has a good information system also contributes to its quality
improvement program. HIRA’s Drug Utilization Review (DUR) program is a good
example of an effective IT application. When physicians prescribe and pharmacists
dispense medicines, information is immediately forwarded to HIRA. Based on
nationwide utilization data of patients, HIRA checks (in real time) precautions for age
and pregnancy, duplications and adverse interactions among prescribed drugs and
between the drugs prescribed and those currently used by the patient. DUR is expected
to contribute to health improvement and cost containment.

HIRA also disseminates provider information and performance to consumers (through
the HIRA website) to help them make rational choices of providers (Kim, 2011). In the
hospital sector, quality is measured in terms of structure, process and outcome for
selected areas, such as Acute Myocardial Infarction (AMI), acute stroke, use of
prophylactic antibiotics for surgery, caesarean section, and Coronary Artery Bypass
Graft (CABG). Regarding outpatient medication, information is gathered on prescription
rates of antibiotics and injectables, number of medicines per prescription, and cost of
medicines prescribed. Information on the performance of health care providers is
disclosed in the HIRA website. Comparative performance information is provided to
health care providers to help them change their behavior by examining the variation of
their behavior and performance from those of their colleagues.

HIRA has implemented pay for performance (P4P) for selected areas for tertiary and
general hospitals (Tchoe, 2011). It began with AMI and Caesarean section.


                                          22
Performance measures include volume, process (use of timely interventions and
medications), and outcomes (mortality within 30 days) for AMI, and the difference
between actual and risk-adjusted C-section rates in the case of C-section. The
performance of 43 big general hospitals was first evaluated at the end of 2008, which
were then grouped into five categories of relative ranking. A financial incentive of 1
percent of the total health insurance reimbursement (for a given hospital) was paid to
the best ranking group (group 1) at the end of 2009. A financial disincentive of -1
percent of the insurance reimbursement was introduced in 2010 for hospitals with
performance scores lower than an (absolute) threshold, which was set to the highest
performance score among hospitals in the group 5 (lowest ranking group) in 2008.

Despite these advances, HIRA needs to expand its performance measurement (that is,
elaborate existing measures and introduce more measures) and improve its
transparency through better public disclosure and explanation of how it measures
performance, so consumers are more informed and able to make better decisions. It
also needs to be able to control potential distortions in provider behavior, such as the
selection of less severe patients, the neglect of areas where performance is not
measured, etc. Although physicians are strongly opposed, DUR should be extended to
check dose adequacy and the overall appropriateness of prescriptions, taking into
account patient characteristics. Pay for performance to hospitals needs to take account
of the performance of individual physicians and be extended to the outpatient sector.

Finally, the overall efficiency of health care provision is limited by the fee-for-service
payment, which creates perverse incentives for providers to provide more services and
services with higher profit margins. Claim review for thousands of services under fee-
for-service is very costly. The guideline book for claim review is already too thick, and
there is continuing controversy and tension between the providers and the insurer over
the adequacy of the guidelines.




                                            23
      PART V – LESSONS LEARNED AND POLICY IMPLICATIONS
                 FROM THE KOREAN EXPERIENCE
                                  POLITICAL AND ECONOMIC ELEMENTS

In Korea, the top down policy process set by an authoritarian regime contributed to the
rapid extension of population coverage by suppressing potential opposition by
employers (who had to pay half of the contribution of employees) and health care
providers (who had to accept the tight fee regulation). As government reduced the fees
for health insurance, employees regarded enrollment in health insurance as benefits
(that is, access to health care by paying only a percentage of lower priced services).
Rapid economic development increased the payment capacity of employers and
enrollees.

Political legitimization of the military government played a key role in the introduction of
health insurance in the 1970s and the democratization process and election motivated
the authoritarian government to rapidly expand population coverage in the late 1980s.
Along with the political will of the authoritarian regime, its financial commitment in
subsidizing the self-employed also helped the rapid extension of health insurance to the
informal sector. Progressive president/government and the democratization of the health
policy process with active participation of civic organizations contributed to the
subsequent reforms after the universal coverage of the population.

                                      RISK POOLING AND COVERAGE

The implementation of a single risk pool made it possible to pool risks better and to
cross subsidize the poor. The fact that insurance membership was family-based (that is,
included family members and dependents along with the family head) was one of the
factors that contributed to the rapid expansion of coverage. The institution of multiple
insurers was more practical in the Korean context, as the inclusion of different
population groups with diverse characteristics into a single risk pool from the beginning
of the NHI program would have required costly and complex managerial structures. This
pragmatic choice also contributed to the rapid extension of population coverage. The
experience of Korea indicates that starting with multiple pools, but minimizing
differences in contributions, benefits, and provider payments across pools can be an
appropriate option.13 Centralized claim review based on uniform guideline and effective
information system have also helped reduce differences across the pools and enhanced
the efficiency and equity of the Korean health insurance system.

Prioritization between population coverage and benefits coverage has been difficult in
Korea. The policy choice of prioritizing population coverage resulted in limited benefit
coverage. Had Korea started with generous benefits coverage, the rapid extension of
population coverage would have not been possible due to the high costs (for example,,
premium) of such a system.




13   That is, a decentralized health insurance system as an intermediate stage can be considered .


                                                      24
                 PRIVATE HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS AND REFORM POLITICS

Increased purchasing power and rapid increase in health care utilization due to the
presence of health insurance have been met by the rapid increase in the supply of
private health care providers. Health providers that can deliver quality health care are an
essential component of any health care system. Although the expansion of private
providers contributed to meeting the rapidly increased demand for health care since
health insurance was introduced, the predominance of private providers and the passive
privatization (that is, the number of public providers remained the same, but that of
private providers increased, resulting in the decline in the relative proportion of public
providers) have had some side effects (Yang, 1998). Almost all graduates of medical
schools become specialists, and the role of tertiary care hospitals has been increased.
For example, tertiary care hospitals accounted for 16.5 percent of total health insurance
expenditure in 2001, which increased to 22.9 percent in 2010, while the share of
physician clinics in health insurance expenditure declined from 46.3 percent to 29.6
percent during that period (NHIC, 2012).

The dominance of private providers has had an impact on health politics and health
expenditure such as the use of new medicines and high-technology equipment in Korea.
Private health providers have been very strong opponents to health care reform in
Korea. Civic groups or citizen participation can counteract these pressures and push the
government to move toward universal health coverage. Citizens can also participate in
the definition of benefits so these better reflect their needs and preferences and take
into account their capacity to pay contributions or taxes (Kwon, et al, 2012).




                                            25
                            PART VI – FUTURE CHALLENGES
                                 IMPROVE FINANCIAL PROTECTION

Out-of-pocket (OOP) payment still accounts for a significant portion of total health care
expenditure in Korea (Figure 1), potentially leading to insufficient financial protection.
The relative cost sharing for insured services and direct payment for un-insured services
(not in the benefits package) was at 62.7 percent and 37.3 percent of the total out-of-
pocket expenditure in 2006, and has changed to 54.5 percent and 45.5 percent in 2011
(Seo, et. al, 2011). However, high OOP payment and limited financial protection is not
only related to the size and depth of the benefit package, but is also heavily affected by
provider behavior. Korea has experienced a very rapid increase in the provision of
services not included in the benefits package because these are not subject to fee
scheduling, generating high profits. As government has incrementally expanded the
benefits package, providers have quickly induced the demand for new services and
technology.

      EXPAND THE BASE OF INSURANCE CONTRIBUTION FOR FINANCIAL SUSTAINABILITY

Health expenditure in Korea has been increasing rapidly. Although health expenditure
as a percentage of GDP is still lower than the OECD average, its rate of increase is one
of the highest among OECD countries (Figure 3). Payment system reform for providers
is an imminent task for sustainability. In addition, the current contribution setting is
inefficient as it potentially discourages labor participation in the formal sector, since
health insurance contributions for employees are only based on wage income, while
people have increasingly diversified sources of income. The system is, therefore,
inequitable as it treats wage income less favorably than other types of income. Korea
needs to expand the income base for health insurance contributions, which should be
charged on all types of income, leading to surcharges (earmarked for health insurance)
on rental income, financial income, etc.

Figure 3 Health Expenditure in Korea




Source: OECD Health Statistics, 2012.


                                             26
                             COPE WITH POPULATION AGING

Korea’s population is aging rapidly. The impact of aging on per capita health
expenditure is controversial (Zweifel, 1999) as the proximity of death is an important
determinant of health spending (Sin, et al., 2012). Indeed, population aging has been
regarded as one of the factors contributing to increased health expenditure. Per capita
health expenditure of the elderly (over 65 years old) is more than three times greater
than that of the non-elderly as of 2012 (NHIC, 2012). Korea introduced public long-term
care insurance, which is also managed by NHIS, in 2008, and one of the arguments
used for its implementation was to reduce social admissions in acute-care hospitals
(Kwon, 2008). However, overall, the health care system is not ready to cope with the
rapidly aging population, and the coordination of health care and long-term care is a
critical issue.




                                          27
                                   REFERENCES
Jones, R. S. 2010. Health-Care Reform in Korea. Economics Department Working
Paper, No. 797, OECD.

Kim, S. 2011. “Health Care Quality in Korea.” PowerPoint presented at the HIRA-OECD
conference, May 11, Seoul.
Kwon, H. 1999. The Welfare State in Korea: The Politics of Legitimization. New York: St
Martins Press.


Kwon, S. 2003a. “Health Care Financing Reform and the New Single Payer System in
Korea: Social Solidarity or Efficiency?” International Social Security Review, Vol. 56, No.
1: pp. 75-94.

———. 2003b. “Pharmaceutical Reform and Physician Strikes: Separation of Drug
Prescribing and Dispensing in Korea.” Social Science and Medicine, Vol. 57, No. 3: pp.
529-38.

———. 2003c. “Payment System Reform for Health Care Providers in Korea.” Health
Policy and Planning, Vol. 18, No. 1: pp. 84-93.

———. 2007. “Fiscal Crisis of the National Health Insurance in Korea: In Search of a
New Paradigm.” Social Policy and Administration, Vol. 41, No. 2: pp. 162-78.

———. 2008. “Future of Long-term Care Financing for the Elderly in Korea.” Journal of
Aging and Social Policy, Vol. 20, No. 1: pp. 119-36.

———. 2009. “Thirty Years of National Health Insurance in Korea: Lessons for
Universal Health Care Coverage.” Health Policy and Planning, Vol. 24, No. 1: pp. 63–71.

Kwon, S., and M. Reich. 2005. “The Changing Process and Politics of Health Policy in
Korea.” Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law, Vol. 30, No. 6: pp. 1003-26.

Kwon, S., M. You, J. Oh, S. Kim, and B. Jeon. 2012. "Public Participation in Healthcare
Decision Making: Experience of Citizen Council for Health Insurance." Korean Journal of
Health Policy and Administration, Vol. 22, No. 4: pp. 673-702 (in Korean).


NHIS (National Health Insurance Service). Various years. Health Insurance Statistics,
Seoul.

OECD. Various Years. OECD Health Statistics, Paris.


Seo, NK et al. 2013. Analysis of Out-Of-Pocket Payment in Health Insurance. NHIS (in
Korean).



                                            28
Sin H.C., M.Y. Choi and B.H. Tchoe. 2012. “Health Expenditure at the End of Life,”
Korean Journal of Health Policy and Administration, Vol. 22, No. 1: pp. 29-48 (in
Korean).

Tchoe, B. 2011. “Pay for Performance for Sustainable Health Care in Korea.”
PowerPoint presented at the HIRA-OECD conference, May 11, Seoul.


Yang, B. 1998. “The Role of Health Insurance in the Growth of the Private Health Sector
in Korea.” International Journal of Health Planning and Management, Vol. 11, No. 3: pp.
231-252.


Zweifel P, et al. 1999. “Ageing of Population and Health Care Expenditure: A Red
Herring?” Health Economics, Vol. 8, No. 6: pp. 485-496.




                                          29
This paper broadly examines the development process of Korea’s health care system toward the
achievement of Universal Health Coverage. Korea implemented a series of health care reforms after a
rapid expansion of population coverage to improve efficiency and equity in financing and delivery of
health care. The authors also investigate changes in the governance structure of Korea’s national health
Insurance, which is now represented by two agencies: National Health Insurance Service (NHIS) and
Health Insurance Review and Assessment Service (HIRA). Health insurance agencies have improved the
accountability and transparency of the health insurance system, thanks to the ICT-based centralized
claim review and assessment. Lessons and challenges from Korea ’s experiences and achievements on
the road to UHC could provide valuable policy implications to low- and middle-income countries.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated
organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and
the use of material presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies
of papers in this series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries
about the series and submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@
worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                              1818 H Street, NW
                                                                              Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                              Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                              Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                              Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                              E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
