LINKING RESULTS TO PERFORMANCE:
 EVIDENCE FROM A RESULTS BASED
 FINANCING PRE-PILOT PROJECT IN
     KATETE DISTRICT, ZAMBIA
                             98265
DISCUSSION PAPER            APRIL 2015




Collins Chansa
Ashis Das
Jumana Qamruddin
Jed Friedman
Akafwilangachi Mkandawire
Monique Vledder
              Linking Results to Performance:

Evidence from a Results Based Financing Pre-Pilot Project in
                  Katete District, Zambia




                       Collins Chansa
                          Ashis Das
                    Jumana Qamruddin
                        Jed Friedman
                 Akafwilangachi Mkandawire
                      Monique Vledder




                         April 2015
            Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
The World Bank’s Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP) Global Practice produces the papers in this
series to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage discussion and
debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
authors and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, its affiliated organizations, its
Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citations and the use of material presented
in this series should take into account this provisional character.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor, Martin Lutalo, at
mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2015 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.
          Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

                          Linking Results to Performance:
              Evidence from a Results Based Financing Pre-Pilot Project
                              in Katete District, Zambia

Collins Chansaa, Ashis Dasa, Jumana Qamruddina, Jed Friedmanb, Akafwilangachi Mkandawirec, Monique
                                                  Vleddera
a Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA
b Development Research Group, The World Bank, Washington, DC, USA
c Ministry of Health, Lusaka, Zambia



Abstract: Global interest in results based financing (RBF) as a means of strengthening health systems
and improving service delivery coincides with heavy Zambian investment in its health sector—but with
poor maternal and child health (MCH) outcomes. Determined to remedy the situation, Zambia pre-piloted
an RBF project in Katete district aimed at testing how RBF can be adapted to the country context and its
suitability in strengthening the health system and improving service delivery.

This case study reviews the design and implementation of the Katete RBF Pre-Pilot and explores its
impact on access and utilization of MCH services and health systems strengthening. The research team
used a mixed-methods approach, collecting qualitative and quantitative data through semi-structured
interviews, group discussions, document reviews and financial and health service delivery databases.
Changes in performance indicators were estimated using an interrupted time series analysis
complemented by a simulated modeling analysis.

In Katete, RBF increased immunization coverage of children less than one year old by 4 percent and
curative consultations by 14 percent between 2008 and 2012. These achievements were facilitated by
some health system improvements such as increased managerial autonomy and local decision-making at
service delivery levels, enhanced staff performance and teamwork, and community participation. Despite
these gains, the project experienced some delays in RBF disbursements to health facilities and increased
staff workload due to increased utilization of health services. The study revealed clients’ perceptions of
high service quality despite low technical quality scores.

RBF can be used to improve health system performance and service delivery quality. However, the
implementation and effects of RBF are context-specific and the model has to meet certain key design
criteria and requires basic inputs for RBF to work effectively.

Keywords: Results based financing, maternal and child health, health systems performance, Zambia

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in the paper are entirely those of the
authors and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they
represent.

Correspondence Details: Jumana Qamruddin, Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, The
World Bank, Washington, DC, USA.

Email: jqamruddin@worldbank.org
                                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS

ACRONYMS ........................................................................................................................................... II

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ........................................................................................................................ III

PART I – INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... 1

PART II– METHODS............................................................................................................................... 3
   STUDY DESIGN...................................................................................................................................... 3
   STUDY SITE .......................................................................................................................................... 3
   DATA COLLECTION ................................................................................................................................ 3
   DATA ANALYSIS..................................................................................................................................... 4
PART III – RESULTS .............................................................................................................................. 5
   THE KATETE RBF PRE-PILOT DESIGN.................................................................................................... 5
   CHANGES IN SERVICE UTILIZATION......................................................................................................... 7
     Quantitative Evidence ..................................................................................................................... 7
     Qualitative Evidence ...................................................................................................................... 10
   CHANGES IN THE HEALTH SYSTEM....................................................................................................... 10
     Managerial Autonomy.................................................................................................................... 10
     Data Quality ................................................................................................................................... 12
     Quality of Health Care ................................................................................................................... 12
     Increased Demand for Health Services......................................................................................... 13
     Community participation ................................................................................................................ 13
   CHANGES IN FINANCING....................................................................................................................... 14
     Aggregate level of funding and composition of funding ................................................................. 14
     Flow of funds to the rural health centers ....................................................................................... 15
PART IV – DISCUSSION ...................................................................................................................... 16

PART V – POLICY LESSONS.............................................................................................................. 19

REFERENCES ...................................................................................................................................... 20
                                        ACRONYMS
CHV       Community Health Volunteer

DMO       District Medical Office

D-RBFSC   District RBF Steering Committee

EHT       Environmental Health Technician

FGD       Focus Group Discussion

HCC       Health Center Committee

HMIS      Health Management Information System

ITS       Interrupted Time Series

MCH       Maternal and Child Health

MDG       Millennium Development Goals

MMR       Maternal Mortality Ratio

MOH       Ministry of Health

NHC       Neighborhood Health Committee

PMTCT     Prevention of Mother-to-Child Transmission of HIV

P-RBFSC   Provincial RBF Steering Committee

RHC       Rural Health Center

RBF       Results Based Financing

TBA       Traditional Birth Attendant

U5MR      Under-Five Mortality Rate




                                              ii
                                    ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are grateful to Chishimba Nakamba Mulambia and Easter Musanide Mwale for collecting and
transcribing data from the Katete district focus group discussions. The authors are also indebted to
Caesar Cheelo, Jos Dusseljee and Dr. Caroline Phiri for providing the earlier data on the external
verifications and for the technical review of the Katete Pre-Pilot project. The authors commend Mambwe
Kabaso, Brivine Sikapande, Teniford Shawa and Dr. Pricilla M. Zulu for facilitating the data collection
process in Katete. Finally, the authors are grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP
Discussion Paper.




                                                    iii
                                  PART I – INTRODUCTION

Zambia has made recent strides towards the attainment of health-related Millennium Development Goals
(MDGs). This progress is evidenced by the reduction of under-five mortality rates (U5MR) from 119 to 75
per 1,000 live births between 2007 and 2013 (CSO et al. 2014). During the same period, Zambia’s
maternal mortality ratio (MMR) reduced from 591 to 398 per 100,000 live births (CSO et al. 2014). Despite
these achievements, Zambia is unlikely to meet any of its health-related MDGs in 2015. For example, the
percentage of children age 12-23 months who are fully vaccinated remained unchanged at 68 percent
between 2007 and 2013/14 (CSO et al. 2014), and it is unlikely that Zambia will make gains large enough
to close this gap in one year.

Although at US$44 the total per capita health expenditure in Zambia is marginally higher than the average
for Lower Middle Income Countries (US$43), service delivery is worse-off (Chansa et al. 2014). Zambia’s
health sector struggles with ongoing inefficiencies in resource allocation and utilization, a high and
increasing burden of communicable and non-communicable disease and poor quality of care (MOH,
2011). Other challenges include inadequate and poorly motivated human resources for health; erratic
supply of essential medicines and medical supplies; limited autonomy in decision-making at decentralized
levels of the health system; and a weak monitoring and evaluation system (MOH, 2011). The Zambian
health system faces a human resources crisis due to a shortage of skilled workers, imbalanced skills mix,
inequitable distribution, chronic absenteeism, tardiness and low morale (WB, 2009).

In 2008, in an attempt to strengthen the health system and improve health service delivery, Zambia
launched a results based financing (RBF) Pre-Pilot in Katete district financed by the World Bank through
the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund. The Katete Pre-Pilot was designed to conceptualize and refine
the RBF model in Zambia before countrywide roll out.

The motivation to implement RBF in Zambia was driven by its success in several other African countries
as a health financing innovation with the potential to strengthen health systems and improve health
outcomes (Murray et al., 2007). With RBF, a principal entity provides a financial or in-kind reward
conditional on the recipient undertaking a set of pre-determined actions or achieving a pre-determined
performance goal. It encompasses output-based aid, provider or healthcare based incentives for
performance and consumer incentives for behavioral changes (Eichler, 2006). By introducing incentives
that reward results, RBF promotes greater accountability of service providers and improves management,
efficiency and equity of service delivery and health information systems. An increasing body of evidence
shows that RBF can strengthen health systems, help countries use limited resources effectively, improve
staff motivation and morale and empower providers and beneficiaries (Rusa et al., 2009; Basinga et al.,
2011; Soeters et al., 2011; Gertler and Vermeersch, 2012).

Conversely, RBF approaches have the potential to create perverse incentives and unintended
consequences (Eldridge and Palmer, 2009; Ireland et al., 2011; Miller and Babiarz, 2013). Miller and
Babiarz (2013) argue that the use of incentives to improve performance has the potential to incline efforts
towards contracted services at the expense of non-contracted services. They further argue that RBF may
lead to heterogeneity in rewarding efforts across contracted services when health providers spend much
of their time on the provision of services which yield the largest (net) marginal return (Miller and Babiarz,
2013). Another concern is that RBF approaches (which in most cases place emphasis on extrinsic
incentives) may erode intrinsic motivation in the long run.

Other authors (Ireland et al., 2011) view RBF as a financing mechanism rather than a strategic tool for
reforming health systems in developing countries. Eldridge and Palmer (2009) further question the
rationale of implementing RBF schemes in less developed countries where health systems are weak,
contending that implementing RBF requires: (i) strong political and management support; (ii) room for
change and innovation to maximize efficiencies; and (iii) strong health information and reporting systems
(Eldridge and Palmer, 2009). Banerjee et al. (2008) add that sufficient capacity to enforce contracts,
collect data and verify performance is necessary for pay-for-performance schemes to succeed.



                                                     1
Due to the unintended consequences of RBF approaches, some authors have requested more research
on RBF in the health sector (Eldridge and Palmer, 2009; Miller and Babiarz, 2013). The consensus is that
the growing body of research on performance incentives has not provided enough evidence on the design
and underlying conceptual issues on performance incentives (Miller and Babiarz, 2013). The objective of
this study, therefore, is to review the design and implementation of the RBF project in Katete, its impact on
access and utilization of maternal and child health services, and usefulness of pre-piloting RBF projects.




                                                     2
                                       PART II– METHODS

                                             STUDY DESIGN
The research team used a case study design using a mixed-methods approach to evaluate the effects of
the RBF Pre-Pilot project in Katete district. The choice of this design and data collection method was
mainly due to lack of a counterfactual measure. This approach was particularly necessary given that the
study tried to make sense of a complex and poorly controlled context and can be regarded as a “real-
world research” (Rodson, 2002). Furthermore, given that one of the objectives of the study was to review
the design and implementation of RBF in Katete, a case study design was appropriate because it enables
researchers to understand the dynamics, processes and relations present within a specific setting
(Eisenhardt, 1989; Yin, 2003).

                                              STUDY SITE
The study was undertaken in Katete district in Zambia’s eastern province. Katete covers approximately
3,989 square kilometers of land (Figure 1). Katete’s population was about 238,807 at the time of the Pre-
Pilot and growing at an annual rate of 2.8 percent (CSO, 2003). The study included twenty-five health
facilities which were operational during the Pre-Pilot. These included six health posts, 18 rural health
centers (RHC) and one urban health center. All 25 participating health facilities were coordinated and
managed by Katete District Medical Office (DMO). The district also has one general hospital, St. Francis
Mission Hospital, which was contracted by the DMO to conduct quality assessments at the health centers.

                                            DATA COLLECTION
The study relied on a combination of qualitative and quantitative data-collection methods. To enable
sufficient analysis, data covering the time period January 2006 to March 2012 was collected for the study.
Data sources were semi-structured interviews, group discussions, document reviews and financial and
health service delivery databases. In particular, health service delivery information was collected from the
district Health Management Information System (HMIS) in line with the nine HMIS indicators used to
incentivize performance during the Pre-Pilot project. Zambia’s HMIS has been in place since 1996 and is
one of the better performing systems in Africa with 85 percent completion and data accuracy rates.

Data on four of the nine RBF incentivized indicators was used for this study because Zambia’s 2009 HMIS
restructuring led to changes in the definition of the other five indicators. As a result, there were only four
comparable indicators before and after the Katete RBF Pre-Pilot project: institutional deliveries, fully
immunized children under one year, outpatient consultations and antenatal care visits. The indicators were
transformed to rates with relevant population level denominators to prevent overestimation of the effect of
the intervention that might be influenced merely by a natural growth in population. The denominators were
total estimated district pregnancies for institutional deliveries and antenatal care visits; total estimated
district children under one year for fully immunized children under one year; and total district population for
outpatient consultations. Aligning with the project payment cycle, data was transformed to quarterly rates.

One of the potential shortcomings in linking payments to performance is the inherent risk of over-reporting
by service providers. To mitigate this problem, internal and external verification mechanisms were put in
place during the implementation of the RBF project in Katete. The Katete DMO conducted the first order
substantiation of self-reported HMIS data by the health centers on a monthly basis. The University of
Zambia—an institution not linked to the RBF implementation process—conducted two rounds of external
data quality audits. As such, for the RBF implementation period, data for this study was collected from the
externally verified audit reports and further triangulated with supervisory visits and performance
assessment reports. On the financial side, data was collected from district and facility level action plans
and financial reports. Additional information on the design and implementation of the Katete Pre-Pilot
project was collected from the project manual, project-specific reports and minutes of the RBF steering
committees at district and provincial levels.

The research team obtained qualitative information through interviews with district health managers (n=7),
as well as through group discussions with health facility staff (n=8) and community representatives (n=15)


                                                      3
between January and February of 2012. Community representatives included members of health center
and neighborhood committees and volunteers. The interviews focused on provider and community
representative perspectives on the effects of the RBF project in Katete. Interviews took an average of 45
minutes and group discussions 60 minutes. Interviews with the health managers and health facility staff
were conducted in English, whereas those with the community representatives were conducted in
Chinyanja, the local language. All the interviews were audio-recorded upon participants’ written informed
consent. The qualitative interviews and discussions were conducted using semi-structured guides.

                                             DATA ANALYSIS
The research team analyzed the quantitative service utilization data from the HMIS using interrupted time
series (ITS) analysis. ITS analyzes data collected from several equally spaced time points before and after
the intervention to observe the difference that the intervention might have induced other than the secular
trend (Wagner et al., 2002). The time period under analysis was first quarter of 2006 (January to March,
2006) through first quarter of 2012 (January to March, 2012); in total there were 11 pre-intervention and 14
post-intervention time points for each indicator. The team undertook a simulated modeling analysis (SMA)
recommended for short data streams (<30 data points per phase). The SMA software 1 provides more
statistical power and is less prone to type I error than conventional statistics (Borckardt et al., 2008) and
takes into account autocorrelation that is normally observed in time series data (Borckardt et al., 2008).
Changes in levels and trends of the indicators were estimated. A level change signifies a rapid change in
the volume of services through the difference in the indicator at the first intervention time point between
the secular and intervention trends (Ramsay et al., 2003). A trend change signifies change over a longer
period and is measured by the difference between pre- and post-intervention slopes (Serumaga et al.,
2011).

The recordings from qualitative interviews were transcribed and translated and the transcripts were coded
in NVivo software. A thematic analysis of the transcripts was performed using inductive and deductive
methods. Data generated from all sources were triangulated as appropriate. The research team obtained
approval from the University of Zambia’s ethics committee to conduct this study.




1
    SMA software was developed by Clinical Research Solutions


                                                                4
                                      PART III – RESULTS

                                 THE KATETE RBF PRE-PILOT DESIGN
Katete district’s (Figure 1) RBF Pre-Pilot ran from 2008 to 2011. The main aim of the Pre-Pilot project was
to inform the content, process and overall design of the broader RBF pilot project, which was implemented
between April 2012 and October 2014. The model adopted in the Pre-Pilot was a “fee-for-service”
“performance based financing” initiative by “contracting-in” the public health system while adhering to the
general principle of “separation of functions.” This entailed a quasi-split of responsibilities and tasks
between the service providers, regulators, verifiers, purchasing agency and fund holder within the public
health system as shown in Figure 2. Separation of functions and clear lines of responsibilities between
different actors in the health system is one of the key characteristics of contracting in performance based
arrangements (Mills and Broomberg, 1998).

                         Figure 1: Map of Katete and its Health Facilities




       Source: Zambia National Health Facility Atlas

Health Centers were the service providers and the District Medical Office and St. Francis Mission Hospital
served as internal quantity and quality regulators, respectively; the District RBF Steering Committee (D-
RBFSC) was regulator and verifier; the Provincial RBF Steering Committees (P-RBFSC) was purchaser;
and the Ministry of Health (MOH) headquarters served as fund holder. The steering committees also
included stakeholders from civil society and other allied non-health sectors. External verification was
contracted out to the University of Zambia to: independently verify the accuracy of reported data; confirm
that reported health services were actually provided; and measure the perceived quality of such services.




                                                    5
                        Figure 2: The Katete District RBF Pre-Pilot Project Model




      Source: Zambia HRBF Project Implementation Manual

Nine health facility maternal and child health (MCH) indicators found in the HMIS were incentivized based
on performance using a fee-for-service provider payment mechanism (listed in Table 1). The price of each
indicator was based on baseline coverage and MOH targets and priorities. Consideration was made for
the significance of the indicator in contributing to the attainment of programmatic and national MCH goals
as well as the level of complexity in providing the service. For example, curative consultations were priced
at US$0.2 per visit while institutional deliveries were priced at US$6.4 per delivery.

                              Table 1: Incentivized Indicators and Unit Prices
                                    Indicator                                  Unit Price
                                                                                (US$)
1   Curative consultation                                                         0.2
2   Institutional deliveries by skilled birth attendant                             6.4
3   Antenatal care (prenatal and follow up visits)                                  1.6
4   Postnatal visit                                                                 3.3
5   Full immunization of children under one year                                    2.3
6   Pregnant women receiving 3 doses of malaria IPT                                 1.6
7   Family planning users of modern methods at the end of the month                 0.6
8   Pregnant women counseled and tested for HIV                                     1.8
9  Number of HIV pregnant women given anti-retroviral therapy                       2.0
   prophylaxis
Source: Zambia HRBF Project Implementation Manual




                                                          6
To ensure that RBF interventions addressed both service coverage and quality, all health facilities were
audited on a quarterly basis using a quality assessment checklist. The checklist incorporated international
and national operating practices and guidelines in ten different areas deemed critical for quality
improvement. At the end of the assessment, a composite quality score for each health center was
computed. The weights and means of verification are presented in Table 2. The composite quality score
for each health center was then multiplied by the total income from the “quantity” performance
assessment to derive the final performance payment. This is shown in the formula below.



where P = Performance Payment; Q = Quality Score; ai = Unit Price for indicator i; bi = Quantity achieved
for indicator i.

                   Table 2: Areas for Quality Assessment and Associated Weights

                        Service                      Quality Index Weight       Means of Verification
  1   Curative Care                                           0.11             Direct observation
  2   Antenatal Care                                          0.16             Direct observation
                                                                               Direct observation and
  3   Family Planning                                         0.18             records review
                                                                               Direct observation and
  4   Expanded Program on Immunization                        0.09             records review
                                                                               Direct observation and
  5   Delivery Room                                           0.20             records review
  6   HIV Services                                            0.05             Direct observation
  7   Supply Management                                       0.07             Direct observation
                                                                               Direct observation and
  8   General Management                                      0.06             records review
  9 Health Management Information System                      0.06             Records review
 10 Community Participation                                   0.03             Records review
      Total                                                   1.00
Source: Zambia HRBF Project Implementation Manual


                                        CHANGES IN SERVICE UTILIZATION
Quantitative Evidence
As shown in Table 3, the rate of fully immunized children rose by 4 percentage points (17.21 percent pre-
RBF vs. 21.23 percent post-RBF; see also Figure 3) whereas the rate of outpatient consultations
increased by 14 percentage points (40.56 percent pre-RBF vs. 54.58 percent post-RBF; Figure 3) and the
rate of institutional delivery went up by 3.5 percentage points (11.85 percent pre-RBF vs. 15.39 percent
post-RBF; Figure 3). However, as determined by the SMA analysis, only two indicators (i.e. rate of fully
immunized children [coefficient 0.643; p value 0.026] and outpatient consultations [coefficient 0.605; p
value 0.036]) were statistically significant. The rate of antenatal care decreased by about 3.5 percentage
points (76.17 percent pre-RBF vs. 72.84 percent post-RBF; Figure 3), but this reduction was not
statistically significant.




                                                    7
            Table 3: Effect of RBF on the Level and Trend of Key MCH Service Utilization Indicators


                     Pre-intervention    Post-intervention
    Variable          mean (95% CI)       mean (95% CI)           Level change             Trend change
                     2006Q1-2008Q3        2008Q4-2012Q1        Coefficient     p      Coefficient        p
Fully immunized            17.21                21.23
children rate         (15.67-18.69)          (20.1-22.4)          0.643      0.026       -0.053        0.888
Outpatient                 40.56                54.58
consultations rate     (38.5-43.12)        (48.43-60.67)          0.605      0.036       -0.432        0.178
                           76.17                72.84
ANC rate              (72.85-79.26)        (69.01-76.74)         -0.241      0.424       0.025         0.947
Institutional              11.85                15.39
delivery rate           (9.6-13.98)         (14.33-16.5)          0.514      0.155        0.25         0.517
  Source: Authors

  There was no significant change in trends for any indicator, suggesting that the introduction of incentives
  had an immediate effect in terms of change in the levels (i.e. sudden increase in utilization) for those
  indicators that responded without a sustained increase afterwards through the end of the Pre-Pilot. For
  robustness, we moved the period of analysis forward by a quarter prior to the implementation to
  investigate any “anticipation effect” since publicity about the Pre-Pilot prior to actual RBF implementation
  may have spurred behavioral changes before the Pre-Pilot even began. If we do this, then we observe a
  significant increase in institutional delivery by 10 percent.




                                                       8
                  Figure 3: Trends in Incentivized Indicators




Source: Authors




                                      9
Qualitative Evidence
Service providers attribute some of the increased healthcare utilization in the district to the RBF program.
The increase in patient load is partly perceived to arise from health centers receiving patients beyond their
catchment areas; additional patients came from neighboring communities, districts and countries,
including Mozambique.

        The introduction of RBF has improved the services at the hospital and people in the village are
        more willing to go to the clinic knowing that they will be treated well. [Health Center Committee
        (HCC) member]

        When RBF was just starting most of the women used to deliver at home. But now you will find that
        as a midwife I am more occupied because people are delivering at the centers. [Midwife, RHC]

Some outreach services such as under-five clinics were either introduced or organized more frequently to
promote higher utilization rates. Health center staff and community members alike reported an increase in
the utilization of institutional deliveries, counseling and treatment for HIV and AIDS and family planning
services. However, there were also concerns about geographical access to the health centers, which the
RBF model did not directly address.

        I have also seen that previously at our center we had five outreach under-five clinics but with the
        coming of RBF we now have six. [HCC member]

        It is a big task to help a woman who is HIV positive to look after their child. You know in rural
        communities there are so many myths and beliefs and the work is tough so the more they come to
        the clinic the more the women get informed and RBF has helped to bring more numbers of women
        though with some there is still the problem of distance. [HCC member]

                                   CHANGES IN THE HEALTH SYSTEM

Managerial Autonomy
The MOH disbursed RBF performance incentive payments directly into the health centers’ bank accounts.
This mechanism is in contrast to the Government of the Republic of Zambia (GRZ) operational grant that
the MOH disburses to the DMO, which then releases this money to district health facilities. In addition,
health facilities involved in the RBF Pre-Pilot were given the discretion to utilize the performance-based
payments according to their specific needs. The only condition was to spend a maximum of 75 percent of
the RBF performance payments on staff bonuses/incentives and a minimum of 25 percent for activities at
the health facilities and the communities. In contrast, health facilities had very limited discretion on the use
of the GRZ operational grant.

        We were able to make budgets without necessarily consulting the district; the budgets were based
        on health center needs and priorities. The district would just come in to confirm if the budget was
        aligned to the priorities at the health center. I like that kind of autonomy because as a health
        center we know our needs and priorities. [Health Worker, RHC]

In practice, health facilities used part of the RBF performance payments to purchase a number of goods
and services, which assisted them to implement a variety of locally adapted activities (Table 4) in line with
the quarterly Health Center Business Plans. Some health facilities recruited local data entry clerks and
community health volunteers. One health center employed a retired midwife. Resources were also used to
purchase medical equipment and supplies such as thermometers, weighing machines, mattresses, linens
and mosquito nets. In some facilities “Mama Kits” (packages containing soap, napkins, petroleum jelly,
baby powder and a blanket) were provided to women who delivered their babies at the health facility.
Table 4 shows how the income from the RBF performance payments was utilized and the results
observed.




                                                      10
          Table 4: Utilization of the Income from the RBF Performance Incentive Payments

        Level                      Activity                                    Results
                                                             Accuracy and completeness in recording and
                         Recruitment of data clerk                            reporting
                                                             Reduced workload for the health workers and
                        Recruitment of volunteers                    more focus on clinical care
                      Recruitment of retired midwives        Enhanced quantity and quality of institutional
                                                                    deliveries by skilled workers
                      Hire of local transport for referral        Prompt referral to next level of care
        Health
                            Purchase of linens and                Improved in-patient care, and client
        facility
                                   mattresses                                 satisfaction
                         Purchase of equipment, for           Increased quality of care and health worker
                            example, thermometer                              motivation
                       Provision of Mama Kits (soap,
                        napkin, pins, petroleum jelly,
                          talcum powder, blanket) to
                         women who delivered in the          Increased client demand for health services
                                  health facility             and facility-based utilization and deliveries
                        Incentives to Traditional Birth
                            Attendants (TBAs) and            Increased client demand for health services
     Community         volunteers to send women and              and facility-based utilization of health
                           children to health centers                           services
                     Incentives to pregnant women for
                          early registration and ANC                 Early pregnancy registration
   Source: Authors


Both the ability to earn money according to the level of effort and flexibility in the use of income contributed
increased staff morale and performance. Specifically, health workers and communities were appreciative
of the ability to use the money to improve working conditions at the health facilities and service delivery in
the communities, and for personal benefit. Perceptions from community representatives and health
workers were that RBF contributed to improving the attitudes of health workers towards work and
consequently performance. It also fostered teamwork among various stakeholders at the facility level.
Considering that RBF performance incentive bonuses were shared among all the health workers at the
health centers according to individual performances, it could have helped to enhance teamwork.

        We are happy that we have RBF in our district. It has increased our eagerness to work and even
        the performance itself. I can also say that job satisfaction was there because targets could be
        reached and in some instances we even exceeded our expectations for that indicator. [Health
        worker, RHC]

        What we have seen from the community is that the staff are really working well. They have put in
        extra effort. [Neighborhood Health Committee (NHC)member]

        It keeps us motivated to find out the ways and means to improve our situation. At the end of the
        day you are also raising money to solve your own problems. [Health worker, RHC]

Though some health facilities were able to purchase some low cost medical equipment, it was not
possible for others because low catchment populations translated to lower RBF income. Furthermore,
small health facilities with one or two health workers could not raise adequate financial resources since
their performance was limited by what the existing two staff members could achieve. Lack of retired health
workers in the surrounding areas, for example, limited heath facilities from employing additional health
workers even though they had the money to do so.


                                                        11
Data Quality
The University of Zambia, an independent agency, was contracted to conduct two rounds of external
verification to validate the accuracy of reporting of HMIS data at the health facilities. Subsequent audits
conducted as the Pre-Pilot progressed showed improvements in record keeping and data accuracy
(Cheelo et al., 2014). Over- and under-reporting of the HMIS information was reduced to about 10
percent. The general perception was that the recruitment of data entry clerks at the health facilities had
contributed to the improvement in data recording. The employment of data entry clerks by most of the
health centers also allowed the health center staff to devote more time to patient care.

        The system of filing and recording the clients is there at the center and the records are much more
        in order than before because of the data entry clerks. [Health Worker, RHC]

A comprehensive review of project data also showed that the Pre-Pilot improved: data completeness
through the use of patient registers instead of tally sheets; data accuracy through regular internal and
external data audits; and timeliness by putting in place a schedule for data reporting through the
audit/verification system, which is linked to results. In particular, strict guidelines for collecting, processing
and transmitting data were put in place to ensure speedy verification and payments. However, while data
quality (i.e. completeness, accuracy, and timeliness) improved, disbursement of RBF performance
payments was poor. This is discussed further below.

Quality of Health Care
Employment of data entry clerks allowed the health center staff to devote more time to patient care. As a
result, the health workers could earn more from RBF through additional effort towards quality of care and
client satisfaction. Clients reported reduced waiting times and timely attention by the health care providers.

        We used to split tasks amongst health center staff and the volunteers such that we could use
        some volunteers to weigh the children whilst others would be outside taking the temperature for
        the children and the other one checking blood pressure levels before they can be screened.
        [Health Worker, RHC]

Information from interviews on clients’ perceptions on quality of care at health facilities was further
triangulated with reports from two client tracer surveys conducted by the University of Zambia during RBF
Pre-Pilot implementation. The purpose of these client surveys was to confirm receipt of health services
and to assess clients’ perceptions of various aspects of service delivery (Cheelo et al., 2014). Clients who
could be traced during the initial and subsequent client tracing survey generally rated the health workers
high on the "hospitality" and "technical" aspects of service delivery (Cheelo et al., 2014). About 89 percent
reported that they received a friendly service at the facility; 83 percent received a clear explanation of the
procedures and services; and 89 percent were informed of the results of the examinations conducted on
them. Furthermore, 89 percent of the clients reported that they received medication during the visit to the
health facility, and 97 percent of these clients indicated that the health staff explained how the medication
was to be taken.

        Quality of care has improved because mothers are bringing their children and by nine months they
        are fully immunized. [NHC member]

        I think there was great improvement because protocols were followed. Previously you wouldn’t go
        to the clinic to measure blood pressure and these other things… now all the protocols are
        followed. …. And also the cleanliness of the centers because it is part of the quality assessment…
        [HCC member]

        The health workers are now able to provide a friendly service and explanations on the illness,
        procedures and services to be provided. [HCC member]

However, contrary to the positive client perceptions on quality, results from the technical quality
assessments on health center service provision conducted by the district hospital were not as positive.


                                                       12
Results show that the mean quality score for Katete district was 44.3 percent; only 7 out of the 25 health
facilities, or 28 percent, scored more than 50 percent.

Poor technical quality scores can be attributed to the structural nature of the quality assessment tool,
which gives more weight to availability of inputs such as skilled birth attendant, drugs, medical equipment
and health facility infrastructure than process quality. Health facilities had no control over their
infrastructure or availability of drugs, essential medical equipment and supplies, which were procured
centrally at either national, provincial or district levels. Quality auditors would continuously score a health
facility poorly even if the ability to improve these structural elements was beyond their reach. For instance,
the quality assessment penalized the health facilities if they had no skilled birth attendant despite that the
recruitment of skilled health workers was the purview of the MOH headquarters. Although one RHC hired
a local retired midwife, it was not possible for other health facilities due to lower RBF earnings or
unavailability of retired health workers in the area.

After applying the quality score, income from the RBF performance payments were often reduced. Thus,
some health workers considered the quality audit as a punitive exercise.

        The district is aware that there is a staff shortage at health centers, and it is not the health centers’
        fault. When marks are deducted because there are unqualified personnel it is very unfair. [Health
        Worker, RHC]

Respondents expressed that reshuffling of skilled staff from health centers with excess capacity to needy
health centers would benefit RBF project implementation.

Increased Demand for Health Services
As previously reported, stakeholders perceived an increase in the demand for health services among the
communities—especially for institutional delivery, antenatal and postnatal care, and PMTCT services.
Health centers engaged volunteers from the communities to sensitize those within the catchment area
about available health facility services. Volunteers also encouraged pregnant women to deliver at health
facilities and to go for post-natal care. They mobilized communities for child immunization days. At the
same time, the health centers provided incentives to pregnant women for early registration at the
antenatal clinics.

        Before, women were reluctant to move to the health centers even when they knew that they were
        about to deliver. But, now they are so willing to leave behind whatever work they have to find a
        place to be near the health center and make sure that the delivery takes place there. [NHC
        member]

        As a volunteer in our community, I have seen that patients are more willing to listen to advice and
        more willing to go to the clinic than before. [Community health volunteer]

While intensified community mobilization increased client inflow to the facilities, it also increased the staff
workload at the health facilities. Nevertheless some health workers felt the incentives attached to seeing
additional patients mitigated the negative impact of the increased workload.

        Being at the rural health center I am forced to work 24 hours, but now with this RBF I don’t know
        what will happen. When people are sensitized they will be coming in numbers and I will fail to
        control. But on the part of the incentive I was quite happy. [Health Worker, RHC]

Community participation
Community participation in the planning and implementation of activities at the health facilities increased
during the Katete RBF Pre-Pilot. Through the health center and neighborhood health committees,
community representatives planned the strategies jointly with health center staff. Stakeholders revealed
that committee meetings were held frequently and provided a forum for discussion, which increased
interaction between the community and health workers. This was unlike the period before the RBF Pre-


                                                      13
Pilot, when community participation was initiated only after health workers had made a decision on a
particular issue.

        The relationship even among ourselves at the center improved and this even extended to the
        community because we are working hand in hand. So there is teamwork both at the center and
        the community. [Health Worker, RHC]

        The mechanisms of achieving the results have given us enough power that we are able to plan
        and then supervise the staff during the time of rewarding the incentives. [NHC Member]

Community leaders, including village headmen, also participated in monitoring and evaluation of activities
at the health facilities. For example, some headmen maintained registration of newborns and used these
registers to track their vaccination status. As part of the process of data verification, community
representatives discussed the trends in indicators and achievements every month and were able to
understand the data and to generate measures to improve performance. They were also involved in
signing off the RBF provisional invoices before submission to the DMO.

        They (community representatives) used to look at the health center’s performance from the
        indicators, find out the gaps and tell us here we are not doing fine and the reasons are A, B, C and
        D. [District Medical Office, Katete]

        As a community person I am even able to provide data about the center in a community meeting
        because data management is now up-to-date and during data audit I know what happens. [NHC
        member]

Some village headmen and other community leaders questioned why they did not receive some incentive
considering they were also instrumental in mobilizing the communities for higher service utilization.

A few community representatives expressed a desire to include the community level service providers,
such as volunteers and traditional birth attendants, in a contractual agreement with the health facilities with
clear guidelines for the price of each unit of service delivered at community level.

                                         CHANGES IN FINANCING

Aggregate level of funding and composition of funding
At the time of the Pre-Pilot, the main sources of funds at the district and health facilities were the GRZ and
RBF. The GRZ was providing operational grants and staff salaries. The operational grant was a fixed
amount based on the catchment population of the health facilities. During the period under review, the
highest total income for all the health facilities combined was from GRZ for staff salaries (US$1,502,126)
at 71 percent, followed by GRZ funds for operational grants (US$320,520) at 15 percent, and lastly RBF
funds (US$302,225) at 14 percent. During the period under review, the level of GRZ funding for salaries
and operational grants remained at almost static while RBF funding was increasing. The GRZ operational
grant per health facility per quarter was constant at about US$1,068 during the RBF implementation
period. Meanwhile, the RBF grant increased by 73 percent from US$535 per health facility per quarter
during the initial stages of the project to US$923 per health facility per quarter by the end of the project.
This increase in income suggests that the performance of health facilities improved over time. It also
suggests that RBF performance payments were additional to the total income at the health facilities in
Katete.

The aggregate MOH disbursements to the health facilities for RBF performance shows that the minimum
amount disbursed per capita per quarter was US$0.23 and the maximum was US$1.82. This excludes
costs for supervision, capacity building, technical assistance and other administrative costs. Generally,
health facilities with higher catchment populations made more RBF money and spent part of this money
on staff motivation bonuses. The bonuses earned by each individual staff member were also dependent
on the number of health workers at a health facility, i.e. the lower the number of staff, the higher the


                                                      14
motivation bonus. Thus, the ratio of the RBF staff motivation bonuses to the GRZ staff salary at health
facilities was dependent on the catchment population, the number of staff at the health facility and the
salary scale of the health cadres at the health facilities. On average, RBF staff motivation bonuses were
between 2 and 56 percent of the salaries with a mean of 18 percent (median of 16 percent) with each
health worker earning between US$8 and US$164 per month from RBF bonuses with a mean bonus of
US$64 per month.

Flow of funds to the rural health centers
As earlier observed, improvements in the timeliness of data collection, processing and transmission did
not translate into improved disbursement of RBF performance payments by the MOH, particularly during
the start-up of the Pre-Pilot. The flow of RBF performance payments from the MOH to the health facilities
was erratic and demotivated some health workers and volunteers. At some health facilities, some
volunteers reduced their participation in the RBF project. Reduced volunteer coupled with enhanced
demand for health services increased the workload of health workers in the affected areas.

        I think the challenge was that when we started implementing RBF, community volunteers worked
        at an increased pace. When there was a delay in payments some volunteers started shunning the
        program and there was a lot of work left for us health center staff. [Health Worker, RHC]

Erratic disbursement of funds could also be why some health facilities were not always able to address
their needs in a timely way even with the introduction of RBF.




                                                   15
                                                  PART IV – DISCUSSION
This case study reveals that the RBF Pre-Pilot project in Katete was entirely managed through the Zambia
public health system through a contracting-in arrangement. This design and implementation arrangement
contrasts with other RBF models in Africa where external agencies such as NGOs are used as
purchasers, verifiers or providers using contracting-out management arrangements (Toonen et al., 2009).
The choice of this model and design may have been driven by a long history of performance based
contracting in Zambia where structures at national, provincial, and district levels had been established as
far back as 1996 to accommodate a split of functions and responsibilities between the MOH and the
Central Board of Health (Chansa et al. 2014). The Katete Pre-Pilot project was able to contribute to
strengthening the existing health system not only through the choice of this design but also through
alignment with the existing government planning, and monitoring and evaluation structure. For example,
the RBF internal verification process was built into the existing routine performance assessment system—
although data collection and verification was conducted more frequently during the Katete RBF Pre-Pilot.

In particular, the results show how the RBF Pre-Pilot project facilitated improvements in data quality. The
design of the RBF Pre-Pilot project, which linked payments to verified results, prompted health facilities to
hire data clerks, which led to improvements in data completeness, timeliness and accuracy. Health
facilities were able to consistently use patient registers rather than tally sheets, while regular internal and
external data audits contributed to improvements in data accuracy. External data verification by an
independent firm, in particular, helped to validate the reported data and tracing of patients to confirm if the
health services were provided (Cheelo et al. 2014). Use of a rigorous schedule for data reporting and
verification also contributed to improved timeliness in data reporting and verification—demonstrated
through prompt data collection, processing, and transmission according to the prescribed times and in
readiness for timely decision making (USAID, 2004). However, improvements in timeliness of data
collection, processing and transmission did not translate into improved disbursement of RBF performance
grants from the MOH to the health facilities. This affected the implementation of the RBF Pre-Pilot project
in terms of implementing all planned activities on time and sustaining the morale of staff and volunteers.

The Katete RBF Pre-Pilot project was also associated with a higher utilization of health services, improved
client perceptions on the quality of health care and overall health system strengthening. Improved
managerial autonomy and local decision-making at service delivery levels increased staff performance
and community participation. For example, provision of flexible funding and managerial autonomy
stimulated the performance of the health system through increased motivation of health workers. Most of
the health workers reported that they were motivated by the incentives, which enhanced teamwork and
appreciation by the clients.

The role of managerial autonomy in the management of health centers is critical to the success of
incentive programs and a lack of autonomy among providers or healthcare organizations can restrict the
range of behavioral responses (Miller and Babiarz, 2013). Toonen et al. (2009) further highlight the need
for implementers to understand the implications of RBF schemes for health facility managers. They argue
that it is important to divide the management options into actions on intrinsic and extrinsic motivation 2
factors. In Katete, health facility managers were able to innovate with the money earned from RBF by
designing and implementing activities addressing the local needs of their health facilities and
communities. This allowed for bottom-up and needs based planning for rural health centers as opposed to
the traditional top-down approach. This, in turn, facilitated community participation in planning and
implementation of activities at the health facilities. Health center and neighborhood health committees
were able to hold meetings more frequently, which provided a forum for discussion and increased
interaction between the community and health workers.

The use of volunteers from the communities to sensitize people about the services available at the health
facilities was another key strategy in enhancing community participation and increasing demand at health

2
    Intrinsic motivation of a health worker can be triggered by moral duty or attachment to the goals of the employer organization, while extrinsic
     motivation can be brought about by monetary incentives.


                                                                         16
facilities during the Katete RBF Pre-Pilot. This phenomenon is similar to the conventional RBF theory of
change. The RBF approach, which focuses on performance, pushes health workers to be innovative and
think out of the box in their quest to attract more clients to utilize health services at their health facilities
(Miller and Babiarz, 2013). For example, hiring retired health workers and other casual workers such as
data entry clerks contributed to the availability of health workers and improvements in health service
delivery. The availability of data entry clerks enabled nurses and midwives to devote more time to patient
care than data entry and other administrative duties. Involvement of the community in implementation and
monitoring further enhanced accountability over financial resources, decision-making and management of
the health facilities. Canavan et al. (2008) support this observation, indicating that community participation
is vital in RBF approaches as it guarantees feedback on quality of care, which is critical to improving client
satisfaction.

We triangulated our results on clients’ perception on the quality of health care with a study by Cheelo et al.
(2014), which traced patients and confirmed that health services were indeed provided. Similarly, this
study revealed that the clients had rated health workers working in Katete during the RBF Pre-Pilot project
high in the provision of quality health care. On the contrary, results from the technical quality assessments
on service provision at health centers were poor. These poor technical quality scores could be attributed to
the structural nature of the quality assessment tool, which gave more weight to availability of inputs.
Several items on the quality checklist were beyond the capacity of the health workers at the health
facilities to improve upon and it would have been beneficial to the running of the RBF Pre-Pilot project if
the quality tool had been revised prior to the launch of the Pre-Pilot.

The government provided the highest amount of funding through staff salaries and operational grants but
this funding remained constant during the entire review period. Meanwhile, the RBF performance grant
increased by 73 percent by the end of the project. This implies that health facility performance was
improving over time. The cost of the RBF Pre-Pilot project at US$1.82 per capita per quarter was also
within the realm of other RBF projects in Africa, which are estimated at US$2 per capita per quarter
(Canavan et al. 2008). Health facilities with higher catchment populations earned more money, which
presupposes that performance was dependent on the catchment population.

Studies looking at the pay structures and composition of personal income for public health workers in four
African countries including Zambia reveal that income from per diems and private practice accounts for
about 10 percent and 0.1 percent of total personal income, respectively (McCoy, et al. 2008). The study
further shows that several health workers in Zambia generate supplementary personal income from other
sources, but this practice was more common in urban than rural health centers (32 percent and 9 percent
of staff, respectively) (McCoy, et al. 2008). Given that the Katete Pre-Pilot project was operational in rural
areas where generating extra income from other sources was limited, the income from RBF evidently
boosted both operational and personal income at the health facilities. This income was essential for
improving staff motivation and productivity, and strengthening the link between the health facilities and
communities.

Despite the lessons, successes and challenges this case study has revealed, there are several limitations
to this study. First of all, there is no counterfactual to attribute change to the RBF. This was not feasible
considering the fact that Katete was the only district selected by the MOH to pre-pilot RBF before national
roll out to other districts. Nonetheless, the research team was able to look critically at the RBF design,
potential effects and policy implications by considering the Pre-Pilot project as a “case” and using a
combination of qualitative and quantitative research methods to argue for association rather than casual
effect.

The study further suggests that RBF is context specific and requires meeting key implementation and
design conditions to achieve intended goals and objectives. For example, critical inputs such as human
resources, equipment, drugs and medical supplies have to be sufficiently available. Some health facilities
managed to use the RBF funds to make some of these inputs available but it was not possible for smaller
health facilities because they could not raise enough money through RBF due to low catchment
populations. Delays in disbursement of RBF performance grants to health facilities was another negative
aspect experienced during the Pre-Pilot project and could be a reason why some health facilities were not


                                                       17
able to improve their situation or comprehensively address their most urgent needs even with the
introduction of the RBF. Moreover, even if they had money, it was difficult for them to find unemployed
nurses and midwives in their vicinities. There were also concerns about geographical access to the health
centers, which RBF did not directly address. RBF helped to bring more patients to the health facilities but
there was still a problem of access by those in extremely remote areas. Thus, in general, health facilities
still had limited control over the availability of these inputs despite the introduction of the RBF Pre-Pilot,
and could explain why the technical quality audits produced poor results.

As expected, increased demand and utilization of health services during the RBF Pre-Pilot contributed to
an increase in staff workload. Nonetheless, individual performance incentives that were attached to
increased output were sufficient to compensate for the increased workload. Financial incentives are
designed to motivate employees to improve their performance by producing better results through
increased effort leading to increased outputs and better quality (Ude and Coker, 2012). In this regard,
financial compensation through the RBF Pre-Pilot provided extra money to the health workers for their
increased contributions. However, increased staff workload should be within the established output
standards, that is, the amount of work that an average, well-trained employee working at a normal pace
should be able to accomplish in a given period of time (Ude and Coker, 2012). Furthermore, the extent to
which the RBF Pre-Pilot project could have improved the productivity of the health workers was dependent
on the degree of underemployment before the implementation of the project.

Lastly, the use of community volunteers to sensitize people about the services available at the health
facilities also had a negative consequence in that some village headmen expected to be incentivized for
their services but were not. Future RBF projects should consider incentivizing community level service
providers with clear guidelines and more effective communication around the unit prices and services to
be delivered at community level.




                                                     18
                                PART V – POLICY LESSONS
This case study adds to the global body of evidence on the health system effects of RBF. The Katete RBF
Pre-Pilot project contributed to the strengthening of the health system as measured by the utilization of
health services, client satisfaction, community participation, staff motivation and managerial autonomy at
health facility level. The RBF Pre-Pilot project also contributed to improvements in data quality.
Nevertheless, there are several cautionary notes from this Pre-Pilot with respect to the RBF mechanism.

Although RBF is poised to enhance health worker motivation (Eichler and Levine, 2009), it requires the
availability of basic health system components such as qualified staff, equipment, supplies, etc. In the
absence of these, the health worker might be further demotivated. In low- and middle-income countries,
where a stretched health workforce is coupled with sub-optimal drug and equipment provision, the primary
intervention should provide all the basic inputs such as health workers, drugs and medical equipment so
that RBF can stimulate productivity by motivating existing health workers. As such, RBF is not an end in
itself and should be used to catalyze performance in a health system were all necessary inputs are
available but under utilized.

The design of the RBF incentive package (including quantity and quality assessment checklists) should
put adequate emphasis on the baseline status of the health system, such as staff availability, mix and
distribution, so that the design takes into account the diversity of roles that the health workers play and
consequently incentivizes them appropriately. On the other hand, the flow of funds in a RBF program
should be predictable both in time and volume because RBF is very much dependent on the link between
financing and performance. The RBF approach aims to maximize responsiveness of health workers to the
incentives while considering context and other potential constraints critical as design elements to the
successful implementation of RBF programs. If the RBF model does not meet these basic conditions
health facilities and communities can lose faith in the RBF program. Furthermore, RBF can be
implemented in such a way that it explicitly addresses both the supply and demand side. Some community
representatives expressed a desire to include the community-level service providers, such as volunteers
and traditional birth attendants, in a contractual agreement with the health facilities—with clear guidelines
for the price of each unit of service delivered at community level.

Finally, the study demonstrates that RBF is context specific and that piloting can be an important
instrument for testing and adapting a model to the local context before nationwide scale-up. What we
observe from Zambia is that RBF can be adapted and implemented through a “contracted-in” public health
sector model. Most importantly, the Katete Pre-Pilot generated evidence that was necessary to inform
policy about the feasibility of implementing RBF in Zambia. Having been tested and refined in Katete, the
RBF project was subsequently scaled up to ten additional districts countrywide. Qamruddin et al. (2013)
observe that the Katete RBF Pre-Pilot project was useful in: (i) establishing eligibility criteria for the
inclusion of health facilities; (ii) refining the quality tool for assessing structural and process quality at
health centers; (iii) revising the fees per indicator; (iv) incorporating a performance target for the
distribution of clinical health workers (this could be achieved by encouraging managers at district level to
reshuffle skilled staff from health centers with excess capacity to needy health centers); and (v) outlining
contracting mechanisms. The RBF Pre-Pilot project also acted as a medium to create sufficient local
capacities and to refine tools for evaluating the impact of the successor RBF project, which commenced in
April 2012.




                                                     19
                                           REFERENCES
Basinga, P., P. J. Gertler, A. Binagwaho, A. L. Soucat, J. STURDY and C. M. Vermeersch. 2011. “Effect
       on Maternal and Child Health Services in Rwanda of Payment to Primary Health-care Providers
       for Performance: An Impact Evaluation.” Lancet, 377, 1421-8.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo and R. Glennerster. 2008. “Putting a Band‐Aid on a Corpse: Incentives for Nurses
       in the Indian Public Health Care System.” Journal of the European Economic Association, 6(2‐3),
       487-500.

Borckardt, J. J., M. R. Nash, M. D. Murphy, M. Moore, D. Shaw and P. O'neil. 2008. “Clinical Practice as
       Natural Laboratory for Psychotherapy Research: A Guide to Case-based Time-series Analysis.”
       Am Psychol, 63, 77-95.

Canavan A., J. Toonen, and R. Elovainio. 2008. Performance Based Financing: An International Review of
      the Literature. Amsterdam: Development Policy and Practice, KIT.

Chansa C., M. Sjoblom and M. Vledder. 2014. Achieving Better Health Outcomes Through Innovative
       Strategies and Results-focused Interventions. In: Adam, C., Collier, P., and Gondwe, M., eds.
       Zambia Building Prosperity from Resource Wealth. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 399-431.

Cheelo, C., M. Vledder, J. Qamruddin, C. Chansa, J. Friedman and A. Das. 2014. External Verification of
        a Health Results Based Financing Program: the Katete Experience in Zambia. Washington, DC:
        World Bank.

CSO (Central Statistical Office. 2003. Population Projections Report. Lusaka: Central Statistics Office,
      Zambia.

CSO (Central Statistical Office), MOH (Ministry of Health), TRDC (Tropical Disease Research Center),
      University Teaching Hospital, University of Zambia, and DHS Program. 2014. Zambia
      Demographic and Health Survey 2013-14 Preliminary Report. Retrieved online from
      http://dhsprogram.com/pubs/pdf/PR53/PR53.pdf on 10th November 2014.

Eichler, R. 2006. Can "Pay for Performance” Increase Utilization by the Poor and Improve the Quality of
         Health Services? Discussion paper for the first meeting of the Working Group on Performance-
         Based Incentives. Washington, DC: Center for Global Development.

Eichler, R. and R. Levine. 2009. Performance Incentives for Global Health: Potential and Pitfalls,
         Washington, DC, Center for Global Development.

Eisenhardt, K. M. 1989. Building Theories from Case Study Research. Academy of Management Review
       14 (4): 532-550.

Eldridge, C., and N. Palmer. 2009. Performance-based Payment: Some Reflections on the Discourse,
        Evidence and Unanswered Questions. Health Policy and Planning; 24: 160–166.

Gertler, P. J., and C. M. Vermeersch. 2012. Using Performance Incentives to Improve Health Outcomes.
         Impact Evaluation Series No. 60. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Ireland, M., E. Paul and B. Dujardin. 2011. Can Performance-based Financing be Used to Reform Health
         Systems in Developing Countries. Bulletin of the World Health Organization; 89: 695–698.

McCoy, D et al. 2008. “Salaries and Incomes of Health Workers in Sub-Saharan Africa. Lancet Vol 371:
       675–81.



                                                    20
Miller, G., and S. Babiarzk. 2013. Pay-for-Performance Incentives in Low- and Middle-Income Country
         Health Programs. NBER Working Paper No. 18932.

Mills, A. and G. J. Bromberg. 1998. Experiences of Contracting Health Services: An Overview of the
         Literature. Macroeconomics, Health and Development Series – Technical Paper No. 33. Geneva:
         World Health Organization.

Murray, C. J., J. Frenk. and T. EVANS. 2007. “The Global Campaign for the Health MDGs: Challenges,
        Opportunities, and the Imperative of Shared Learning.” Lancet, 370, 1018-20.

Qamruddin, J., C. Chansa, A. DAS. 2013. Using Evidence to Scale Up Innovation: Insights from a
      Results-Based Financing (RBF) Project for Health in Zambia. IFC SmartLessons Brief Report No.
      74056. Washington, DC: International Finance Coorporation.

Ramsay, C. R., L. Matowe, R. Grilli, J. M. Grimshaw and R. E. Thomas. 2003. “Interrupted Time Series
      Designs in Health Technology Assessment: Lessons from Two Systematic Reviews of Behavior
      Change Strategies.” Int J Technol Assess Health Care, 19, 613-23.

Rodson, C. 2002. Real World Research. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.

Rusa, L., D. Ngirabega JDE, W. Janssen, S. Van Bastelaere, D. Porignon and W. Vandenbulcke. 2009.
        “Performance-based Financing for Better Quality of Services in Rwandan Health Centers: 3-Year
        Experience.” Trop Med Int Health, 14, 830-7.

Serumaga, B., D. Ross-Degnan, A. J Avery, R. A. Elliot, S. R. Majumdar, F. Zhang and S. B. Soumerai.
      2011. “Effect of Pay for Performance on the Management and Outcomes of Hypertension in the
      United Kingdom: Interrupted Time Series Study.” BMJ, 342, d108.

SMA (Simulation Modeling Analysis) Program for Short Streams of Time-series Data [computer program]
       2014. Version 9.9.28. Knoxville (TN): Clinical Research Solutions.

Soeters, R., P. B. Peerenboom, P. Mushagalusa and C. Kimanuka. 2011. “Performance-based Financing
        Experiment Improved Health Care in the Democratic Republic of Congo.” Health Aff (Millwood),
        30, 1518-27.

Toonen, J., A. Canavan, P. Vergeer and R. Elovainio. 2009. Learning Lessons on Implementing
       Performance Based Financing, from a Multi-country Evaluation. Amsterdam: KIT, in Collaboration
       with CORDAID and WHO.

Ude U., and M. A. Coker. 2012. “Incentive Schemes, Employee Motivation and Productivity In
        Organizations In Nigeria: Analytical Linkages.” IOSR Journal of Business and Management.
        Volume 1, Issue 4, pp 32-39.

UNICEF. 2010. Progress for Children: Achieving the MDGs with Equity. New York: United Nations
      Children’s Fund.

USAID. 2004. A Manual for Strengthening HMIS Data Quality. Retrieved online from
       http://uphold.jsi.com/Docs/Resources/Training/Health/manual_for_strenghtening_hmis_data_quali
       ty.pdf on 20th September 2013.

Wagner, A. K., S. B, Soumerai, F. Zhang and D. Ross-Degnan. 2002. “Segmented Regression Analysis of
      Interrupted Time Series Studies in Medication Use Research.” J Clin Pharm Ther, 27, 299-309.

World Bank. 2009. Zambia Health Sector Public Expenditure Review: Accounting for Resources to
       Improve Effective Service Coverage. Washington: The World Bank.



                                                  21
Yin, R. 2003. Case study design and methodology. Thousands Oaks, Sage Publications.

Zambia. Ministry of Health. 2011. National Health Strategic Plan 2011-2015. Lusaka.




                                                  22
Global interest in results based financing (RBF) as a means of strengthening health systems and improving service
delivery coincides with heavy Zambian investment in its health sector—but with poor maternal and child health (MCH)
outcomes. Determined to remedy the situation, Zambia pre-piloted an RBF project in Katete district aimed at testing
how RBF can be adapted to the country context and its suitability in strengthening the health system and improving
service delivery.

This case study reviews the design and implementation of the Katete RBF Pre-Pilot and explores its impact on access
and utilization of MCH services and health systems strengthening. The research team used a mixed-methods
approach, collecting qualitative and quantitative data through semi-structured interviews, group discussions,
document reviews and financial and health service delivery databases. Changes in performance indicators were
estimated using an interrupted time series analysis complemented by a simulated modeling analysis.

In Katete, RBF increased immunization coverage of children less than one year old by 4 percent and curative
consultations by 14 percent between 2008 and 2012. These achievements were facilitated by some health system
improvements such as increased managerial autonomy and local decision-making at service delivery levels,
enhanced staff performance and teamwork, and community participation. Despite these gains, the project
experienced some delays in RBF disbursements to health facilities and increased staff workload due to increased
utilization of health services. The study revealed clients’ perceptions of high service quality despite low technical
quality scores.

RBF can be used to improve health system performance and service delivery quality. However, the implementation
and effects of RBF are context-specific and the model has to meet certain key design criteria and requires basic inputs
for RBF to work effectively.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated
organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and
the use of material presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies
of papers in this series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries
about the series and submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@
worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                             1818 H Street, NW
                                                                             Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                             Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                             Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                             Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                             E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
