                                          98274




BALANCING FLEXIBILITY AND
  WORKER PROTECTION
UNDERSTANDING LABOR MARKET
     DUALITY IN POLAND


              October 2014




Social Protection and Labor Global Practice
1
                                           Abstract


This paper analyzes the legal and actual gaps in working conditions and returns
between permanent and temporary contracts, with a focus on civil law contracts,
which are at the center of the debate on widening labor market duality in Poland.
We find that net employment creation in recent years occurred largely through
involuntary temporary contracts, especially among the low-skilled and young
people. Even accounting for workers heterogeneity, we find a persistent wage gap
between permanent and temporary contracts, and limited mobility across contract
typologies. Insights from qualitative evidence suggest that narrowing duality
without hurting the most vulnerable workers will require a reduction in
administrative burdens and implicit costs associated with permanent labor
contracts, while eliminating firms’ incentives to strictly prefer temporary contracts.




Acknowledgements: This note was prepared by Roberta Gatti, Karolina Goraus, and Matteo
Morgandi, with Ewa Korczyc and Jan Rutkowski. Jan Rutkowski managed the qualitative analysis
summarized in Uhl (2014). We thank DM Jacek Męcina, Bogumił Czerwiński, Małgorzata
Sarzalska, Monika Siergiejuk (Ministry of Labor), and Gordon Betcherman and Marcel Jansen for
detailed comments. We are grateful to Elsa Fornero, Anke Hassel, Marcel Jansen, Pietro Ichino,
Piotr Lewandowski, and Jan Svejnar for productive discussions.

Cite as: Gatti R., Goraus K., and Morgandi, M (2014). Balancing Flexibility and Worker Protection.
Understanding Labor Market Duality in Poland. The World Bank, Washington DC




                                                2
Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                                            2

ABBREVIATIONS                                                               4

1. INTRODUCTION AND KEY MESSAGES                                            5

2. LABOR MARKETS IN POLAND: THE BROADER CONTEXT                             7

3. THE ROLE OF TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT IN POLAND                              11

4. WHY IS TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT USED AND WHY IS IT ON THE RISE IN POLAND?   18

5. WHO WORKS WITH TEMPORARY CONTRACTS IN POLAND?                           21

6. IS TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT IN POLAND (IN)VOLUNTARY?                        25

7. TEMPORARY EMPLOYMENT: A STEPPING STONE OR A NEW REALITY?                29

8. BALANCING FLEXIBILITY WITH FAIRNESS IN THE POLISH LABOR MARKET          31

REFERENCES                                                                 36

ANNEX                                                                      39




                                         3
Abbreviations



CC         civil law contract

EPL        employment protection legislation

EU         European Union

FTLC       fixed-term labor contract

GDP        gross domestic product

LFP        labor force participation

LFS        Polish Labor Force Survey

OECD       Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development




                                         4
1. Introduction and Key Messages
The perceived gap in labor market outcomes and conditions between those who are employed
with labor contracts and those who are employed with atypical contracts is a subject of much
debate in Poland and the central concern of this paper. Civil contracts (CCs), which are flexible
forms of employment not regulated by the labor code, carry a narrow set of benefits, no
protection against dismissal, and limited or no accrual of pension rights. Yet, together with
fixed-term labor contracts (FTLCs), they have been a substantial part of net employment
creation in the country in the past decade. A secondary concern of the paper regards the
increasing use of FTLCs as a substitute for open-ended labor contracts. While FTLCs carry the
same set of social security rights, the overutilization of FTLCs appears to be a reaction to the
excessive rigidity of open-ended contracts.

Based on existing available data and newly collected qualitative evidence, this note describes
the main features of atypical labor contracts and the characteristics of the workers associated
with them. It discusses why these contracts are increasingly used and the advantages and
disadvantages they present to workers and society as a whole. The note concludes by
presenting policy options to balance labor market flexibility with a reduction in the existing gap
between labor and civil contracts in the context of the Polish labor market.


 Box 1. A note on terminology

 The central concern of this paper is the duality between civil and labor contracts.
 However, data allow us mostly to measure temporary employment, which encompasses
 both civil contracts (CCs) and Fixed Term Labor Contracts (FTLCs). As such, this paper
 refers to "temporary employment" whenever inferences are possible only regarding the
 combination of civil and fixed-term labor contracts, and to "civil contracts" when data or
 information refer directly to this subcategory of employment. Section 3.1 elaborates in
 more detail on the features of these contracts in contrast to labor contracts. The National
 Statistical Office GUS is fielding a module of the LFS which will allow the differentiation
 between civil and labor contracts. Once these data are available, the statistical analysis
 conducted in this paper could be updated to validate and refine results.



This paper has four main findings:

1) While Poland did better than other comparator countries in employment, including during
the 2008–2009 economic crisis, net employment creation in the past decade was largely in
terms of temporary jobs. In Poland, the share of temporary employment has been steadily
increasing from the early 2000s, up until the financial crisis, when it stabilized at around 25 to 27
percent of wage employment (about 3.2 million individuals), the highest share among the

                                                 5
EU-28. Just as importantly, the work of about 1.4 million individuals is regulated by civil law
contracts (CCs), which offer a limited set of benefits for workers. Most temporary work is in the
private service sector and in industry, and CCs are mostly concentrated in administrative and
support services.

2) Temporary contracts are mostly used among youth (especially young women), older
workers (55+), and low-skilled workers. In most cases these are involuntary employment
arrangements. The distribution of temporary employment is highly driven by age: temporary
contracts are often viewed as an entry to labor markets in lieu of probation for young workers.
In all age categories, these contracts are especially used for workers with lower education—in
2012, 40 percent of the workers with primary education were in temporary contracts.

3) The vast majority of young people are in these jobs because they have no other option,
while as many as 40 percent of older workers are in temporary contracts voluntarily. In
addition, the reliance on temporary employment is not always a stepping stone to more stable
employment; the data show that between 2008 and 2013, only one out of three workers
employed with a temporary contract moved to permanent employment. When compared with
countries such as Norway, the U.K., and even Spain, the probability of moving to a more stable
job is low. This fact can be of particular concern for young people, especially given that
temporary employment is associated with employers making lower investments in workers’
skills and training. Overall, temporary employment is increasingly becoming the norm in Polish
labor markets, with the average tenure of temporary employment lengthening significantly.
Interestingly, temporary employment is an effective way to bring older workers into the labor
market in a way that is aligned with their preferences. This is an important finding in light of
Poland’s low participation to the labor force, particularly so among older workers. Finally,
temporary workers—even after controlling for differences in a number of characteristics—earn
on average 15 percent less than permanent workers. However, this average actually masks two
opposite situations: those workers who report to be involuntarily employed with temporary
contracts actually receive 20 percent lower earnings, while those who are voluntarily employed
with temporary contracts earn 4 percent more than permanent workers.

4) Low transitions, an important wage gap, and a high share of involuntary temporary
employment point to a significant gap between permanent and temporary employment.
Reducing this gap entails a multipronged strategy that increases the cost of using flexible
contracts; reduces the cost and complexity associated with labor contracts (both permanent and
temporary); and strengthens workers’ protection during transition. This requires first making
civil contracts subject to the same social security contributions as labor contracts. It also
requires limiting the use of flexible contracts to instances in which they are justified by the
irregular or temporary nature of a job, which calls for strengthening the enforcement of existing
regulations and giving greater power to the Labor Inspectorate. Second, the costs of labor
contracts need to be lowered. This primarily requires simplifying labor regulation and increasing
awareness around it, especially among small and medium firms. It could also entail lowering the
procedural cost of dismissals (including the expected costs associated with judicial review),

                                               6
which employers perceive as an important barrier. One way to do this is to institute a severance
pay that increases with job tenure in lieu of the “just cause? requirement and the judicial review
process. There is also room to rethink other aspects of labor code contracts design, such as the
structure of the probation period, which is seen as too constraining in its ability to lead to an
open-ended contract after three months. Finally, international experience shows that these
measures need to be accompanied by strong social protection.


2. Labor Markets in Poland: The Broader Context
Upon joining the European Union (EU) in 2004, policy reforms and economic integration with
Europe fueled a remarkable expansion in Poland. The country recorded the strongest economic
expansion among the new member states, and this growth brought about rapid convergence to
EU income levels: GDP per capita increased from around 50 percent of the EU average in 2004
to 67 percent in 2012.

When Poland joined the EU in 2004, its labor market faced significant challenges; an unfinished
restructuring agenda translated into a high share of population working in low productivity
sectors and a high structural unemployment rate. In addition, early retirement schemes and
easy access to disability benefits created substantial disincentives to participate in the labor
force. The EU accession process has been recognized as an important catalyzer of economic
reforms. These reforms helped to foster continued reallocation of labor from agriculture to
more productive sectors, while better education outcomes facilitated the transition from low to
higher skilled occupations. Rapid economic growth resulted in improvements in some labor
market outcomes. The unemployment rate dropped significantly from nearly 20 percent in 2004
to 9.6 percent in 2008, at the peak of the economic cycle (Figure 1). Government policies, in
particular those that tightened the criteria for obtaining disability benefits in early 2000s and
limited access to early pensions in 2008, helped boost certain groups’ labor force participation.
At the same time, the opening of EU labor markets to Polish workers resulted in sizeable
migration flows, especially to the U.K. and Ireland.

The 2009 economic slowdown deteriorated labor market conditions. Unemployment started to
pick up gradually, especially among young and lower skilled workers, which led to a large
increase in the share of long-term unemployed (Figure 2).




                                                7
Figure 1. Unemployment Rate in Poland, 2004–2012 (%)                           Figure 2. Increase in Unemployment Rates by Different
                                                                               Groups of Unemployed, 2009–2012 (%)
                    male      female          unemployment rate                        Overall unemployment rate   Youth   Low-skilled   Elderly
 25                                                                            12


 20                                                                            10

                                                                                8
 15
                                                                                6
 10
                                                                                4

  5
                                                                                2

  0                                                                             0
      2004   2005     2006   2007      2008   2009    2010   2011   2012                       EU27                                PL

Source: Eurostat, World Bank staff calculations.


             Between 2001 and 2012, the size of the working age (15–64) population remained fairly stable,
             with a slight decrease from 25.9 to 25.7 million. However, Poland’s employment structure has
             changed substantially in the past decade. Positive economic performance resulted in a
             decreasing number of people remaining out of work. As a result, their share in the working age
             population decreased from 46 percent (in 2001) to 40 percent (in 2012). The number of self-
             employed people also decreased, but the change was much smaller—by 1 percentage point.1
             The number of dependent employees increased from 10.2 million in 2001 to 11.9 million in
             2012. This increase was overwhelmingly driven by temporary employment—the number of
             temporary dependent workers increased by 2 million people, while the number of permanent
             workers decreased by 0.3 million (Figure 3). The growth in temporary contracts took place
             largely in the early 2000s when Poland experienced high unemployment, though it did not
             contract again during the following years of economic growth.




             1
               Within the group of self-employed people there were important changes: the number of self-employed
             people in agriculture sharply declined, while the number of self-employed people outside of agriculture
             increased. It should also be mentioned that in both 2001 and 2012, 2 percent of the working age
             population is classified by Eurostat as working, but they are neither included in the separate estimates of
             dependent employment nor self-employment. For transparency, in Figure 3 we add those persons (who
             are possibly working as helping family members) to the group of self-employed.

                                                                           8
Figure 3. Structure of Poland’s Working Age Population
                                    2001
        Not in employment                Self-employment
        Permanent dependent employment   Temporary dependent employment



                       14%

                                                  35%
                              40%
                46%                                        5%




                                    2012
        Not in employment                Self-employment
        Permanent dependent employment   Temporary dependent employment



                      13%

                                                 34%
                              47%
                40%                                        13%




Source: Eurostat.




                                             9
          Notwithstanding the positive employment growth track record, Polish labor markets face a
          number of substantive challenges. The workforce is rapidly aging, and labor force participation
          among older workers—and especially women—continues to be substantially lower than in
          comparator countries (Figure 4). Long-term unemployment is on the rise, especially among
          young and low-skilled workers (Figure 5). Regional differences persist, which also reflects the
          limited internal mobility of workers. Finally, in-work poverty is relatively high—the fifth highest
          in the EU.

Figure 4. Activity Rates Among People Aged 55–64 for Males and Females in Selected EU Countries,
2012
                                 Males                                                        Females
80                                                                    80
70                                                                    70
60                                                                    60
50                                                                    50
40                                                                    40
30                                                                    30
                                                                      20
20                                                                    10
10                                                                     0
 0




                                                                                 Romania




                                                                                   Greece
                                                                                    Latvia
                                                                                Germany

                                                                                 Portugal




                                                                                   Austria




                                                                                   Croatia

                                                                                 Slovenia
                                                                                     Spain

                                                                                  Slovakia
                                                                                Lithuania


                                                                                   France




                                                                                  Belgium
                                                                                 Hungary

                                                                                      Italy
                                                                                 POLAND
                                                                                   Estonia




                                                                                  Bulgaria


                                                                           Czech Republic
                Hungary
                 Bulgaria
               Germany




                   Latvia
                Portugal



                  Austria



                  Croatia



                Slovenia
                    Spain


                 Slovakia

                  Greece
               Lithuania




                Romania



                  France
                 Belgium
                     Italy
                POLAND
                  Estonia

          Czech Republic




Source: Eurostat.

Figure 5. Labor Force Participation (LFP) Rates, Unemployment Rates, and Long-Term Unemployment
(as Percentage of Total Unemployment) for the Population Aged 15–64 (Poland and EU-15), 2000–2012
                       LFP                                 Unemployment                       Long-term unemployment
     74                                        25                                        60
                                                                                                                         EU 15
     72                                                                                  55
                                               20                                                                        PL
     70                                                                                  50
     68                                        15                                        45
     66                                                                                  40
     64                                        10                                        35
     62                                                                                  30
                                               5
     60                                                                                  25
     58                                        0                                         20
          2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012        2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012        2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012

Source: Eurostat.




                                                                 10
3. The Role of Temporary Employment in Poland

Among these key challenges, Poland stands out internationally for the substantial share of
temporary contracts among the employed. At about double the EU average, temporary
employment in 2012 was the highest in Poland among all EU countries (Figures 6 and 7).2

Figure 6. Share of Temporary Employment (%) in EU Countries, 2012
    30
                                                                                EU 28
    20

    10

     0




              Czech…
           Netherl…




            United…




         Lithuania
            Poland




          Belgium



              Latvia




         Romania
          Sweden




          Bulgaria
            Greece

            Austria
          Portugal




          Hungary




          Slovakia




           Estonia
           Finland
            France

               Italy
              Spain




         Denmark
          Slovenia




         Germany



            Ireland
           Croatia




Source: Eurostat.

Figure 7. Share of Temporary Employment (%) in Poland and EU-15 Over Time
    30
    20
    10
     0



                                     Poland        EU 15

Source: Eurostat.

Overall, the growth in temporary employment represented the totality of net employment
growth in the past decade. This growth has been associated with a significant structural
transformation from agriculture to services, as well as substantial churning of open-ended wage
employment (Figure 8). The substitution of permanent workers with temporary ones, even in
industry, is particularly striking. The international evidence shows that employment tends to
grow after hiring regulations become more flexible, since firms adjust their labor force along the
margin of temporary contracts. When a crisis intervenes, however, firms also adjust their total
labor force downward, especially at the expense of temporary workers, exposing them to
substantial vulnerability. In Poland, temporary employment grew significantly in period of

2
  According to Eurostat, “Employees with temporary contracts are those who declare themselves as
having a fixed term employment contract or a job which will terminate if certain objective criteria are
met, such as completion of an assignment or return of the employee who was temporarily repla ced.? As
per the Polish LFS, every employee that does not have an open-ended labor code contract is defined as a
temporary worker.

                                                  11
increasing unemployment (2000–2004). Yet, when unemployment started to decrease, duality
in the labor market remained entrenched, likely due to competition on labor costs, since the use
of CCs allows a significant cost containment and might force other firms to follow suit or exit the
market.3

Figure 8. Change in Dependent Employment, 2001–2012

           Total

         Services

    Construction
                                                                                      Temporary
        Industry                                                                      Permanent

      Agriculture

                -1000     -500        0       500      1000   1500   2000   2500
                                               thousands

Source: Eurostat, World Bank staff calculations.




3.1 An Overview of Employment Relations in Poland

Behind the broad term “temporary employment? used in the Polish Labor Force Survey (LFS) lies
a heterogonous set of contracts (Figure 9). These could be broadly distinguished among (i) term
contracts regulated by the labor code; (ii) CCs; and (iii) collaborations of firms with self-
employed workers. Each type of employment relationship determines the mutual obligations of
employers and employees regarding working time and conditions, termination, social security
contributions, and other benefits. Table 1 summarizes employment relations in Poland.
Throughout this paper the expression “temporary employment? refers to any dependent
employment arrangement except for permanent contracts. As such, this taxonomy, which is
driven by the classification of the LFS, lumps together FTLCs and CCs, which are very different in
terms of benefits and accrued rights. Whenever evidence—qualitative or quantitative—allows
us to single out features or dynamics of CCs, it will be explicitly indicated.

Contracts of employment under the labor code are in writing and characterized by the following
set of provisions: (i) the employee is subordinate to the employer—that is, the employee should
follow instructions while he/she performs duties; (ii) the employee is obliged to perform his or
her work in the place specified by the employer; and (iii) the employee is obliged to observe the


3
    We are grateful to Marcel Jansen for this observation.

                                                      12
working time. If the employment relationship fulfills the provisions of the labor code contract,
the employer is legally bound to offer such a contract to the employee.

There are several types of labor code contracts of employment, and these differ depending on
their duration. Contracts for a trial period, a fixed period, or for the time of completion of a
specified task are time-bound, and their duration is set in the contract of employment, which
needs to legally adhere to the labor code provisions. For example, the contract for a trial period
cannot exceed three months and a second trial contract is not allowed after the first one has
expired; in the case of fixed-term contracts, the labor code does not specify the maximum
duration, but it limits the number of renewals to two, after which the open-ended contract has
to be stipulated. The Polish Labor Code also distinguishes the replacement contract, which is a
special kind of contract for a fixed period. In this case the termination date is defined as the
moment when the regular employee returns to work. Most of the rules overlap with the
standard contract for a fixed period, but there are a few differences that result in less protection
of such workers: the notice period is always three days; in case of pregnancy, the contract is not
automatically prolonged to the child’s delivery date; and the regulations regarding the number
of fixed-term contracts’ renewals do not apply here.

Figure 9. Contractual Employment Arrangements in Poland

                                                                                               Self-
                                Dependent employment                                        employment




                  Labor code contracts                            Civil law contracts




                                                                             Contract for
                                                                Commission
                                                                              a specified
   Permanent                                                     contract
                            Fixed term contracts                                 task
    contracts                                                    (umowa
                                                                              (umowa o
                                                                 zlecenia)
                                                                                dzieło)



                                Contract for
                 Contract for   the time of
                                               Contract for
                                                                     Temporary
                   a fixed      completion
                   period       of specified
                                               a trial period        employment
                                    task




Source: World Bank staff.




                                                     13
Labor code contracts offer numerous benefits to both employers and employees, but are also
seen as the most costly and rigid form of employment. By signing a contract of employment,
the employer gains a permanent employee and can be certain that the employee will arrive at
the workplace at a specified time every day and will observe instructions. The employee, on the
other hand, enjoys paid holidays, maternity and child care leave, severance pay when
employment is terminated for reasons unrelated to the employee, and the right to effective
legal protection against unfair dismissals.4 Labor code contracts are subject to all social security
contributions (old age, disability, sickness, health, work accident insurance, and the Labor Fund
and Guaranteed Employee Benefits Fund; see Table A1) and legal provision of the labor code in
the areas of working time and conditions, redundancy, minimum wage, and other benefits.

CCs and self-employment include commission contracts (umowa zlecenie), contracts of result
(umowa o dzieło) or cooperation with self-employed persons (samozatrudnienie). Such
contracts do not provide the protection defined in labor law provisions, and this is why the law
limits their application even though they are very common. At the same time, they give
substantial flexibility to employers and employees with regard to working time and conditions,
and social security contributions. Just as importantly, a person working under these types of
contract does not have the employee rights set out in the labor code. In such contracts there is
no element of subordination (which is instead typical of employment relations regulated by the
labor code); thus the person carrying out the work under such contract has the freedom to
decide how the work should be performed. There is also no statutory minimum wage, no
vacation, no severance pay, as well as no limitation on the number of subsequent CCs
concluded. Table 1 summarizes some of the key differences between labor contracts and CCs.

Table 1. Features of Various Employment Arrangements in Poland
Benefits and rights           Labor code                  Civil contracts
of workers                    contracts
                              (permanent or fixed         Commission contract        Contract of result
                              term)                       (umowa zlecenie)           (umowa o dzieło)

Social security               Yes                         Yes, but can be            No
benefits                                                  relatively low
Health insurance              Yes                         Yes                        No
Holidays                      Yes                         No                         No
Minimum wage                  Yes                         No                         No
requirement
Period of notice              Yes                         Upon agreement             Upon agreement
Source: World Bank staff.




4
    In companies employing less than twenty labor contract workers, there is no severance pay.

                                                     14
Figure 10 below shows the total cost of labor as percentage of net wage for minimum and
average wage earners.5 For employers of low-skilled and low-wage workers, civil contracts
(especially contracts of result) are a much more cost-efficient option than labor code contracts.
In case of higher wages, self-employment is also a cheaper arrangement. Social security
contributions, which are a significant part of labor cost, are a total of 32 percent of net wage.
Tables A1 and A2 in the annex detail respectively the different components and who pays the
cost and obligations in social security contributions and social security benefit obligations for
different types of employment and contracts. Figure 10 offers a visual comparison of labor costs
across different contracts for a hypothetical job with the same earnings/wages.

Figure 10. Employment Arrangements in Poland
    200%
    180%
    160%
    140%                                                                                                                                                                        Other
    120%
    100%
     80%
     60%                                                                                                                                                                        Income tax
     40%
     20%
      0%                                                                                                                                                                        Health contribution
                                  Commission contract




                                                                                                                    Commission contract
            Labor code contract




                                                                                              Labor code contract




                                                                                                                                          Conract of result
                                                                            Self-employment




                                                                                                                                                              Self-employment
                                                        Conract of result




                                                                                                                                                                                Social security
                                                                                                                                                                                contributions
                                                                                                                                                                                Net wage



           Minimum wage earner                                                                Average wage earner

Source: World Bank staff.

In 2012, about 1.4 million workers (slightly less than half of temporary employment) worked
with contracts that are regulated outside of the labor code, such as contracts of result (umowa o
dzieło) or commission contract (umowa zlecenie).6 Compared with 2008 and according to the
Polish Panel Survey the share of employees with a labor code open-ended contract was similar
in 2008 and 2013,7 but the share of CCs has risen somehow since 2008, from 7 to 11 percent of
all wage employment. As discussed above, these contracts provide minimal benefits to workers
(no annual or sick leave, no maternity benefits), little or no social security protection, and, by
their very design, no job protection against dismissal. For some (umowa o dzieło), a written
contract is not even necessary. In much of the common press these are often referred to as
“junk contracts.? With the exception of the obligation to pay income tax, the more flexible CCs


5
  After recent proposed regulations introducing obligatory social security contributions for commission
contract for earnings lower than or equal to the minimum wage.
6
  We thank the National Statistical Office (GUS) for sharing these estimates.
7
  The Polish Panel Survey is fielded every five years. In the last two waves (2008 and 2013), respondents
were asked about the type of contract under which they were working.

                                                                                                                                                  15
bear significant similarities to informal work arrangements—a potentially contributing factor to
the observed low level of estimated informality in Poland.

The earlier discussion indicated that temporary (and among them civil) contracts have played
an important role in Poland’s employment dynamic: between 2001 and 2012 the change in net
employment in industry and services was 1.7 million workers (17 percent), and that increase
was only due to an increased number of temporary workers (1.8 million), as the number of
permanent workers in industry and services decreased by 0.1 million. The most rapid switch
from permanent employment arrangements to temporary contracts occurred in the economic
downturn period at the beginning of 2000s (see Figure 11).

Figure 11. Change in Dependent Employment in 2001–2005, 2005–2009, and 2009–2012


                 2009-2012
  Total




                 2005-2009
                 2001-2005
                 2009-2012
  Services




                 2005-2009
                 2001-2005
  Construction




                 2009-2012
                 2005-2009                                                            Temporary
                 2001-2005                                                            Permanent
                 2009-2012
  Industry




                 2005-2009
                 2001-2005
  Agriculture




                 2009-2012
                 2005-2009
                 2001-2005

                         -2,000 -1,500 -1,000   -500   0    500   1,000 1,500 2,000

Source: Eurostat, World Bank staff calculations.

Temporary (including atypical) contracts have made up an important part of recent employment
growth not only in Poland but also in other countries. For instance, the increase in mini-jobs,
which have more than doubled since the mid-1990s, has been an important feature of
Germany’s strong employment performance (see Figure 12).




                                                       16
Figure 12. Different Forms of Employment in Germany, 1996–2010 (1996 = 100)




Source: Eichhorst, 2012.

Despite the positive impact on employment growth, there are a number of concerns associated
with the rising use of temporary contracts:

   Temporary contracts that are indefinitely repeated can put workers in a permanent state of
    precariousness, rather than serving as a stepping stone to more permanent forms of work.
    This may especially impact vulnerable workers and young people.
   The use of temporary contracts limits employers’ incentives and ability to invest in
    workforce skills and build human capital, with a potential loss of long-term productivity. In
    the long run, this could incentivize firms to specialize in activities that compete on costs and
    with lower value-added.
   CCs deprive workers, who are de facto wage employees, from essential protections against
    sickness and unemployment.
   The use of these contracts has long-term fiscal costs, because of the implicit debt associated
    with having a large share of the workforce not contribute to their retirement costs.
   Temporary contract workers—especially if vulnerable—absorb in full the risks associated
    with the business cycle. As recently shown by the case of Spain, in countries with high labor
    market duality, the contraction on employment happens largely at the expense of
    temporary workers during crises.




                                                17
The costs associated with temporary employment need to be understood in the broader context
of potential counterfactual, which in addition to options of more secure employment could
include increased informality and unemployment.



4. Why Is Temporary Employment Used and Why Is It on
the Rise in Poland?
The widespread utilization of temporary contracts has been a singled out as an important aspect
of concern for the Polish labor market and has come to the center of national debate.8 More
recently it was the object of a country–specific recommendation by the EU Commission
European Semester mechanism for policy coordination, which recommended that Poland
should “combat labour market segmentation by stepping up efforts to ensure a better transition
from fixed-term to permanent employment and by reducing the excessive use of civil law
contracts? (European Commission, 2014).

Globalization, increased competition, and technological advances are rapidly changing the
nature and composition of the new jobs that are created. In particular, structural transformation
and the progressive shift away from industry towards the service sector has implied an
increased creation of jobs that are commonly known as “white collar,? as well as new “atypical?
professions in the growing service economy. Moreover, the widening variation in the
productivity of workers has made it complicated to apply a standard treatment (and the same
coverage) to all employees (Ichino, 2014).

In the mid-1990s, many European countries responded to this technological change with often
piecemeal labor markets reforms, which typically increased flexibility in hiring by introducing a
range of contractual forms—including fixed-term contracts regulated by the labor code and
flexible contracts regulated by the civil code. This translated into an increasing share of
temporary contracts that differed from the mainstream wage employment. The scope of these
reforms, which increased flexibility in hiring without easing dismissal provisions, was driven by
important political economy dynamics in the dialogue among traditional social partners. In
countries with otherwise strong employment protection, such as in Europe, Italy or Spain, these


8
 This topic is the object of significant research in Poland. See for example Ministry of Labour and Social
Policy, Department of Economic Analyses and Forecasts, 2008; Arak et al., 2014; Kiersztyn, 2014;
Bednarski and Frieske, 2012; Baranowska et al., 2001. There is also an ample debate in the media, for
example, “Pole wants permanent employment,?
http://wyborcza.biz/biznes/1,100896,15881008,Polak_chce_etatu.html#MT; “Target—keep permanent
employment,? http://gazetapraca.pl/gazetapraca/1,90443,14353440,Cel__utrzymac_etat.html; “Youths
without permanent employment and opportunities. Lost generation,?
http://wyborcza.biz/biznes/1,100896,15713351,Mlodzi_bez_etatu_i_bez_szans__Stracone_pokolenie_.ht
ml#ixzz31Sk0uRpC; and “Junk contracts are a financial burden for credit and independent life,?
http://wyborcza.biz/finanse/1,105684,15719462,Umowy_smieciowe_to_zyciowa_blokada_finansowa__T
rudniej.html.

                                                   18
reforms resulted in an increase in labor market segmentation/duality between insiders—
typically prime age males—and outsiders—women and youth.9

The challenge is to guarantee that the flexible arrangements are used where they are necessary
and in the interest of employers and employees. Problems arise when these contracts offer
important advantages in terms of flexibility or costs in regular activities that used to be covered
by open-ended contracts.

The creation of new technology and globalization-driven jobs suggests a taxonomy of
employment, whereby job features—typical and atypical—could be matched to contract
features (see Table 2). The top left and the bottom right boxes configure a priori good matches
between jobs and contracts. On the other hand, the bottom left box delineates a mismatch, one
where atypical contracts (in Poland these would be CCs for project or commission), are
improperly used to define labor relationships that, by their characteristics (in terms of economic
dependence or effective subordination to the employer) should be regulated by labor code
contracts. These abuses are likely to result in costs borne by employees (in terms of lack of
benefits or job security). Conversely, the top right box would comprise those cases in which
labor code contracts regulate atypical forms of work, which are likely to introduce excessive
rigidity for firms and employers.

Table 2. Taxonomy of Employment Arrangements and Types of Jobs
                                    Jobs
                                                                        Atypical:
Contract type
                                    Typical                             (unsupervised,
                                                                        deliverable oriented)
Labor code contracts                                                    Mismatch (inefficiency, cost
                                    Match
(open-ended and fixed-term)                                             borne by the employer)
                                    Mismatch (abuse, cost borne
CCs (and self-employment)                                               Match
                                    by the employee)
Source: World Bank staff.

Many factors can explain the increasing use of CCs in Poland. Qualitative evidence from focus
groups with employers indicates that firms rely on civil contracts primarily to cut costs: the lack
of social security resulted so far in a cost advantage for certain contracts, as do—and
significantly so—the lack of employers’ obligations for annual, maternity, or sick leave. These

9
  Labor market duality is a particular two-segment case of labor market segmentation. As described by
Fields (2007): “the idea that (i) the labor market consists of various segments with qualitatively distinct
types of employment and (ii) access to the good job segments is limited in the sense that not all who want
to work in those segments are able to be employed. ? Dual labor markets in Europe are often
characterized by the coexistence of two types of contracts within a country: (i) rigid permanent contracts
with an array of contributions and benefits and high employment protection legislation, and (ii)
temporary short-term contracts, often with lower contributions and lack of benefits, with easy dismissal
rules.

                                                    19
contracts are also used abundantly for low-skilled jobs in areas with relatively depressed labor
markets, where the nationally set minimum wage is binding (see Uhl, 2014).

As they are currently designed, labor contracts also seem to poorly fit the characteristics of new
jobs and of production, thus providing a further incentive to use (and potentially abuse) civil
contracts. The labor code is perceived as exceedingly complex, and lack of awareness of labor
code norms seems to be a particular barrier for small firms. Moreover, while in international
indicators, Poland’s restrictiveness of employment protection legislation appears to be average
(see Figure 13), the lengthy judicial review for just cause dismissal creates substantial
uncertainty for employers, so much so that in focus group settings, some employers equate
hiring a worker with a permanent labor contract to “adopting a child: it is forever,? as one
manager of a small manufacturing company in Lublin put it (Uhl, 2014). This is consistent with
international experience suggesting that strict employment protection on permanent
contracts—especially on dismissal—promotes the use of temporary employment contracts (see
for example Boeri, 2010).

Figure 13. OECD EPL Index for Regular and Temporary Workers

                                  OECD EPL index for regular workers
 4
 3
 2
 1
 0




                                OECD EPL index for temporary workers
 4
 3
 2
 1
 0




Source: OECD, 2013a.

Interestingly, Poland fares in the middle range in terms of employment protection legislation
(EPL) among OECD countries. However, its share of temporary contracts is substantially higher
than what the level of employment protection legislation would predict among OECD countries
(see Figure 14). In fact, Poland and Spain are the two countries where strictness of regulations
on permanent workers seems to least explain the share of temporary employment. While some

                                               20
of the unexplained variation in temporary employment could be attributed to different
production structures, it is also possible that the EPL index might not capture the constraints
that are actually binding in Poland, as appears to be the case for Spain.10 The procedural costs
linked to dismissal could be one reason—one that is repeatedly cited by employers (but not
captured by the index and difficult to verify)—for resorting to temporary employment. In this
respect it is important to highlight that legal uncertainty of dismissal can be more costly to
employers than redundancy pay, since the latter can be factored into wages ex ante.

Figure 14. OECD EPL Index for Regular Workers and the Share of Temporary Employment


                                     31


                                                                                            Poland
                                     26
     Share of temporary employment




                                                                                    Spain
                                     21                                                                        Portugal
                                                                                                                               Netherlands
                                                                                                              Slovenia
                                     16                                      Finland                 Sweden
                                                                                                                      France
                                                                                                                    Italy    Germany

                                     11
                                                                        Ireland             Greece
                                                                                             Austria
                                                                                       Denmark                Czech Republic Belgium
                                      6         United Kingdom                     Slovakia

                                                                        Estonia
                                      1
                                          1.5   1.7       1.9         2.1         2.3         2.5        2.7             2.9         3.1
                                                                OECD EPL index for permanent workers

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on OECD (2013a) and Eurostat data.



5. Who Works with Temporary Contracts in Poland?
Temporary employment is most widespread among youth (especially young women), older
workers, and low-skilled workers.11 Among the age group 15 to 24, and to a lesser extent among

10
   Spain ranks as the second strictest in the EPL for temporary workers, which reflects a very restrictive
regulation that in practice has not been enforced. The same could be true of CCs in Poland. We are
grateful to Prof. Marcel Jansen for pointing this out.
11
   Existing data on CCs is scant and in most cases (including our main data source, the LFS) the data lump
together CCs with FTLCs in the category of temporary employment. For the purpose of this paper,
temporary employment is therefore used to mean CCs + FTLCs. The term “civil contract? is used whenever
there is available and specific evidence, qualitative or quantitative, about umowa o dzieło or umowa
zlecenie.

                                                                             21
those aged 25 to 34, the share of temporary workers is substantially higher than the national
average. Temporary working arrangements are less common among prime age workers (only 18
percent of wage employees in that group have a temporary contract in the main job), which
likely reflects different factors: vintage effects as well as experience and different needs of
workers in this age range. At any given age group, the incidence of temporary employment is
higher among wage employees with lower education (see Figure 15). In 2012, 40 percent of the
workers with primary education were in temporary labor contracts. Gender-wise, temporary
employment appears to be balanced between women and men, though when looking at age
subcategories, young women are overrepresented in temporary employment compared to men.

Figure 15. Who Is in Temporary Employment?
           Share of temporary                   Share of temporary employment
           employment by age                              by education
 70%                                         45%
 60%                                         40%
                                             35%
 50%
                                             30%
 40%                                         25%
 30%                                         20%
                                             15%
 20%
                                             10%
 10%                                          5%
  0%                                          0%
         15-24 25-34 35-54 55-64                        prim.   vocat.   sec.   ter.

Source: LFS 2012 data, World Bank staff calculations.

Over time, the incidence of temporary employment increased across the board, with the highest
increase observed among young workers (Figure 16). For example, among people aged 15 to 24,
the share of temporary employees increased by 34 percentage points between 2001 and 2012
(from 28 percent to 62 percent). For the 25- to 34-year-olds, the share of temporary
employment is lower, but the increase was also drastic (20 percentage points) from 12 percent
in 2001 to 32 percent in 2012.




                                                   22
Figure 16. Share of Workers in Temporary Contracts in 2001 and 2012 by Age (left) and
Education (right)

          60%                                      60%

          40%                                      40%

          20%                                      20%

           0%                                       0%
                  15-24 25-34 35-54 55-64                 prim. vocat. sec.       ter.

                       2001     2012                            2001       2012

Source: LFS 2012 data, World Bank staff calculations.

In addition, while in 2001 temporary contracts were similarly distributed across gender, by 2012
the gender gap was significant between young women and young men (Figure 17). It remains an
open question whether this is related to women’s choice of more flexible jobs when having
small children or to the employers’ potential concerns with providing women labor contracts
that would entail maternity leave.

Figure 17. Difference Between the Incidence of Temporary Employment Among Women and
Men by Age Categories in 2001 and 2012

          55-64

          35-54

          25-34

          15-24

                  -3     -2       -1       0       1       2           3      4          5   6
                                                2001     2012
Source: LFS 2012 data, World Bank staff calculations.

Services are the largest sector of the Polish economy and 60 percent of all temporary wage
employees work in this sector. However, in relative terms, construction is the sectors that make
most use of temporary contracts, as a share of dependent employment (Figure 18). As shown
previously in Figure 11, the increase in employment in industry, construction, and services
altogether occurred mostly through temporary work.




                                                   23
Figure 18. Structure of Temporary Employment in 2012
             Agricult                                                       35%
               ure
                                                                            30%




                                                    Share of workers with
                                                    tempoarary contracts
               3%
                                                                            25%
                                                                            20%
            Industr                                                         15%
               y
              27%                                                           10%
                                                                            5%
                                  Services
                                    58%                                     0%

  Constru
   ction
   12%
                                                                                  2001   2012

Source: Eurostat, World Bank staff calculations.


One of the few pieces of evidence on the incidence of CCs (rather than on temporary
employment in general) in different sectors are the estimates produced by the Polish National
Statistical Office for 2012. This data indicate that employment regulated by civil contracts makes
up the overwhelming majority of jobs in administrative and support services, comprising
occupations such as security guards, administrative support, call centers workers, and cleaning
services (Figure 19).




                                                   24
Figure 19. Share of Civil Law Contracts out of Total Employment (2012)

 Administrative and support services
  Arts, entertainment and recreation
        Accommodation and catering
    Information and communication
 Professional and technical activities
   Water supply; waste management
        Financial, real estate activities
         Manufacturing, construction
   Transportation and other services
                  Non-market services
        Agriculture, mining, elctricity

                                            0%   10%        20%   30%    40%      50%      60%      70%   80%
                                                 Share of employment in CCs (out of total employment)

Source: World Bank staff calculations based on data provided by the Polish National Statistical Office.



6. Is Temporary Employment in Poland (In)voluntary?
Overall, about 15 percent of workers in temporary employment in Poland strictly prefer it to
open-ended employment — a level that is about average across EU-28 countries (see Figure 20).

Figure 20. Share of Voluntary Temporary Employment among Temporary Workers in EU-28
Countries, 2012
 45
 40
                                                                                           EU 28
 35
 30
 25
 20
 15
 10
  5
  0




Source: Eurostat, World Bank staff calculations.


Certain categories of Polish workers, in particular older workers and especially older women,
prefer to work with temporary contracts to retain flexibility and reduce taxation (Figure 21).

                                                       25
Most likely, the limited accumulation of pension rights is not a relevant consideration for older
workers. As a result, temporary contracts appear to be a suitable instrument to increase
participation to active economic life, especially in a rapidly aging country like Poland, where
older workers’ low labor force participation continues to be a concern. Professionals, who are
over-represented among the higher educated, also prefer temporary contracts, in a way that
also reflects a relatively favorable legislation on taxation and social security contributions.
Finally, CCs also reduce the labor costs of workers whose productivity level is below minimum
wage, allowing them to work formally, although in such cases the appropriate policy response
should be a correction or differentiation of the minimum wage.

Figure 21. Who Most Often Prefers Temporary Contracts in Poland?

       Share of voluntary temporary               Share of voluntary temporary
           employment by age                        employment by education
 40%                                          20%
 35%
 30%                                          15%
 25%
 20%                                          10%
 15%
 10%                                           5%
     5%
     0%                                        0%
           15-24 25-34 35-54 55-64                    prim. vocat.   sec.   ter.

Source: LFS 2012 data, World Bank staff calculations.

A related question is whether workers in temporary contracts earn salaries comparable to
permanent workers. The ample literature on compensating differentials (Rosen, 1986; Kaufman
and Hotchkiss, 2005; Averett et al., 2003) would indicate that workers might be willing to be
paid less (more) for a particularly pleasant (unpleasant) job; for example, workers with a
stronger preference for flexible arrangements might be willing to accept a lower wage for a job
with those characteristics. A wage differential could also be the indication that segmentation
between different types of contracts exists, in that the labor market does not work efficiently in
allocating labor where its returns is the highest.

Looking at unconditional means of full-time workers’ monthly wages12, we find that in Poland,
temporary workers earn on average around 30 percent less than permanent workers (Figure
22). As we saw earlier, workers with different contracts differ along many dimensions, including
age, education, and sex. Controlling for relevant observable differences (age, education, sex,
geographical location, and employment sector) through a nonparametric matching method
reduces this differential substantially—to 15 percent. In other words, it appears that workers


12
     Looking at hourly wages leads to very similar results.

                                                        26
who are in permanent contracts differ significantly in endowments from those in temporary
contracts.

Figure 22. Wage Gap between Permanent and Temporary Workers

                35%
                30%
                25%
                20%
                15%
                10%
                 5%
                 0%
                                     Raw                           Adjusted

Source: LFS 2011 data, World Bank staff calculations.

Taken at face value, a positive wage gap of 15 percent in favor of permanent workers would be
consistent with temporary workers preferring to work with temporary arrangements (thus
accepting lower pay for the same work). However, there is an important caveat to this
methodology, which is that there might be characteristics unobservable to the econometrician
but observable to the parties in question—ability, preferences—that once accounted for might
reverse the compensation differential. When accounting also for workers’ preferences – which
are observable in the LFS - involuntary temporary workers earn almost 20 percent less than
permanent workers (see red bar, Figure 23, left). On the other hand, workers who are
voluntarily employed under temporary contracts earn only about 3 percent less than workers
with permanent contracts, controlling for all other observable characteristics (Figure 23, right).
This points to a certain amount of segmentation in the labor market, which prevents workers
who are involuntarily in temporary employment from moving to permanent jobs.

Figure 23. Wage Gap between Permanent and Voluntary/Involuntary Temporary Workers
          40%

          30%

          20%

          10%

           0%
                      Involuntary temporary workers          Voluntary temporary workers

                                              Raw       Adjusted

Source: LFS 2011 data, World Bank staff calculations.


                                                    27
Finally, an important feature of CCs is that they allow for wages below the minimum wage. A
priori, minimum wage could be a significant constraint in low productivity regions, hence it is
important to look at wage distribution to understand the extent to which wages fall below
minimum wage. Overall, in Poland, around 10 percent of full-time workers report wages below
minimum wage. More than half of those workers are employed under temporary contracts, and
thus they constitute as much as 20 percent of all temporary workers; among permanent
workers, however, it is 6 percent (see Figure 24). While the split between labor and civil law
contracts is not yet available in the LFS, it would be safe to assume that workers earning below
minimum wage are mostly under CCs. Figure 25 plots net wage kernels for full-time workers
under permanent (red line) and temporary (green line) contracts for a high productivity region
(śląskie region, left quadrant) and a low productivity one (warmińsko-mazurskie region, right
quadrant).13 Although there may clearly be some measurement error,14 the share of full-time
temporary workers reporting wages below the minimum wage is higher in the low productivity
region. While additional analysis—including on dispersion of wages within regions and through
administrative data—would be needed to draw policy conclusions on potential options to
rethink the minimum wage, reform proposals that call for the abolition of CCs should account
for the potential increase in informality and/or unemployment for workers who are paid below
minimum wage, which are quite a significant share in low productivity regions.

Figure 24. Share of Full-Time Workers That Report Wages Below the Minimum Wage Among
Temporary and Permanent Workers
          25

          20

          15
                                                                                    Permanent
          10
                                                                                    Temporary
           5

           0
                       Total               Urban                 Rural

Source: LFS 2011 data, World Bank staff calculations.




13
   Low productivity in this context is defined as a region with the lowest average wages and highest share
of temporary employment.
14
   Technically, it should not be possible to work full-time with labor contracts at salaries below minimum
wage.

                                                    28
Figure 25. Kernel Densities in Better-Performing (left) and Worse-Performing (right) Regions




Source: LFS 2011 data, World Bank staff calculations.



7. Temporary Employment: A Stepping Stone or a New
Reality?
An important question is whether the reliance on temporary employment—and in particular,
CCs—can be seen as a stepping stone to better and more stable employment, especially for
youth, who have more difficulty entering the labor market. Understanding transitions from
temporary employment over time can help shed light on this question.

The Polish Panel Survey has provided information on the socioeconomic situation of
respondents every five years since 1988. In the last two waves the question on type of contract
was included, and for around 1,050 people it is possible to analyze how their situation changed
between 2008 and 2013. As shown in Figure 26, only one-third of workers with temporary
contracts in 2008 moved to open-ended employment by 2013. Interestingly, these probabilities
are not different for youth and for older workers, suggesting that temporary contracts are more
of a new reality of labor markets for all age categories than an entry point to jobs specific to
youth.




                                                   29
Figure 26. Labor Market Status in 2013 of Temporary Workers in 2008




Source: Kiersztyn, 2014.

Consistent with this is the evidence that temporary workers’ tenure with the same employer has
increased quite significantly since 2001—from 2 years to 3.5 years (see Figure 27).

Figure 27. Tenure with Current Employer (in Years) Among Temporary Workers in 2001 (left)
and 2011 (right)




Source: LFS data, World Bank staff calculations.

Finally, because CCs do not provide access to most social protection instruments, their
prevalence among low-skilled workers, women of childbearing age, and other vulnerable groups
is of potential concern. As it is concentrated among low-skilled workers, temporary employment
is likely to expose these more vulnerable segments of the population to high turnaround and the
risk of unemployment. Moreover, while younger women prefer the flexibility of temporary
employment, the discontinuity of treatment of maternity leave across contract types (covered
by labor contracts, but not envisaged in civil ones) distorts incentives for employers and for
young women, who have the incentive to have children once they are working under a
permanent labor contract. This bunching can in turn reinforce the view that it is risky for
companies to offer permanent contracts to young women and skew contract choices for women
and men.




                                                   30
8. Balancing Flexibility with Fairness in the Polish Labor
Market
The evidence suggests that temporary employment has played a positive and important role in
employment growth in Poland. Temporary employment accounts for all net employment in the
period 2001–2012, and in turn job creation has been a key element of shared growth. Yet, in
light of the significant degree of distance between the characteristics of permanent and
temporary employment—regarding cost and flexibility—this is of concern for the potential risk
associated with future crises. Depending on the extent to which sectors that are intensive in
temporary employment are exposed to the variability of the business cycle—less so those that
rely on public procurement, more so those in tradable goods—the employment adjustment
following a shock could be more or less deep.

At the same time, temporary employment seems to be an effective way to increase activity
among older workers, one that is aligned with individual preferences and responds to the
country’s need to increase activity among a group—older workers—which registers particularly
low labor force participation.

The evidence indicates that duality in Poland is deepening: the vast majority of those who are
employed under temporary contracts would prefer to work under permanent contracts. For
those who are employed under temporary contracts involuntarily, there is a significant wage
disadvantage, estimated at about 20 percent. Transitions from temporary employment to
permanent employment are relatively slow. Finally, the Labor Inspectorate estimates that CCs
are misused in about 18 percent of inspected firms. Only five years earlier this share was equal
to 4 percent.15

While the potential drawbacks of temporary employment need to be understood in the context
of counterfactuals—which range from open-ended employment to informality, or
unemployment—there is scope to reduce the gap between permanent and temporary
employment, especially for what concerns the gap between labor and civil law contracts.
Increasing the likelihood that workers can reach a more stable and secure employment will
require a remodulation of both the costs and incentives that firms take into account when
determining the contractual form for new hires. This necessarily requires intervening on
multiple fronts, especially to avoid large disemployment effects originating from an increase in
costs or rigidity of civil contracts. Some of these interventions appear more feasible in the short
run, while others are more ambitious because of their political economy implications.




15
  From this percentage a broader estimate of abuse of CCs cannot be inferred, since the Inspectorate’s
checks are conducted in firms with a higher a priori chance that abuses will be identified.


                                                   31
Box 2. Emerging lessons from reforming non-standard contracts in Slovakia

Besides standard employment contracts, Slovakia has three types of non-standard contracts: (1) agreements
to work up to 10 hours per week (40% of all non-standard contracts); (2) agreements to perform specific work
up to 350 hours in one year (34%); and agreements to work up to 20 hours per week for students up to 26
years of age (26%). All of these contracts are fixed-term up to a maximum period of one year. In 2014, more
than three quarters of people working on these non-standard contracts earned less than 150 euro monthly
(which is less than half of the minimum wage of 352 euro).

These contracts were used increasingly after the 2009 crisis, also in an effort to cut costs. Compared to
standard employment contracts, these agreements offered more flexibility mainly due to relatively easier
hiring and firing procedures as well as due to limited regulations protecting agreement workers: minimum
wage regulation nor paid leave apply to these contracts. Moreover, with a security social contribution rate of
1.05% - compared to 48.6% - the related labor cost was significantly low if compared to the standard
employment contracts. While the personal income tax rate of 19% was the same for agreements and the
standard employment contracts, this rate was applied only from the income above 304 euro monthly in 2013
(raised to 317 euro in 2014). The massive use of agreements highlighted several problems such as the limited
protection of workers who were not entitled to social benefits such as social security, unemployment benefits,
paid sickness leave, etc.

The government of Slovakia adopted in 2013 a reform that increased social and health contributions for non-
standard contracts to the same level as for employment contracts, e.g. from 1.05% to 48.6% of the gross
income paid by both workers and employers, though few exceptions remained. The government also applied
minimum wage regulation to all employment contracts. The reform had immediate impacts. The number of
people working on agreements decreased by almost 60% in January 2013 compared to December 2012. Later,
the decline slowed down and the year-on-year decrease was almost 40% in December 2013 corresponding to
a reduction from 552 thousand in December 2012 to 344 thousand in December 2013.

Number of non-standard working agreements and people working with them

 700,000
 600,000
 500,000
 400,000
 300,000
 200,000
 100,000
        0
                                                                                                                                       4-14
            1-10
                   4-10
                          7-10


                                         1-11
                                                4-11
                                                       7-11


                                                                      1-12
                                                                             4-12
                                                                                    7-12


                                                                                                   1-13
                                                                                                          4-13
                                                                                                                 7-13


                                                                                                                                1-14


                                                                                                                                              7-14
                                 10-10




                                                              10-11




                                                                                           10-12




                                                                                                                        10-13




         Number of people working on agreements                                                    Number of agreements


Source: INEKO based on data from the Social Insurance Agency


                                                                                                    32
Box 2, continued

What happened to people who ceased to work on agreements? There was no significant change in the number
of employees (1.96 million both in 4Q 2012 and 4Q 2013), registered unemployed (0.39 million both in 4Q 2012
and 4Q 2013) and self-employed (0.36 million both in December 2012 and December 2013). About half of those
who stopped canceled their non-standard agreements were already working with standard employment
contract or as self-employed and continued to work under those arrangements. Their net income decreased on
average by more than 60 euro monthly (Source: INESS, 2013).There are no data on the remaining 97 thousand,
workers. Some of them might be pensioners and others might have continued working informally. The reform
effectively transferred the full payroll-tax burden on workers regardless of their income. It is also likely that
those with low productivity have been hit hard and had to move to working informally.

Source: Peter Goliaš (2014), INEKO.




       Short-term changes would include:

       1) Confine the use of CCs to within the scope of their intended use in the law. This change will
       necessarily require an improvement in the effectiveness of labor inspections and an increase in
       sanctions for abusing CCs—in line with measures adopted by other countries. Two of the legal
       tests commonly used to detect abuses are whether the worker under civil contract is operating
       in subordination to the employer, or alternatively whether he is in direct economic dependence
       on the employer (Ichino, 1996). Besides the monetary sanctions, a dissuasive measure may be
       to allow courts to retroactively declare freelance contracts as open-ended labor contracts, in the
       event freelance contracts disguised an employer-employee relationship.16

       2) For atypical employment relationships for which CCs are warranted, social security
       contribution requirements should be aligned with those in labor contracts. This could ensure
       adequate contribution for old age pensions across categories of workers. Additional measures
       that could be considered are restricting CC renewals.

       Medium-term changes would help reduce the gap between permanent and temporary contracts:

       3) The costs of temporary labor contracts should be reduced, especially for low-paid workers.
       This can be achieved at no significant economic cost by simplifying the labor code, which may
       lower the administrative burden on firms. A recent enterprise survey shows that medium-sized
       firms especially complain of the complexity of labor regulations. Interesting in this respect is the
       Italian initiative for a Simplified Labor Code, thanks to which a draft of a simplified labor code (in
       16
          This norm was introduced in Italy’s most recent labor market reform in 2012, together with an increase
       in contributions to progressively match those of term contracts. The reform resulted immediately in a net
       decline in the hiring of freelance workers (-25%), though less is known about the forms of contracts that
       substituted these jobs, due to the lack of longitudinal data. Another interesting fact is the modest
       increase in the use of term contracts (+6%) after the reform, though a new reality was the increase of
       “ultra-short? term contracts (1–-3 days). See: Ministero del Lavoro e Delle Politiche Sociali (2014)

                                                          33
70 simple articles) has just been completed. Such a measure would, however, require a
significant amount of time, given the technical and potentially political complexity of changing
the labor code. A quicker but more resource-intensive reform would be to raise the nontaxable
allowance of labor income in order to make labor contracts more accessible to firms for current
workers on civil contracts. This is particularly important because a share of CCs appears to be
used to hire workers at wages below the minimum wage, and a tax exemption would maintain
stable the net minimum wage without excessively increasing the gross labor costs for firms. In
addition, costs could be reduced by limiting the abuses of contractual rights—such as sick
leave—for prolonged periods, and without strong documentary evidence. For instance, Poland
has one of the highest average periods of pre-birth sick leave among pregnant women. Part of
this effort would include also (i) more effective access to information regarding the
administration of labor contracts and sanctions for abuse of civil contracts; and (ii) making the
regulation of hours in some professions more flexible—in some professions hours are still very
rigid, which leads to hiring with civil contracts, under which workers might have overall lower
protection.

4) Decrease the implicit costs of permanent contracts, so as to make them the natural
progression of the employment relationship after a period of temporary work. This could be
obtained by reducing the implicit costs of hiring permanent workers, including reducing
procedural costs of dismissal and uncertainty of labor adjudication, which are perceived as an
important barrier by employers. One way to do this is to put in place a severance pay that
increases with job tenure in lieu of the “just cause? requirement and the judicial review process.
There is also room to rethink other aspects of labor code contract design—one of these could be
the structure of probation periods, which are seen as excessively constraining in their ability to
lead to an open-ended contract after three months.

Changes in this direction are likely to result in:

   A smaller gap between CCs and FTLCs, with a likely improvement in benefits for workers.
    Because of the increased labor costs due to social security contributions, there might be a
    downward adjustment on wages. In the presence of reduced taxation this would not
    necessarily translate into a proportional decrease in take-home pay. Alternatively, it could
    result in an adjustment in working hours.
   Relatively more flexible permanent contracts, akin to the changes that moving to a
    prevalent contract with a basic set of rights and increasing levels of protection (also known
    in the literature as a “single contract?) that is discussed in proposals for Italy or Spain. While
    there is currently much debate over the benefits of single labor contracts, their introduction
    in Poland would require an overhaul of the labor code into a system with significantly
    greater ease of dismissal, in order to allow employers to hire workers who are needed only
    for a limited period of time. This seems unlikely at present.
   Many factors will determine the potential impact on unemployment and/or informality.
    Interventions on the labor demand side might be necessary to avoid, in some sectors,
    workers with low productivity for whom labor contracts are too costly being left

                                                     34
   unemployed—for example, moving away from cost being the only criteria for public
   procurement selection. It is also important that enforcement provide suitable disincentives
   for firms to hire informally and create a level playing field across firms. The international
   evidence suggests that these types of adjustments might be associated with some increase
   in unemployment in the short term, but might not impact unemployment significantly in the
   long term.

The government has recently proposed the increase of social security contribution for civil
contracts at the minimum wage level. Recent literature (Onaran, 2008) does not provide
evidence of the negative employment elasticities with respect to wages in Poland. However, in
focus groups settings, managers of low-value added companies indicated that in response to
these changes, firms might hire workers informally or hire younger workers. Firms that rely on a
highly skilled work force reported that they would reduce employment to some extent.




                                              35
REFERENCES
Aleksynska, Mariya, and Martin Schindler. 2011. "Labor Market Regulations in Low-, Middle- and
       High-Income Countries: A New Panel Database." IMF Working Papers 11/154,
       International Monetary Fund.

Arak, Piotr, Piotr Lewandowski, and Piotr Zakowiecki. 2014. “Dual Labor Market in Poland—
        Proposals for Overcoming the Deadlock.? IBS Policy Paper no. 01/2014, Instytut Badań
        Strukturalnych, Warsaw.
        http://ibs.org.pl/files/publikacje/pp/pp_2014/IBS_Policy_Paper_01-2014_eng.pdf.

Averett, Susan, Howard Bodenhorn, and Justas Staisiunas. 2003. "Unemployment Risk and
        Compensating Differential in Late-Nineteenth Century New Jersey Manufacturing."
        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9977, Cambridge.

Baranowska, A., and M. Gebel. 2008. “Temporary Employment in Central and Eastern Europe:
       Individual Risk Patterns and Institutional Context.? MZES Working Papers, 2008 (106),
       Universität Mannheim Mannheimer Zentrum für Europäische Sozialforschung,
       Germany.

Baranowska, A., M. Gebel, and I. E. Kotowska. 2001. “The Role of Fixed-Term Contracts at Labor
       Market Entry in Poland: Stepping Stones, Screening Devices, Taps or Search Subsidies??
       Work, Employment and Society 25 (4): 777–93.

Bednarski M., and K. Frieske. 2012. „Zatrudnienie na czas określony w polskiej gospodarce.?
       Społeczne i ekonomiczne konsekwencje zjawiska, Instytut Pracy i Spraw Socjalnych,
       Warszawa.

Boeri, T. 2010. “Institutional Reforms in European Labour Markets.? Handbook of Labour
         Economics.

Bruno, Giovanni S. F., Floro Ernesto Caroleo, and Orietta Dessy. 2012. “Stepping Stones Versus
        Dead End Jobs: Exits from Temporary Contracts in Italy After the 2003 Reform.? IZA
        Discussion paper 6746, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn, Germany.

Cahuc, P., O. Charlot, and F. Malherbet. 2013. "Explaining the Spread of Temporary Jobs and its
        Impact on Labor Turnover." IZA Discussion paper 6365, Institute for the Study of Labor,
        Bonn, Germany.

Eichhorst, W. 2012. “The Unexpected Appearance of a New German Model.? IZA Discussion
       paper 6625, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn, Germany.

Esping-Andersen, G. 1990. The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Cambridge, UK: Policy Press.




                                               36
Eurofound. 2013. "Young People and Temporary Employment in Europe." Eurofound, Dublin,
       Ireland.

European Commission. 2014. “Recommendation for a COUNCIL RECOMMENDATION on Poland’s
       2014 national reform programme and delivering a Council opinion on Poland’s 2014
       convergence programme.? European Commission, Brussels.
       http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/csr2014/csr2014_poland_en.pdf

Eurostat. n.d. “LFS series—Detailed annual survey results (lfsa).?
        http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/cache/ITY_SDDS/en/lfsa_esms.htm.

Fields, G. 2004. “Dualism in the Labor Market: A Perspective on the Lewis Model after Half a
         Century.? Manchester School 72 (6): 724–35.

Fields, G. 2007. “Labor Market Policy in Developing Countries: A Selective Review of the
         Literature and Needs for the Future.? Policy Research Working Paper 4362, World Bank,
         Washington, DC.

Fields, G. S. 1975. “Rural Urban Migration, Urban Unemployment and Job Search Activity in
         LDCs.? Journal of Development.

Goliaš, P. 2014. “The reform of non-standard contracts in Slovakia,? mimeo, INEKO.

Harris, John R., and Michael P. Todaro. 1970. “Migration, Unemployment and Development: A
         Two-Sector Analysis.? American Economic Review 60 (1): 126–42.

Ichino, Pietro. 2014, May. Presentation delivered at the Conference on Labor Market Duality
         organized by the World Bank and the Polish Ministry of Labor, Warsaw.

Ichino, Pietro. 1996. Il lavoro e il mercato. Milan: Mondadori.

        International Labour Office. 2012. Global Employment Trends for Youth: 2012. ILO,
        Geneva.

International Monetary Fund. 2014. “Jobs and Growth: Supporting the European Recovery.?
        IMF, Washington DC.

Kaufman, Bruce E., and Julie L. Hotchkiss. 2005. "Education, Training, and Earnings Differentials:
      The Theory of Human Capital." The Economics of Labor Markets (5th ed.). Harcourt
      College Publishers.

Kiersztyn, A. 2014. „Niepewność zatrudnienia. Kto jej doświadcza? Czy to stan chwilowy??
        Zespół Porównawczych Analiz Nierówności Społecznych, Instytut Filozofii i Socjologii
        Polskiej Akademii Nauk, Warszawa.

Lewis, W. Arthur. 1954. “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor.? Manchester
        School of Economic and Social Studies (22): 139–91.

                                                 37
Ministero del Lavoro e Delle Politiche Sociali. 2014. “Il primo anno di applicazione della legge
        92/2012?. Quaderno 1. January 2014.
        http://www.camera.it/temiap/temi17/QUADERNO1_I%20anno%20applicazione%20L%2
        092_2012.pdf

Ministry of Labour and Social Policy, Department of Economic Analyses and Forecasts. 2008.
        Employment in Poland 2007: Security on a flexible labour market. Instytut Badań
        Strukturalnych, Warsaw. http://ibs.org.pl/files/Employment_in_Poland_2007_IBS.pdf

OECD. 2013a. Indicators of Employment Protection Database.
       http://www.oecd.org/employment/emp/oecdindicatorsofemploymentprotection.htm

OECD. 2013b. OECD Employment Outlook. OECD, Paris.

OECD, 2014. OECD Economic Surveys: Poland. OECD, Paris.

Onaran, Ozlem. 2008. "Jobless Growth in the Central and East European Countries: A Country-
       Specific Panel Data Analysis of the Manufacturing Industry." Eastern European
       Economics 46 (4): 90–115.

POLPAN. Polish Panel Survey. 1988–2013. http://polpan.org/english/project-description

Rosen, Sherwin. 1986. "The Theory of Equalizing Differences." In Ashenfelter, Orley; Layard,
        Richard. The Handbook of Labor Economics. New York: Elsevier. pp. 641–92.

Uhl, Hanna. 2014. “Qualitative Research on Labor Market Duality in Poland: the perspective of
        employers and young worker.? Millward Brown, Warsaw.




                                               38
ANNEX
Table A1. Components of Social Security Premiums Paid by Employer and Employee
  Type of insurance           % premium                           Breakdown of premium

                                                          Employer                 Employee

 Retirement            19.52% of remuneration               9.76%                   9.76%

 Disability            8% of remuneration                   6.5%                     1.5%

 Accident              0.67% to 3.33% of                0.67% to 3.33%                   -
                       remuneration depending
                       on occupational risk in a
                       given industry

 Sickness              2.45% of remuneration                  -                     2.45%

 Additional contributions:

 Labor Fund            2.45% of remuneration                2.45%                        -

 Guaranteed            0.10% of remuneration                0.10%                        -
 Employee Benefit
 Fund

Source: World Bank staff.




                                                   39
Table A2. Social Insurance Obligations Under Different Employment Contracts
                     Labor
                     code                                 Civil
   Labor costs     contracts                         law contracts                     Self-employment
                                                                          Contract
                   All types           Commission contract                of result
                                Before changes           After changes
                                                          Yes, at least
                                                                                      Yes, at least based on
                               Yes, first contract         based on
     Old age                                                                          60% of average wage
                      Yes      mandatory, other            minimum           No
   contribution                                                                        in enterprise sector,
                                   voluntary              wage, later
                                                                                          later voluntary
                                                           voluntary
                                                          Yes, at least
                                                                                      Yes, at least based on
                               Yes, first contract         based on
    Disability                                                                        60% of average wage
                      Yes      mandatory, other            minimum           No
   contribution                                                                        in enterprise sector,
                                   voluntary              wage, later
                                                                                          later voluntary
                                                           voluntary
                                Voluntary for the
    Sickness
                      Yes      first contract, then        Voluntary         No        No, only voluntary
  contribution*
                                    impossible
                                                          Yes, at least
                                                                                      Yes, at least based on
                               Yes, first contract         based on
     Accident                                                                         60% of average wage
                      Yes      mandatory, other            minimum           No
   contribution                                                                        in enterprise sector,
                                   voluntary              wage, later
                                                                                          later voluntary
                                                           voluntary


                                                                                      Yes, at least based on
                                                        Yes, obligatory
     Health                    Yes, obligatory for                                    75% of average wage
                      Yes                                 for every          No
   contribution                  every contract                                        in enterprise sector,
                                                           contract
                                                                                          later voluntary


                                                          Yes, at least
                                                                                      Yes, at least based on
                               Yes, first contract         based on
                                                                                      60% of average wage
    Labor Fund        Yes      mandatory, other            minimum           No
                                                                                       in enterprise sector,
                                   voluntary              wage, later
                                                                                          later voluntary
                                                           voluntary
                                                          Yes, at least
   Guaranteed                  Yes, first contract         based on
    Employee          Yes      mandatory, other            minimum           No                No
  Benefits Fund                    voluntary              wage, later
                                                           voluntary
Source: World Bank staff.




                                                        40
41
