                                                                     98279

 Toward Gender-Equitable Fisheries
    Management in Solomon Islands




                                                         Photo Credit: Kate Barclay


This report was written by Olha Krushelnytska, World Bank. It synthesizes the study
Gender, Fisher, Trader, Processer: Towards Gender-Equitable Fisheries Management and
Development in Solomon Islands (Barclay, Payne and Mauli, 2015).
This report aims to identify gaps in the available data on the social and economic
opportunities and constraints for women in the fisheries sector in Solomon Islands in order to
inform policy directions and future investments in the sector. It examines women’s
involvement in two supply chains in the fisheries sector of Solomon Islands – tuna fisheries
and coastal fisheries – and recommends next steps for improving the information and data to
better address the inclusion of women in fisheries to enhance the social benefits and
outcomes from this sector.

Women make up a large proportion of the workforce in tuna and coastal fisheries supply
chains, however there is little or no data available to measure the extent of their engagement.
As a result, many initiatives including training, awareness programs, and policies are not
gender-informed and as such overlook the needs of women engaged formally and informally
in the fisheries sector.

However, as this report finds, women have a high potential to improve the sustainable
management of coastal fisheries in Solomon Islands, both in their own fisheries and
aquaculture activities and in supporting men’s activities.

II.      Why Analyze Gender in Pacific Fisheries Management?

Fisheries are a fundamental driver for many PIC economies. For PICs1—especially the
fishery-dependent small-island states—fish stocks comprise the primary natural resource on
which future economic growth will be based. Tuna (part of oceanic fisheries) caught in PIC
waters represent around 35 percent of the world’s tuna catch, with an estimated total first
sale value of US$3.4 billion in 2013. PICs received roughly 7 percent of this total in public
revenues. The coastal fisheries throughout the region play a very different but equally crucial
role in PIC economies. Although they do not generate significant amounts of national
revenue, they are crucial supporters of local livelihoods, food security and dietary health in
all PICs.

Benefits from fisheries resources depend on how well they are managed. PICs tuna
resources are now reaching their long-term sustainable limits, due in large part to
overexploitation. Similarly, coastal fisheries are threatened (and in some cases severely
impacted) by overfishing and coastal degradation driven by population growth, increased
demand for coastal fish products, inefficient fishing technologies, and the erosion of
customary management regimes due to increasing monetization of local economies.

Understanding the role of women in the fisheries supply chain is key to effective
fisheries management and development. Women play a pivotal role in fisheries around the
world. Contrary to the widespread perception that fishing is a male-dominated activity, a
recent study by FAO2 finds that of the 120 million people worldwide who work in capture
fisheries3 and associated supply chains, half are women. However, since informal activities
in the sector are not well recorded, the number of women involved may actually be higher. In

1
  The report refers to PIC Bank member countries, which include Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), Fiji, Kiribati,
Palau, Papua New Guinea, the Republic of the Marshall Islands (RMI), Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu and
Vanuatu. The Cook Islands and Niue are also members through New Zealand.
2
  Sustainable fisheries and aquaculture for food security and nutrition. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the
United Nations (FAO), High Level Panel of Experts (HLPE) on Food Security and Nutrition of the Committee on World
Food Security. HLPE, 2014.
3
  Capture fisheries refer to all kinds of harvesting of naturally occurring living resources in both marine and freshwater
environments.

                                                                                                               2|P a g e
Solomon Islands, women constitute most of the workforce in the processing sector of the
tuna fisheries supply chain. They also make up half of the community coastal fisheries
supply chain – both in their own fisheries and aquaculture activities, and as support for
men’s activities through providing food, trading and financial backup.

Gender analysis needs to be integrated into planning processes and policy development
to strengthen fisheries management policies in PICs. The perception that fisheries is a
male-dominated sector has led to a degree of ‘gender blindness’ in the fisheries sector. This
gender blindness means that the post-harvesting and trading activities of women are often
overlooked or neglected in fisheries development and management. As a result, training and
assistance programs are often targeted for men. There is also a lack of gender-disaggregated
data overall, and a knowledge gap about gendered retail and consumption patterns and the
differing constraints on men and women to more effective participation in markets. This lack
of data on women’s roles in fisheries perpetuates the existing assumption that women’s
interests are taken care of by men and that benefits are shared within households.

Solomon Islands’ fisheries sector makes a significant impact on the national economy.
Over 90 percent of the country’s territory is ocean, with an Exclusive Economic Zone of
more than 1.3 million square kilometers. This area includes tremendous fisheries resources,
such as tuna fisheries4, coastal fisheries and aquaculture essential for food security and
livelihoods for many communities. Women play a central role in development and resource
management outcomes in Solomon Islands, but as their role is considered informal, or not
recognized, they are often excluded in the planning and decision-making processes.
To begin to address this, the Solomon Islands Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources
(MFMR) developed a Gender Implementation Strategy (2011-2014) to take a more gender-
informed approach to coastal fisheries management and development.

III.     Study Methodology

This report uses the “fish chain” as a conceptual framework to analyze the gender
aspects of the fisheries supply chain. Fish chains can be considered the same as supply
chains, but they start with the ecosystem, and they integrate social and ecological dimensions
with economic considerations. The gender analysis conducted along selected Solomon
Islands fish chains took into account the multifaceted relationships between men and women
– as boat owners, processors, sellers, family members, community members and co-workers.
It considered the advantages or disadvantages of particular policy or practice for both men
and women.

The report focuses on two key fish chains – the industrial tuna fisheries and coastal fisheries
– which differ in terms of product, use, and processing. The study focused on elements of the
fish chains present in Solomon Islands: for the tuna fish chain the case study focused on
processing, for coastal fisheries it focused on production, harvesting, and marketing
elements.

The fieldwork was conducted in two short periods between September 2014 and February
2015 and included individual and group interviews, focus groups5, and non-participant
observation around ports and market areas in three provinces: Guadalcanal (which includes

4
  Tuna fisheries provided an estimated US$19 million in revenues to the Government in 2014.
5
  Approximately 60 people were interviewed in the fisheries and related sectors: Those interviewed included SolTuna
employees, focus groups of women in coastal fisheries, Noro market vendors, NGO workers, community participants,
government and donor representatives, police officers, shell-money producers. Interviewees were recruited via
‘convenience’ and ‘snowball’ sampling.

                                                                                                               3|P a g e
          Honiara), Western (which includes Noro and Munda), and Malaita (which includes Auki and
          the Langalanga Lagoon area).

          The primary data collection was qualitative only. However the research also drew on two
          relevant pieces of quantitative analysis which included work done by Pomeroy and Yang
          (2014) associated with the Hapi Fis6 project, and the SolTuna workforce profiles.7 The
          analysis of the coastal fish chain is more limited than that undertaken for the tuna fish chain.
          Coastal fisheries are widely diffused in Solomon Islands and have a broad array of products.
          These factors, coupled with limited time and resources for the research, allowed the team to
          undertake a broad analysis only of coastal fisheries.

          IV.       Study Findings

          Gender issues in the tuna fisheries chain

          The industrial tuna fish chain follows the fish from the water to the plate. It starts at the
          ecology and continues through production, processing, trading and consumption (see Figure
          1). The analysis focused on women’s roles in processing element of the tuna fish chain in
          Solomon Islands, which are discussed below. Gendered characteristics for all other elements
          of the fish chain are presented in Annex 1.

          Figure 1. Tuna fisheries chain

                                                                             Distribution
Ecology         Inputs        Harvesting       Logistics      Processing                      Importing         Retail          Consumption
                                                                             & Marketing




          The domestic tuna industry in Solomon Islands relies heavily on the processing element
          of the fish chain. Processing in Solomon Islands is represented by one large company,
          SolTuna, which operates at Noro in Western Province. SolTuna processes skipjack, albacore
          and yellowfin tuna mainly for export-grade canning, but it also processes for domestic
          consumption. SolTuna is majority owned by multinational tuna trading company Tri Marine,
          with just under half of the shareholdings owned by the Solomon Islands government.
          SolTuna now employs approximately 1,500 people – almost two-thirds of whom are women
          – and it anticipates adding 500 more jobs over the next five years.

          The impact of gender inequality on the processing element of the tuna fish chain

          The flow of benefits from the tuna sector in Solomon Islands has been constrained by
          two main gender-related factors: (i) turnover and absenteeism among women fish
          processing workers, which affects productivity rates and profitability, and (ii) sex
          segregation in work roles in this sector (i.e., the lack of women in supervisory and senior
          roles). Addressing these factors has the potential to improve gender equity, the wellbeing of
          the women’s families and communities, and the profitability of the industry.

                 Turnover and Absenteeism. Turnover at SolTuna in 2014 was 2 percent a month –
                 nearly a quarter of workforce turning over every year. As a result, the company had to
                 absorb higher operational costs, maintaining a roster of 300 workers more than needed

          6
            Hapi Fis is a project, financed initially by USAID and continued under the Mekem Strong Solomon Islands Fisheries
          project in MFMR, which resulted in the development of a mobile application and a web-based platform to report fish
          landings in Solomon Islands. More information at http://www.usaid.gov/pioneers-prize/hapi-fis-hapi-pipol
          7
            The most recent version of the Solomon Islands Household Income and Expenditure (HIES) statistics, which includes
          more gender disaggregated data than the previous HIES was not available at the time of this research.

                                                                                                                         4|P a g e
       (20 percent for every shift) to ensure 1,500 workers are available. This practice inflates
       the remuneration and overheads needed to adequately staff the fish processing lines.
       Factors contributing to absenteeism and turnover include: lack of childcare, limited
       transportation to and from work, no or poor quality housing, poor health, gender-based
       violence, and insufficient wage income, and family and community responsibilities. To
       address absenteeism, the company has implemented an incentive bonus system
       whereby workers can receive up to 35 percent of gross wages for full attendance for a
       month. Many of these challenges are also reported by managers of tuna factories in
       Papua New Guinea (PNG).

       Lack of childcare. In an effort to attract and retain women employees, SolTuna has a
       comparatively generous maternity leave policy granting 12 weeks maternity leave paid
       on a sliding scale according to length of employment. Former and current employees of
       SolTuna reported that the maternity leave was appreciated, but not a significant enough
       incentive for them to join the company or remain there. However, the lack of adequate
       childcare was mentioned as a key driver for staff turnover and a problem for SolTuna
       in losing experienced staff. This also presents a roadblock for women to progress
       within the company due to inability or irregularity of attendance.

       Housing Supply. The supply of housing for employees of SolTuna in Noro is
       inadequate. The company provides housing for managers, but much of the low-income
       housing that exists in Noro is in a poor state of repair, and residential services (water,
       power, sewerage, rubbish disposal) are inadequate. The reasons behind the housing
       problems are complex, involving customary land tenure and low government capacity
       to plan for and deliver services. This problem is also apparent in the tuna processing
       industry in Papua New Guinea and is consistent with the problem of peri-urban
       informal settlements across Melanesia.

       Housing Allocation. In addition to inadequate housing supply, it was found that the
       allocation of housing was gender-biased. For instance, SolTuna’s internal Housing
       Committee, which is responsible for allocating housing, selects candidates based on
       criteria such as seniority and years of service. As a result, the majority of housing is
       allocated to men in management roles, while the majority of workers are women in
       lower positions. To address this problem, the company reviewed the practices of the
       Housing Committee and appointed a woman as Chair and women and men from each
       Department were appointed as Committee members. In addition, gender equity was
       introduced as a new criterion for allocating housing. More housing and efforts to
       improve gender equity in distributing housing are needed, but filling the need for low-
       income housing in Noro is likely to take at least several years.

       Health. Data from SolTuna showed respiratory diseases (asthma, cold/flu, pneumonia)
       at the top of the list in terms of number of occurrences and cost for treatment, and
       second in causing numbers of absentee days. It is not clear whether these diseases are
       related to the working or living conditions. Other ailments included diarrhea, infections
       of the ear and eye, dental, and obstetric/gynecological problems. SolTuna has a
       company clinic with a registered nurse and two nurse aides. A doctor comes to the
       company to do health checks for new recruits (which is required for food safety
       reasons) and also does emergency assessments when there are accidents. The company
       provides medical trips to Gizo8 for workers who need to go to the hospital.


8
 Gizo is the capital of Western Province, which is situated approximately 1.5 to 2 hours boat ride away or approximately 15
minutes flight time.

                                                                                                                 5|P a g e
       Gender-based violence (GBV). GBV is prevalent throughout Solomon Islands. It is
       estimated 64 percent of women aged 15 to 49 have experienced physical or sexual
       violence from an intimate partner or someone related or known to them.9 Several
       interviewees and SolTuna managers raised violence against women by their partners as
       a problem for employees that contributes to increased absenteeism and low
       productivity. There is a unit within the company security department to deal with
       violence through counseling. SolTuna has also supported the multi-stakeholder
       initiative SafeNet, which aims to reduce violence against women in Noro by providing
       training on combating domestic violence. SolTuna allowed 20 staff to attend the
       training on paid time. SolTuna is also supporting the plan to establish a women’s
       refuge in Noro, at the time of writing they were awaiting land approval for the site for
       the house.

       Low wages. In the Pacific, formal employment at low pay is a less attractive option for
       women when compared to running their own informal micro-enterprise from home, on
       their own terms. Formal employment comes with challenges of transport, housing,
       childcare, and low career prospects. In the case of SolTuna, low wages were the most
       common reason given for women leaving processing work at SolTuna. The benefits
       provided by formal employment (e.g., wage security, paid maternity leave or long
       service leave) did not significantly influence their decision to stay in or leave formal
       work.

       Budgeting. Managers at SolTuna have observed income management, or budgeting, as
       an issue for their workers who have difficulty making their cash income last from one
       pay period to the next. The risk is that they then take days off to pursue other income-
       generating activities to fill this gap. A solution SolTuna management was considering
       was to shorten the pay period to weekly. SolTuna has an emplo yee’s credit union but,
       according to staff interviewed, it is not being utilized by workers as part of their
       personal budget management. Therefore, household budgeting and financial literacy
       training are potential interventions to consider.

A gender-segregated workforce in the tuna industry

Gender segregation exists in the tuna industry in Solomon Islands and in other PICs
with these industries. In Solomon Islands, the number of women in formal employment is
half the number of men. Women are over-represented in low-paid, low-skilled jobs and face
serious obstacles when they attempt to enter the labor market. Unequal sharing of household
responsibilities and other unpaid labor is also a major contributor to economic inequalities
between women and men. In the tuna fish chain, no women are employed as crew on
industrial tuna fishing vessels, although some women work as government observers on
vessels. At the other end of the spectrum, virtually no men work on fish processing lines and
in the SolTuna factory women outnumber men three to one. This sex segregation in
SolTuna’s workforce, which is also observed in the other much smaller fish processing
company in Solomon Islands, is part of entrenched gender norms in Solomon Islands society
and the broader international seafood sector.

Pay differentials between men and women results in women clustering around the
lower end of the pay scale both in waged labor and salaried professional work. This
wage differential between men and women is similar across Solomon Islands, with women

9
  Ministry of Women, Youth Children and Family Affairs. Solomon Islands Family Health and Safety Study: A study on
violence against women, 2009.


                                                                                                            6|P a g e
earning approximately 8 percent less than men. This difference results from differential pay
for similar work and over-representation of men in well-paid jobs.10 SolTuna human
resources data for 2014 show that the higher paid salaried staff category in
Production/Cannery Department included 25 men and only seven women, though there were
nearly three times as many women as men in this department. Unskilled or low skilled labor
(e.g., fish cleaning) is female-dominated and in the lower band of worker remuneration,
while male-dominated roles such as trades, driver, and forklift operator are categorized in the
higher wage band.

In 2014, management of SolTuna included two women and 11 men. At the deputy
manager level all nine were men. In the salaried staff category – which receives higher pay,
better access to housing, and benefits such as pre-paid phones – the ratio of men to women
was 78:19. The 19 women staff were in Production/Cannery, Quality Control, Human
Resources, Administration and Finance, and not in the conventionally male work areas of
Engineering or IT. There is an opportunity for women to move into a wider range of roles
within SolTuna, as the management team wants to have more women in non-conventional
roles (e.g., technical areas including welding, mechanics, excavator operating, and
plumbing).

Diversifying the workforce at SolTuna will be difficult, despite management
commitment. Various initiatives by SolTuna to empower women at a workplace, like
housing and health care, have important but limited benefits due to gender perceptions in
Solomon Islands in general. Entrenched gender norms around family responsibility, the kinds
of work suitable for women, and gender-based violence constitute a real constraint to fully
addressing gender issues within the company.

The ‘bottleneck’ for women to move from low paid unskilled work through to the skilled,
supervisory and management-level positions results from lower levels of education, as well
as fewer training and promotional opportunities available to them in the workplace (in
comparison to those offered to men). This is a result of sociocultural norms that enable men
to hold positions of authority and restrict women from attaining leadership or management
roles. Women thus need to be mentored to be able to take on leadership roles within the
company. This bottleneck could be addressed in part through the creation of women-only
consultative groups within the company as a way to empower women to speak up about their
issues and concerns.

The impact of tuna processing on gender equality

The capacity for fish processing alone to deliver on gender equality is limited. The
Solomon Islands government policy is to encourage growth in onshore tuna processing, as it
is perceived to bring major benefits through employment. Notwithstanding government
efforts to harness international investment in tuna processing, the capacity of the tuna
processing industry alone to deliver social and economic outcomes for women is limited by
several factors.

A major factor is competition and cost structures within the global tuna industry.
Processing tuna for canning is a high-volume, low-margin business. Therefore increases in
costs to improve incomes and conditions for workers are not always easy to accommodate.
Although many cannery operations in the Pacific are not profitable, the guaranteed access to
fish is factored into the decision-making process in this industry. Lastly, external factors such

10
  Increasing the Participation of Women Entrepreneurs in the Solomon Islands Aid Economy. Haque and Greig, World
Bank. 2011.

                                                                                                         7|P a g e
as existing gender norms, gender-based violence and stereotyping in work roles constitute a
real constraint to fully deliver on gender equality at work. These factors exist across all PICs.

Transactional sex and sexual violence seem to be related to the industrial tuna fisheries,
but more evidence is needed. Girls and young women have been visiting foreign fishing
vessels in harbors for commercial sex around the Pacific, including Solomon Islands, since at
least the 1970s. In some cases the transaction involves women being given fish, which they
then sell in local markets.

Interviews with community leaders and people involved with the industry in Noro and
anecdotal evidence indicates that there has long been a phenomenon of “women going on the
boats”, which may include explicit sex work, but also includes women seeking to “party”
with alcohol and to meet men who have cash to spend.11 Violence against women and the
prevalence of sexually transmitted infections (STIs) may well be exacerbated by these
activities, and women’s vulnerability to negative impacts is likely to be increased with
limited options for earning cash.

The police in Noro aim to address the issue through their ongoing awareness and training
activities targeting young women and girls, as well as parents. More data is needed to
understand the relationship between the transactional sex and the tuna industry.

The tuna industry also has gender-specific impacts around industrial ports and
factories in Solomon Islands. The masculine culture of seafarers, not limited to the tuna
sector, has norms of “partying” when ashore, involving sex (including transactional sex) and
alcohol. Factories also attract people seeking work, many of whom are experiencing for the
first time living out of the cultural context of the village, which can result in unrestrained
behavior in terms of sexual relations, alcohol consumption and violence.

Problems arising from social change and tensions are exacerbated by a lack of infrastructure
and services in Noro and Honiara, low incomes and unemployment, and urban/peri-urban
migration. The intersection between customary tenure, commercial activity and labor
migration has not been well governed, giving rise to further sources of conflict including
insecure tenure for housing.

Women bear the brunt of many of these issues, for example, with increased risk of violence
and STIs. There is potential to improve the lives of women and their families involved in the
industrial tuna fish chain by addressing the lack of infrastructure and services in port and
factory towns, including services promoting health, reducing violence against women, and
finding socially acceptable solutions for accommodating labor migration.

Gender stereotyping in work roles is strong, and gender-based violence rates are high.
Therefore, it could be expected that discrimination and/or harassment occurs in workplaces.
SolTuna has long had a policy of equal pay for the same work, even though this has not been
legally required, in part because buyer companies have required a certain level of equal
opportunity to be demonstrated.

A deeper investigation is needed for a thorough understanding of
discrimination/harassment of women in the industrial tuna fish chain. Such an
investigation should also include a review of the current legislative framework for equal


11
 Report of the Special Rapporteur on the violence against women. Mission to Solomon Islands. Manjoo., 2012. United
Nations.

                                                                                                            8|P a g e
          employment opportunities and protection from discrimination and sex-based harassment in
          the workplace, and of available services and training in Solomon Islands in this area.

          Gender issues in the coastal fisheries chain

          The coastal fish chain, like the tuna fish chain, starts with ecology and continues
          through harvesting, processing, marketing, export and consumption (see Figure 2).
          However, in contrast to tuna fisheries, the data and information on coastal fisheries is more
          difficult to obtain due to their diffuse and non-homogeneous nature. In addition the limited
          resources available for the research did not enable fieldwork to be conducted with those
          actually fishing. Instead, fieldwork was limited to interviewing fish sellers at the markets and
          in some communities. Therefore, further detailed analyses on the coastal fish chain is
          recommended, and should be narrowed to selected products to better understand specific
          coastal fish chains such as bêche-de-mer.

          Figure 2. Coastal fisheries chain
                                    Production &                        Consolidation
Ecology              Inputs                          Manufacturing                        Transport         Marketing        Consumption
                                     Harvesting                          of products




          The report analyzes the production and harvesting, manufacturing, and marketing
          elements of selected coastal fish chain. Gendered characteristics of all other elements of the
          coastal fish chain are presented in Annex 2.

          General assumptions about gender roles in coastal fisheries are difficult to make, as the
          patterns for each community and coastal fish products need to be identified
          individually. In the Pacific region, one study has estimated that women’s small-scale
          fisheries make up 56 percent of total estimated small-scale fishery catches, contrasting
          sharply with the conventional perception that women play a minor role in capture fisheries.
          This has serious implications for fisheries management and development, as well as food
          security.12

          Women in Solomon Islands do a great deal of fishing, taking well over half of the
          subsistence catch, and increasingly fish to generate income through market activities.
          Women’s fishing is crucial for a coastal community’s food security and increasingly for cash
          incomes. This is similar to the situation in agriculture in PNG where men predominate in
          cash crop production and women in subsistence production. Women also provide extensive
          labor inputs for cash production, but men control the income from cash crops.

          Internationally, women have largely been excluded from coastal resource decision-
          making, and from coastal fisheries development activities. Community-Based Resource
          Management (CBRM) is seen as key to the sustainable development of coastal fisheries in
          the Pacific, however very few places have an understanding of the gender-inclusive resource
          management. Solomon Islands is ahead of the curve due to the “gender transformative”
          coastal resource work done by WorldFish since 2011.

          Coastal fisheries were examined in terms of the elements in the fish supply chain for
          production and harvesting and marketing along three main product groupings: (i) bêche-de-
          mer; (ii) trochus, greensnail, pearl oysters, and shell money; and (iii) aquarium trade, deep-
          water snapper and seaweed production.


          12
               Women and fisheries: Contribution to food security and local economies. Marine Policy, Harper et al., 2013.

                                                                                                                              9|P a g e
Production and Harvesting

Bêche-de-mer (sea cucumbers) exports are consistently one of Solomon Islands’ high export-
earning marine commodities after tuna, earning SBD33 million in 2013 (increasing from
SBD10 million in 1992). Bêche-de-mer are easily overfished due to their high financial value
in Asian markets and their long growth period. To make bêche-de-mer fisheries sustainable,
strong support from the government and other stakeholders is needed for monitoring,
surveillance and enforcement, as well as awareness raising and providing alternative income
opportunities during closed seasons.

Bêche-de-mer are one of the coastal fisheries activities important to women, and one in
which women’s involvement could potentially be enhanced. However, the literature on
bêche-de-mer is overwhelmingly gender blind, with little written on the role of women in
this fishery. Interviews conducted during this research, indicated that women are usually
heavily involved with bêche-de-mer fisheries – either fishing themselves or supporting men’s
fishing activities through the provision of food for fishing parties, and participating in post-
harvest processing.

Increasing the involvement of women in this fish chain may help to improve effective and
sustainable management of this resource. However to understand how to effectively integrate
women into this fishery information on gender relations in the bêche-de-mer chain needs to
be strengthened. A qualitative investigation of the gender relations involved in fishing,
processing and trading bêche-de-mer, along with a livelihoods analysis in one or more
communities heavily reliant on this fishery is important to help communities better manage
this resource and move beyond export bans to more effective resource management.

Trochus, greensnail, pearl oysters and the range of shells used in customary money
have also for many decades been successful in generating cash income for Solomon Islands
coastal communities. Like bêche-de-mer they are high-value, small, light, shelf-stable
products that suit the economic, geographic and cultural contexts of remote coastal
communities. Trochus buttons have been partially manufactured domestically, adding value
before export. However, all three of these products have been overfished. Export bans and
size limits for exports have been implemented, but a more comprehensive spread of
consultatively established measures need to be put in place to enable sustainable
development of these fisheries. These fisheries also produce the shells that are incorporated
into handicrafts and ‘shell money’13 that are traditionally made and marketed by women,
therefore these fish chains are as likely as bêche-de-mer to be important livelihood
opportunities for women.

Aquarium trade, deep-water snapper and seaweed production may also present income
opportunities for women in Solomon Islands. Reports show that women and men have been
involved in wild harvest and cultured production for the aquarium trade and in 2005 the
annual turnover was SBD5 million, with profit for exporters estimated to be SBD1.8
million.14 The aquarium trade has had mixed success in Solomon Islands, its viability and
gender impacts would need to be examined further. A gender analysis of the implications of
deep-water snapper should be undertaken to ascertain the level to which women will be
needed to support the fishery. For example, opportunities for women may exist in the
marketing elements of the supply chain. Seaweed farming is not suitable in all areas of

13
   Traditionally, shell money is used for bride price and traditional ceremonies, but in the modern market, these crafts are
also commercialized as jewelry and souvenirs.
14
   Financial Assessment of the Marine Trade of Corals in Solomon Islands. Suva: Foundation of the People the South
Pacific International, South Pacific Regional Environment Programme. Lal and Kinch., 2005.

                                                                                                                    10 | P a g e
Solomon Islands and its attractiveness depends on international prices among other things.15
It has been introduced as an alternative source of income to bêche-de-mer in some
communities. The gender dimensions of this product should be examined to better
understand the role women play and if it assists to minimize impacts of closed bêche-de-mer
seasons.

Manufacturing of Shell Money and Jewelry

Shell money is not a highly profitable way to earn a living. The profits in shell money
(estimated at 1SBD per hour of labor input) are small due to the costs women incur while
trying to sell their product. As women primarily sell the shell money in Honiara, they incur
costs such as boat fare to and from Malaita Province to Honiara in Guadalcanal Province;
daily transport to the market; buying food while staying with relatives in town; daily market
fees; etc. Buying more shells for future production is also part of their cost structure. The
majority of the shell money and handicrafts come from the Langalanga Lagoon area in
Malaita Province, however, due to the degradation of coastal habitat in the Lagoon there are
fewer resources to support this as an income-generating activity for the growing population.

The declining supply of shells in the Langalanga Lagoon needs to be addressed for both
economic and environmental reasons. Further analysis into the shell supply chain and
profitability could be considered as a way to increase income-generating opportunities for
women, and reduce further environmental damage. For example, fishers in Western and
Isabel Provinces are currently supplying shells for the production of shell money and
handicrafts in Malaita. This spreads income-earning opportunities but the shell fisheries must
be sustainably managed to avoid also spreading resource depletion.

Marketing

Economic returns from marketing fish generates better income than processing work at
SolTuna. However fish vendors are mostly men. A survey associated with the Hapi Fis
project that collected questionnaire data from 100 vendors in four Honiara markets in 2012
found that 76 percent of fish vendors were men. There are more men than women involved
in fresh fish sales, but women (usually family members of fishermen) dominate the sale of
salt fish and selling to restaurant owners. In the Honiara Central Market, a new system of
intermediaries has emerged whereby specialist fish vendors buy through fish receivers. There
is not yet any data on the gendered composition of this group.

Market trading work was also reported to be easier and more flexible work for women to
combine with childrearing duties than formal paid work at a plant. It was reported that
income from market trading was enough to pay rent, school fees and food bills. In order to
better support the marketing element of the fish chain, more gender disaggregated
information is needed on net incomes and how this livelihood works in balance with people’s
life situations, the kinds of relationships that enable and constrain the business, and the
gendered aspects of this element.

The management system of the markets adds a challenge for women. Marketplace
locations are overcrowded, have inadequate infrastructure, unsanitary and unsafe conditions,
including threatening or demeaning social interactions which present as problems for women
vendors. Although women comprise the majority of traders in markets, there are few women

15
  Solomon Islands Diagnostic Trade Integration Study. Honiara, Solomon Islands: Solomon Islands Government
Department of Trade Industry and Investment, Implementing Agency: United Nations Development Programme. Gay,
(Ed.), 2009.


                                                                                                  11 | P a g e
in management. A recent study16 found that market systems are corrupt, dysfunctional, and
contain discriminatory policies. There is a need for gender-responsive, effective and
accountable local government and market management. Collaborative action by vendors can
be a positive force for improving market conditions. This may be in the form of inclusive,
effective representative marketplace groups. Women’s collective action groups can enable
women to maintain control over increased income they earn, minimize costs and labor
inputs, and facilitate transportation though pooling funds and labor.

Poor financial literacy and a lack of market information inhibit women’s ability to get
the best value for their product and the best outcomes from their earnings. Financial
training and business management has been identified by vendors as useful for women to
manage their budgets and the daily operations of their business, including wages for their
casual workers and investing income back into the business. This supports the finding of
Honiara-based women entrepreneurs interviewed in 201017 who cited basic financial literacy
and business sense as a constraining skills gap by women, whereas men considered the
primary gap to be in access to training in more technical areas. A lack of financial services,
namely savings facilities and credit for market vendors and to support production, is a
problem for women and men. The procedures required to open savings accounts are difficult
for a large portion of the population who do not have identification documentation. In
addition, women with limited literacy and who lack confidence dealing with public
institutions are even less able to open savings accounts.

There are some current development programs focused on providing financial services
for women market vendors in Solomon Islands. The International Finance Corporation18
is working with the ANZ Bank and Bank of South Pacific to make financial services more
accessible via mobile banking and financial literacy training, and aim to include women as
half of the participants in these initiatives. The UN Women Markets for Change (M4C)
project is working with the Honiara Central Market and the Auki market in Malaita Province
to address many of the issues noted above. The project encompasses improving market
facilities (including sanitation), creating market vendors associations, capacity development
including training, access for people with disabilities, access to organized savings schemes,
improving food quality and safety standards (including food storage), revising market
regulations, and addressing security issues.

One of the key local partnership organizations is the Solomon Islands Women in Business
Association (SIWIBA) established in 2005. One of SIWIBA’s main activities is monthly
‘mere markets’ in Honiara selling mainly handicrafts. The market vendors association started
in 2014 under the M4C project and includes women selling fresh and cooked fish, but at the
time of fieldwork this project was too new to yet have identifiable positive impacts.

V.       Data and Information Gaps

The analysis has highlighted a number of gender-specific issues related to the
management of tuna and coastal fisheries in Solomon Islands. However during the
research it became evident that limited information and robust data exists on both of these
fish chains, but more so in the case of the coastal fish chain. The gender disaggregated HIES

16
   DFAT., 2014. Pacific Women Shaping Pacific Development. Solomon Islands Country Plan Summary. Retrieved from
http://www.pacificwomen.org/wp-content/uploads/Solomon-Islands-Country-Plan- Summary3 .pdf
17
   Increasing the Participation of Women Entrepreneurs in the Solomon Islands Aid Economy. Haque and Greig, World
Bank. 2011.
18
   The International Finance Corporation, a member of the World Bank Group, is the largest global development institution
focused exclusively on the private sector in developing countries.

                                                                                                             12 | P a g e
may help fill some of the data gaps but at the time of this research it had not yet been
released. The report lists below some of the key data gaps that exist.

Overall data gaps

     Female participation (%) in the fisheries sector and ratio of men to women in the sector
      (this includes both formal (private and public) and informal sectors as main and
      secondary activities).
     Aggregated individual income statistics for those in the formal sector.
     Household income statistics for those in the informal sector.
     The correlation of income level and educational attainment of women participating in
      fisheries.
     Women’s access to micro-credit facilities.
     Income, expenditure and consumption profiles of households with female fishers/
      fisheries employees at the household level.

Data gaps in tuna fish chain

     Proportion of men and women in each part of the industrial tuna supply chain. For
      example fishing for bait; owning boats; working as support staff for fishing in store
      control, administration and office work; working in government departments; and
      related businesses in seafood export, transport and retail; and those employed in
      processing activities.
     Workforce profile of employees of large and small companies involved in processing
      and analysis of this information as compared to other similar countries.
     Data on health and housing conditions of SolTuna employees.
     A thorough understanding of workplace discrimination/harassment in the industrial
      tuna fish chain. Such an investigation should include a review of the current legislative
      framework for equal employment opportunities and protection from discrimination and
      sex-based harassment in the workplace, and of available services and training in
      Solomon Islands in this area.
     Inventory of activities aimed at addressing gender dimensions in tuna fisheries and
      evaluation on their effectiveness and/or how they could be improved.

Data gaps in coastal fish chain

     The degree to which women have access to transport to the markets. For example,
      anecdotally it is thought that men tend to control the transportation, while women are
      involved in seafood retailing.
     Income generated from selling coastal fish products and uses of this income,
      disaggregated by men and women.
     Expenses generated from coastal fisheries – how does this differ for women and men?
     Impact of declining fisheries and/or closed seasons on communities and women’s
      livelihoods.
     Mapping of coastal fish chains for all coastal fisheries products across Solomon
      Islands.

VI.    Recommendations

Specific recommendations and potential areas for action in the tuna industry and in coastal
fisheries are presented below to address some of the data gaps relating to the social and

                                                                                           13 | P a g e
economic opportunities and constraints for women in the fisheries sector in Solomon Islands
to help move to more gender-informed policy directions and investments.

Overall, a comprehensive and integrated approach should be taken to fill some of the data
and information gaps that exist, particularly for coastal fisheries. This should also be closely
aligned with MFMR’s gender strategy.

Table 1 – Tuna Industry
Recommendation                       Areas for Action
SolTuna should be supported to        Assess options to strengthen women’ financial
continue its efforts to improve         literacy to build their capacity to manage income
gender equity and remove                and household budgets
barriers, and measure                 Assess options for reducing absenteeism such as
effectiveness of programs and           improved childcare, housing opportunities and
initiatives.                            regular access to transport for low income families
                                      Develop training and mentoring opportunities for
                                        women to move into more senior or non-traditional
                                        women roles
                                      Work closely with other stakeholders in Noro to
                                        support ongoing initiatives such as SafeNet,
                                        improving infrastructure and/or services and
                                        creating a safe community
                                      Evaluate effectiveness of current initiatives
                                      Company awareness campaign to support
                                        organisational and behaviour change
                                      Conduct a survey of women in industry to profile
                                        them (educational attainment, health, income,
                                        housing situation, etc.) and get feedback on gender
                                        mainstreaming initiatives proposed
Strengthen the data and               Analyse the HIES and strengthen the information
information about tuna fisheries        about formal sector and fisheries sector
industry                                employment trends
                                      Profile the workforce of small and large scale
                                        operators in the Solomon Islands
                                      Undertake comparative analysis against similar
                                        countries such as PNG
                                      Compile gender disaggregated data on all tuna
                                        fishery companies in Solomon Islands – including
                                        the smaller operators and compare against large and
                                        small operators for commonalities/differences
Understand the social and             Undertake household and village surveys for social
economic impacts and benefits of        and economic impact assessment looking at the
processing plants on communities        impacts and benefits of SolTuna in the immediate
in Solomon Islands                      and surrounding areas




                                                                                        14 | P a g e
Table 2 – Coastal Fisheries
Recommendation                      Area for Action
Support the implementation of        Design more effective coastal fisheries
MFMR Gender Strategy                   management and development through engaging
                                       more effectively with communities, including the
                                       gender and intersectional issues relevant to coastal
                                       resource use, World Bank financing under the
                                       PROP presents an opportunity for MFMR to take
                                       the lead in coordinating this activity
Improve data collection and          Livelihood and market surveys
analysis on gendered issues along    An analysis of MFMR Hapi Fis market data
fishery supply chains and develop      collection system to determine how it may be
a single repository, including:        improved or complemented to reflect/capture
                                       gender aspects
                                     In-depth gender analysis (quantitative and
                                       qualitative) on a few select coastal fishery chain
                                     Identify income generating opportunities and
                                       micro-credit facilities for women
                                     Review the HIES analysis for relevant information
                                       and data on coastal fisheries
Support improvements to              Support or expand upon the Markets for Change
opportunities and conditions for       (M4C) project, including improved access to
women vendors at markets               financial/microcredit services for market vendors,
                                       potentially working with other stakeholders such as
                                       IFC
Undertake a pilot project to         Research into gender dimension of fisheries in
develop a participatory model for      which women are already heavily involved in or
integrated coastal zone                potential markets, including: bêche-de-mer, shells
community-based resource               for export, deep-water snapper, seaweed farming
planning and management in 2-3         and shell money
locations, to be scaled out in       Research mechanisms or models to enable
future                                 community participatory planning for integrated
                                       resource management
                                     Build on existing experience and analysis of ways
                                       to improve women’s participation in resource use
                                       decision-making




                                                                                    15 | P a g e
           Annex 1: Industrial Tuna Fish Chain – Key Gendered Characteristics and Issues
           *GDL – gendered division of labor. X = predominantly/exclusively male; Y = predominantly/exclusively female; Z = shared/joint tasks
Chain            Actors                     Activities                GDL* Overarching issues                             Gender-based constraints                         Gender-based opportunities
elements
                     Oceanic ecosystems      Log fish catches       X        Skipjack stocks good, some              Tuna fisheries science & resource management       Improve women’s access to
Ecology              Fishing companies       Monitor & analyse                problems with yellowfin & bigeye         male dominated                                      education & training
                     MFMR                     catches relative to              stocks                                  Gender differences in education and training       Expand # & capacities of
                     WCPFC                    stocks                                                                   Gender norms: ‘fishing is a man’s world’            women in resource science &
                     SPC Oceanic             Regulate fisheries                                                                                                            management
                      Fisheries Program
                     Farmers around          Supply fresh food      Z         Local supply sometimes                  Unknown, see work on gender in agricultural       Facilitate farmers and produce
Inputs                Noro                     for canteen &                     inadequate, requiring use of             development in Solomon Islands                     traders to increase supply
                     Salt fish traders in     fishing vessels                   imported food
                      ports
                     Formal food
                      provisioning
                      businesses
                     Chandlers               Supply fishing         Z, X    Lack of entrepreneurial activity to     Women face gender-specific barriers to business     Investigate potential service &
                     Fishing vessel           gear, vessels, other            service and supply fishing &             development, including credit                        supply businesses (uniforms,
                      manufacturers            materials                       processing                              Interventions need to take into account risks of     cleaning, gardening, etc.)
                     Repair &                Repair &                                                                 violence & women’s existing work burdens            Train & recruit women for
                      maintenance              maintenance                                                                                                                   non-typical technical roles
                      services                 vessels & gear,
                     Sundry supply            processing factory
                      businesses
                     SolTuna
                      Engineering
                      Department
                     Shops, eateries,        Services for           Z, Y    Culture of ‘partying’ with sex and      Male culture among seafarers, including             Develop services to encourage
Inputs                bars, casinos in         visiting fishing                alcohol among male seafarers             substance abuse, sex & risk taking                   socially desirable behaviour
                      Noro & Honiara           crew                           Lack of non-party activities for        Inadequate services for sexual health and            from seafarers
                                                                               seafarers                                violence against women                              Improve services for sexual
                                                                              No affordable accommodation for         Lack of cash-earning opportunities for women         health and preventing violence
                                                                               seafarers away from vessels                                                                   against women
                                                                                                                                                                            Improve women’s cash-
                                                                                                                                                                             earning opportunities
                   SolTuna                   Management &           X       Management, professional and            Societal gender norms discourage women from         Facilitate learning process of
                                               maintenance of                  supervisory roles dominated by men       seeking leadership roles                             how to include women in
                                               factory & fishing                                                       Gender differences in education and training         senior roles
                                               fleet                                                                    opportunities                                       Improve childcare services in
                                                                                                                       Lack of childcare                                    Noro
                   Tri Marine                Capital                Z       NA                                      NA                                                   NA
                    International
                   Commercial banks
                   IFC
                  National Fisheries    Fishing                X          Limited pool of skilled &              Industrial tuna fishing crews exclusively male            Improve women’s access to
Harvesting         Development                                               experienced human resources in         Management of fishing male dominated                       education & training
                   (NFD)                                                     Solomon Islands for industrial         Gender differences in access to relevant                  Expand # & capacities of
                  Albacore longline                                         fishing                                 education & training                                       women in fishing management
                   vessels, many                                                                                    Gender norms: ‘fishing is a man’s world’                   & technical roles
                   based in Fiji
Logistics tuna    SolTuna               Ensuring supplies               Complex international trading work      Unknown, but may be similar as for managing            Expand # & capacities of
supply            NFD                    of required                      requiring extensive networks of          fishing                                                 women in tuna trading
                  Tri Marine             quantities &                     contacts & capital
                   International          qualities of fish
                                          from National
                                          Fisheries
                                          Development (NFD
                                          & longline vessels
                  SSI                   Processing fresh       Y        Declining yellowfin & bigeye stocks     Gender stereotyping of roles: processing & office      Expand # women in technical
Processing                                 fish for airfreight            Warm equatorial waters do not            administration for women, technical &                   & management positions
                                                                           produce highest value sashimi            management for men
                  SolTuna               Thawing,               Z                                                 Women and men work in these areas, but men                 Increase # & capacities of
                                          butchering &                                                              dominate in senior ranks                                    women in senior ranks
                                          cooking fish for
                                          loining/canning
                                         Packing & retort
                  SolTuna               Cleaning skin and      Y           High rates of absenteeism &            Women face gender-specific difficulties                   Investigate ways to better
                                          bones from fish to                  turnover                                continuing paid employment:                                manage income
                                          prepare it for                     Difficulties making income last        Lack of childcare for low-income families;                Improve childcare options
                                          canning                             from one pay period to the next        Violence from partners related to work;                   Improve housing
                                                                             Inadequate low-income housing          Responsibility for food provision if pay runs out         Improve domestic violence
                                                                             Indications of health problems         Women underrepresented in senior ranks                     services
                                                                              among processing workers & their       Housing allocation has been biased against                Increase # women in senior
                                                                              children                                women                                                      ranks
                                                                                                                                                                                Continue work addressing
                                                                                                                                                                                 gender bias in housing
                                                                                                                                                                                 allocation
                  SolTuna               Quality control        Z        Difficulties having workers with low    Women comparatively well represented in                   Maintain women’s
                                                                           levels of schooling understand food      technical & management roles                               opportunities for skilled roles
                                                                           safety principles                                                                                  Improve processing workers’
                                                                                                                                                                               literacy
Chain          Actors                  Activities                 GDL   Overarching issues                        Gender-based constraints                             Gender-based opportunities
elements
                SolTuna                Arranging transport      Z      Complex international trading work       Unknown, possibly similar to managing fishing       Investigate increasing #
Distribution                             & importation                    requiring extensive networks of                                                                women?
& marketing                              logistics, according             contacts & capital
                                         to requirements of
                                         buyers
                Tri Marine             As above                        As above                                 As above                                            As above
                 International
                Salt fish buyers       Liaise fishing crews     X      Food safety - Fish may sit in the hot    Possible transactional sex for fish                 Support UN Women M4C
                                        barter/buy fish                  sun for hours before being collected     Affordable product for women entrepreneurs but       initiatives for women salt fish
                                         from fishing vessels                                                       inconsistent supply which can impact livelihoods     sellers
                                        transport fish from
                                         fishing vessels to
                                         markets
                                        retail fish or sell to
                                         other sellers
Importing       European canned         NA                       Z      NA                                       NA                                                   NA
                 tuna companies
                Salt fish vendors      Buy from buyers at       Y      General problems with working            General issues for women in market work i.e. -        Consult women vendors
Retail                                   wharf                            conditions in markets (safety,            safety concerns                                       Support UN Women M4C
                                        Sell raw at Central              sanitation, water supply, comfort,                                                               initiatives for women salt fish
                                         Market, or                       storage for goods, etc.)                                                                         sellers
                                        Take home, cook,                Ice not used for preservation
                                         bring back to                   Unclean water used to keep fish
                                         markets to sell                  looking fresh

                Canned tuna             NA                       Z       NA                                      NA                                                   NA
Consumption      customers - in
                 Europe, Solomon
                 Islands
                Salt fish customers    Customers buy raw        Z      Food safety issues                       Unknown                                             Consult women improvements
                                         fish (markets) or               Reluctance on the part of MFMR or                                                              supply chain & distribution re
                                         cooked fish                      the Honiara Central Market to                                                                  food safety
                                         (eateries - ‘kai bar’)           formalize the salt fish trade
           Annex 2: Coastal Fisheries and Aquaculture Fish Chain – Key Gendered Characteristics and Issues
           *GDL – gendered division of labor. X = predominantly/exclusively male; Y = predominantly/exclusively female; Z = shared/joint tasks
Chain            Actors                     Activities                 GDL Overarching issues                             Gender-based constraints                         Gender-based opportunities
elements                                                               *
Ecology           Resource-owning           CBRM                     X        Reef areas depleted in some areas          Women not included in CBRM                     Improve women’s access to
                     communities             Export bans                       To date low involvement of                 Coastal fisheries management male dominated     education & training
                  Government                Hapi Fis data                        government in coastal fisheries          Gender differences in education & training     Expand # & capacities of
                  Conservation                 collection                         management                               Gender norms: ‘fishing is a man’s world’        women in planned increase in
                     NGOs                                                       Illegal trade of bêche-de-mer                                                               government management of
                                                                                   undermining management efforts                                                            coastal fisheries
                                                                                Hapi Fis data not capturing all                                                            Increase Hapi Fis data
                                                                                   coastal fisheries (e.g., local pelagic                                                    collection to gleaned products
                                                                                   & gleaned crustaceans/shellfish)                                                         Gender disaggregate Hapi Fis
                                                                                No data collection in villages                                                              data & revise questions to
                                                                                                                                                                             gather data relevant for
                                                                                                                                                                             gender analysis
                                                                                                                                                                            Scale out WorldFish lessons
                                                                                                                                                                             learned to improve women’s
                                                                                                                                                                             inclusion/participation in
                                                                                                                                                                             CBRM
Inputs             Suppliers of            Supply to fishers &     NA          NA                                        NA                                                NA
                    fishing vessels &        gleaners
                    gear                    Supply to shell
                   Suppliers thread         money
                    & tools for shell        manufacturers
                    money
Production &       Fishers                   Gleaning from         Z          bêche-de-mer & shells stocks             Women’s fishing not assisted in development      Scale out lessons learned in
harvesting         Gleaners                   intertidal zone                   depleted                                  projects                                          AAS to improve women’s
                   Divers                    Fishing from shore               Some reef areas depleted of food         Women excluded from decision making about         inclusion/participation in
                                               or boat                           fish                                      resource use                                      fisheries development
                                              Diving for shells,               High transport costs & lack of ice                                                          activities & decision making
                                               bêche-de-mer,                     make fishing for fresh fish markets
                                               spear fishing                     unviable in many areas
                                              Cultivating corals,
                                               clams for
                                               aquarium trade
                   Aquaculturists            Cultivating tilapia   Z          Aquarium trade limited viability         Unknown                                          Support WorldFish AAS
                                               for village food                 Seaweed production high labor &                                                             gender-transformative work
                                              Cultivating                       low profit                                                                                  in Malaita, scale out
                                               seaweed for                                                                                                                  Investigate opportunities
                                               export                                                                                                                        regarding seaweed
Chain           Actors                Activities                GDL   Overarching issues                        Gender-based constraints                            Gender-based opportunities
elements
Manufacture      Shell money            Turn shells into      Y         Shell stocks depleted                   Lack of water supply some villages meaning       Improve village livelihoods
                  makers,                 beads                           Shell money is a low-income              women must paddle long distances for water        through gender-sensitive ICZM
                  Langalanga             Make strings of                  activity                                 daily                                             CBRM (interlinked problems of
                  Lagoon                  beads                           Langalanga Lagoon ecosystem             Lack of modern energy for cooking means           resource depletion, livelihoods,
                                         Combine strings                  already depleted, increasing             women cut mangroves                               sanitation, water, energy, food
                                          into finished                    population pressure                     Lack of food gardens for some villages            supplies)
                                          products (many                  Lack of alternative livelihoods          (distance for others) puts heavy burden on       Investigate improvements to
                                          varieties)                                                                women                                             marketing arrangements
                                         Families use own                                                                                                           Increased opportunity for
                                          labor                                                                                                                       entrepreneurial women to do
                                         Larger scale                                                                                                                larger scale manufacturing
                                          operators pay
                                          others to make for
                                          them
Consolidation    Fish receivers in      Coordinate fishers    Z      Unreliability of transport               Unknown                                            Investigate opportunities for
of products       provinces               to fill eskies sent          Unavailability of ice                                                                         entrepreneurial women to
                                          by vendors from              Communication by phone or radio                                                               operate as fish receivers
                                          Honiara
                 Langalanga             Barter store goods    Z      A way to purchase store goods, but       Women’s need for cash & store goods due to         Improve village livelihoods
                  village trade           for shells or                 makers income less                        lack of gardens, fishery resources & energy for     through gender-sensitive ICZM
                  stores                  strings                                                                 cooking                                             CBRM
                                         Finish
                                          manufacturing
                 Buyers of bêche-        NA                    ?     NA                                            NA                                               Investigate opportunities for
                  de-mer, shells,                                                                                                                                     businesswomen in exports
                  aquarium
                  products, etc.
Transport        Inter-island           Send fish from        Z         High cost of transport/fuel             Women lack confidence dealing with               Investigate opportunities for
                  shipping                Provinces to                    Access to transport difficult from       outsiders                                         women in transport businesses
                  services                Honiara by ship                  many areas                              Women less mobile
                 Public road            Send fish from                  Logistics chain problems cause          Transports businesses dominated by men?
                  transport               other parts                      high wastage
                 Private small           Guadalcanal &                   Risk losing shipments due to
                  boats                   nearby islands to                shipping delays/breakdown
                                          Honiara                         Ice availability limited
                                         Get fish to urban
                                          markets around
                                          the country
Key elements     Actors                  Activities                GDL   Overarching issues                          Gender-based constraints                             Gender-based opportunities
of the chain
Marketing         Fish vendors           Selling raw fish in     X&       Unhygienic market conditions               Women’s greater risk of violence/harassment       Support UN Women M4C
                                           municipal markets       Z         (lack of toilets & clean water,             in robbery or family taking cash                   initiatives for women fresh and
                                           around the country                wooden benches, dogs roaming)              Shell money: difficult for women & families to     cooked seafood sellers
                                          Selling cooked fish –            Limited banking facilities                  spend long periods Honiara to sell
                                           fish & chips –                   Lack of facilities (storage, seating,
                                           various traditional               shelter from sun & rain, quality of
                                           styles of cooking                 flooring)
                                                                            Lack of coordination among
                                                                             vendors to push for improvement
                                          Sell at road side       ?        Unknown                                    Likely to be similar to other market/business     Requires investigation
                                           stalls                                                                        constraints
                                          Selling to              ?        Unknown                                    Likely to be similar to other market/business     Increased opportunity for
                                           restaurants                                                                   constraints                                        women seafood traders
                  Shell money            Sell in Honiara         X        As above for market conditions             Family difficulties with women away in            Investigate alternative marketing
                   vendors                  Central Market or               Need to stay in Honiara weeks to            Honiara for long periods                           options
                                            bulk sales                       sell                                       Low income relative to effort
                Exporters of             Logistics               Z        Depleted stocks of bêche-de-mer &          Unknown                                           Increased opportunity for
                  bêche-de-mer,           Complying with                    shells                                                                                         women marine commodity
                  shells, aquarium          regulations                     Difficulties exporting live                                                                    exporters
                  animals,                                                   aquarium animals
                  seaweed
Consumption     Customers for           Buy fish, take           Z        Food safety                                Unknown                                           Requires investigation
                  fresh fish, urban         home to cook                    High prices in Honiara
                  & rural                                                   Lack of refrigeration
                Restaurant                 NA                     Z        Unknown                                     Unknown                                            NA
                  customers
                Customers for              NA                     NA       Unknown                                     Unknown                                            NA
                  shell
                  money/jewellery
                Overseas                   NA                     NA     Unknown                                       Unknown                                            NA
                  customers
                  exported
                  products
      NA – not applicable, beyond the scope of this report.
