                                              98281




       Activation
       for Poverty
       Reduction
       Realizing the Potential of
       Armenia’s Social Safety Nets



       September 2014




Social Protection and Labor Global Practice
Acknowledgments

This note was prepared by the team led by Matteo Morgandi that includes Josefina Posadas and Tomas
Damerau, under the supervision of Ximena Del Carpio and Rebekka Grun (task team leaders of the Labor
Market and Social Inclusion Technical Assistance P132514). Paula Cerutti, Soledad Giardili, Lisa
Oberlander, and Laura Sinn provided analytical and research inputs. Background papers informing the
note were prepared by Denis Nikitin (Benefit Formula Analysis), Susanna Karapetyan (Stocktaking of SP
Benefits), Paula Nagler (Analysis of GORT administrative data), and Lisa Oberlander (OECD Tax and
Benefit Model for Armenia). The note benefitted greatly from the feedback provided by the staff of the
Ministry of Labor and Social Issues at different consultative stages, by peer reviewers Aline Couduel,
Kathy Lindert, and Nistha Sinha, as well as various colleagues, including Boryana Gotcheva, Aylin Isik-
Dikmelik, Aleksan Hovhannisyan, and sector and practice managers Omar Arias and Andy Mason. Lauri
S. Scherer professionally edited the note. Sujani Eli and Satik Nairian provided administrative support.

Cite as: Morgandi M., J. Posadas and T. Damerau. 2014. “Activation for Poverty Reduction. Realizing the
Potential of Armenia’s Social Safety Nets”. Social Protection and Labor Global Practice, The World Bank,
Washington DC.

Disclaimer
This report is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The
World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this volume do not necessarily
reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent.

                                                   1
Table of Contents
ABBREVIATIONS.................................................................................................................................3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .......................................................................................................................5
  INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................................................. 5
  ACTIVATION FOR WHOM? A PROFILE OF ARMENIA’S VULNERABLE WORKING-AGE POPULATION ................................. 5
  FAVORING ACTIVE INCLUSION: IS THE CURRENT BENEFIT SYSTEM READY FOR ACTIVATION? ......................................... 8
  PRIORITIES FOR A NASCENT ACTIVATION SYSTEM ............................................................................................... 10
CHAPTER 1. A PROFILE OF THE CLIENTS OF ACTIVATION IN ARMENIA ................................................ 14
  INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................... 15
  THE PROFILE OF ARMENIA’S VULNERABLE POPULATION ...................................................................................... 17
  WHAT CAN EXPLAIN THE BLEAK EMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES AMONG POOR AND SA BENEFICIARIES? ............................ 25
CHAPTER 2. IS THE SOCIAL PROTECTION SYSTEM READY FOR ACTIVATION? ...................................... 30
  INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................... 31
  MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF ARMENIA’S SOCIAL ASSISTANCE AND LABOR BENEFIT SYSTEM ........................................ 32
  PERFORMANCE OF THE SOCIAL ASSISTANCE SYSTEM IN PROTECTING FROM POVERTY ............................................... 36
  PERFORMANCE OF THE FAMILY BENEFIT PROGRAM IN TERMS OF ACTIVATION......................................................... 43
  HOW MUCH POTENTIAL FOR ACTIVATION EXISTS IN THE FAMILY BENEFIT PROGRAM POPULATION? ............................ 43
  MOBILITY AND GRADUATION PATTERNS AMONG SOCIAL ASSISTANCE BENEFICIARIES................................................ 45
  COULD ACTIVATION MEASURES ENHANCE GRADUATION OF SOCIAL ASSISTANCE BENEFICIARIES?................................ 52
CHAPTER 3. PRIORITIES FOR A NASCENT ACTIVATION SYSTEM .......................................................... 56
  INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................................... 57
  REDESIGN THE TARGETING SYSTEM TO REDUCE COVERAGE GAPS AND ENHANCE COORDINATION ............................... 58
  ENHANCE PROGRAM DESIGN TO IMPROVE EMPLOYMENT PROSPECTS OF WORK-ABLE INDIVIDUALS AND THE HUMAN
  CAPITAL OF THE FUTURE WORKFORCE .............................................................................................................. 61
  ACTIVATION PROGRAMS FOR THE LABOR MARKET INSERTION OF WORK-ABLE BENEFICIARIES .................................... 63
  CONDITIONALITIES TO ENHANCE HUMAN CAPITAL ACCUMULATION OF THE FUTURE GENERATION .............................. 67
REFERENCES .................................................................................................................................... 72
ANNEX 1. BEHAVIORAL REQUIREMENTS AND BENEFIT SANCTIONS IN SELECTED OECD AND EASTERN
EUROPEAN COUNTRIES .................................................................................................................... 76
ANNEX 2. STATISTICAL PROFILE OF VULNERABLE GROUPS ................................................................ 84
ANNEX 3. TAX AND BENEFIT MODEL: ADDITIONAL SIMULATIONS ..................................................... 89




                                                                              2
Abbreviations

ALMP    Active Labor Market Program

AW      Average wage

CCT     Conditional cash transfer

CRRC    Caucasus Research Resource Center

CWI     Center for Work and Income

ECA     Europe and Central Asia

EU      European Union

FB      Family benefit

FBP     Family Benefit Program

GDP     Gross domestic product

GoA     Government of Armenia

ILCS    Integrated Living Conditions Survey

LCT     Labeled cash transfer

LTU     Long-term unemployment

LM      Labor market

LRSA    Last Resort Social Assistance Program

MIS     Management Information System

MOLSI   Ministry of Labor and Social Issues

MW      Minimum wage

OECD    Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development

PES     Public Employment Services

PMT     Proxy-means test

SA      Social assistance

SESA    State Employment Service Agency

                                              3
SI     Social insurance

SMEC   Social Medical Expertise Commission

SP     Social protection

SPAP   Social Protection Administration Project

SSN    Social safety net

SSSS   State Social Security Service

TSSU   Territorial social services unit

UB     Unemployment benefit

UCT    Unconditional cash transfer




                                          4
Executive Summary
Introduction
Since the peak of the economic crisis, poverty reduction in Armenia has made limited progress, with
poverty rates moving from 34.1 percent in 2009 to 32 percent in 2013. This slow pace has been mirrored
by the limited progress of the labor market (LM), particularly in terms of job-creation. In 2013, about 36
percent of people worked in the agricultural sector, and about half of all workers earned wages through
informal jobs.

These conditions highlight the need to have a robust social protection (SP) system that not only offers
adequate protection to people living in poverty but can also serve as a tool to increase the quality of
human capital, which in turn can help improve their economic opportunities. The government of
Armenia (GoA) has shown a clear interest in building its infrastructure to deliver SP services through
integrated social service centers as a means to better harness its investment in SP. Its vision is to
ultimately implement an integrated social policy that personalizes interventions and tries to address
multiple constraints that people face when trying to escape poverty— not only through the provision of
cash benefits.

The objective of this policy note is twofold. First, it provides a diagnostic of the SP system in order to
identify the key issues that could be addressed to enhance its effectiveness and efficiency to achieve
greater poverty reduction. Second, the note outlines a set of options—policies and reforms—for the
GoA to consider as it continues to strengthen its poverty-reduction strategy. It is important to note that
the focus of the report is on social assistance (SA) and LM policies for vulnerable groups. Other key
aspects of SP—such as pensions, labor regulations, or the functioning of the LM as a whole—are not
addressed in this report, and they have been the subject of extensive analysis elsewhere.

A profile of Armenia’s vulnerable working-age population

Activation is a coordinated package of policies that includes incentives, programs, and financial support
to favor the inclusion of the vulnerable population into the LM as a means for sustainable poverty
reduction. For this reason, activation policies focus only on work-able individuals. Survey data suggests
that 61 percent of the population in Armenia could be presumed to be able to work, that is, they are not
in school, are able-bodied, and are of working age (Figure A). Within the vulnerable population, the poor
who are not covered by safety nets exhibit similar demographic characteristics to the rest of the
population; on the other hand, households that receive SA have on an average many more members
that cannot be expected to work than the average of the population. This is the result of the targeting
rules of these benefits.




                                                    5
Figure A. Demographic                    composition          across Figure B. Labor force participation rates of
population typologies                                                work-able population, by group
  100%                                                                                                   80
                                                                                                                           Employed       Unemployed
   90%                                                                                                   70
   80%                                                                                                           14
   70%                                                                                                   60                    19       19




                                                                        Labor Force Participation Rate
                                                                                                                                                  17
   60%
   50%                                                                                                   50
   40%                                                                                                   40
   30%           61          58.61            61.03
   20%                                                     46.23                                         30      61
   10%                                                                                                                         51       52        49
                                                                                                         20
    0%
            Population        Poor         Non FBP        FBP Ben                                        10
                                            Poor
                                                                                                         0
          Student       Disabled      Child     Old    Work-able                                              Population      Poor    Non FBP   FBP Ben
                                                                                                                                       Poor
 Source: Armenia Integrated Living Conditions Survey (ILCS) 2011.                  Source: ILCS 2011.
                                                                                   Note: Work-able population only.



In spite of this still favorable demographic situation, only one out of three individuals who could work is
actually employed, and LM outcomes among vulnerable groups are considerably worse. While labor
force participation rates are nearly the same among the poor and the general population, the
employment rates of the poor are 12 percentage points lower than the national average (Figure B). This
highlights the important nexus between joblessness and poverty in Armenia. Safety net beneficiaries,
particularly those in the Family Benefit Program (FBP), are those who suffer from the highest joblessness
rates, in this case driven by particularly low labor force participation rates. Further analysis shows that
labor force participation rates are particularly low among women, due to high rates of ‘labor market
discouragement’ (defined as the reluctance to search for work in spite of being interested in working).

Surprisingly, the sectors of employment of the poor not covered by family benefit are not radically
different from the average population (Figure C). And earnings for the poor not covered by family
benefit appear distributed similar to the rest of the population; the propensity to hold informal jobs
among the working poor is only 6 percentage points lower than the rest of the population (Figure D).
This suggests that ‘low work intensity’—the number of household members who work—is a more
important factor to explain household poverty in Armenia, compared to low wages. On the other hand,
working FBP beneficiaries stand out for having a much higher share of informal jobs (Figure D), working
in agriculture, and being out of wage employment more than all other groups. Their hourly earnings are
also markedly lower than the rest of the poor, and overall they work fewer hours. This skewed
distribution of safety nets in favor of informal and low paid work is in part driven by the program’s
targeting method, as will be explained later.




                                                                    6
 Figure C. Sector of employment, by group                     Figure D. Incidence of low-quality jobs among the
                                                              employed
 100%                                                                         Job is below qualifications
                                  9      Public sector,                       Informal
  90%                 20   22     1      health,
             26                                                               Occasional/ seasonal
                                  11
  80%                 2                  education
                           3                                                  Working Hours (per week)
  70%         5                   17
                      16   17            Skill                100
             16
                                                                                                87
  60%                                    intensive              90
  50%                 19                 services               80
                           19
             16                                                 70                  64                       64
  40%                                    Basic                          58
                                  61     services               60
  30%
                                                                50                                 43
  20%        37       42   40                                                          35
                                                                40         28                                   31
  10%                                    Manufacturi            30
                                         ng, Utilities,                   37     16 35       17                36
    0%                                                          20   13                            29     11
                                         Construction
                                                                10
                                         Agriculture,            0
                                         Mining                         Population   SSN Ben   FBP Ben   Non FBP benef
                                                                                                             poor

 Source: ILCS 2011.                                           Source: ILCS 2011.
Three main sets of factors can explain why social safety net (SSN) beneficiaries and the poor have worse
employment outcomes compared to the general population: first, employability , which includes all
factors that make an individual suitable for a job (for example, skills and personal attributes); second,
constraints to labor supply (distribution of caretaking duties in the household, ability to decide to work,
preferences, and mobility); and third, incentives to participate in formal employment—particularly in the
case of SA beneficiaries.

In terms of employability, prima facie the basic demographic profile of vulnerable populations is not
radically different from the rest of the population. In particular, even if the work-able vulnerable groups
include a slightly lower share of tertiary educated individuals (Figure E), almost all work-able
beneficiaries have at least a secondary education degree. Further analysis is thus needed to understand
differentials in education and skills quality, unobservable in this data, which are likely to play a more
important role in this context than formal diplomas.

On the other hand, participation constraints are likely to matter much more. In particular, the household
structure and number of dependents in poor and SSN beneficiary households is radically different from
the general population (Figure F). This is likely to significantly impact the labor supply for some work-
able members, especially women, who culturally are expected to bear the burden of caretaking. In
addition, 41 percent of FBP beneficiaries appear to live in female-headed households, nearly twice as
many as the general population.




                                                          7
Figure E. Education level of the work-able Figure F. Share of households with two or more
population, by group                       children aged 0–15 years, by group
                    Elementary school
                    Secondary/Vocational
                    Higher education (college or higher)                       Population                     27


     Population     5             47                   48
                                                                                      Poor                              40

            Poor        8              55                   37
                                                                            Non FBP Poor                           35

 Non FBP Poor       8                  54                  39

                                                                                  FBP Ben                                          64
        FBP Ben     10                      61               29
                                                                                             0%      20%        40%          60%        80%
                   0%       20%         40%      60%   80%        100%

Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS 2011.                        Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS 2011.
Note: Work-able population only.



Favoring active inclusion: Is the current benefit system ready for activation?
Compared to the rest of the region, Armenia’s spending on SP is very low in terms of gross domestic
product (GDP), and nearly all SP spending is allocated to benefits for individuals who are not able to
work. In 2012, Armenia spent 5.4 percent of the GDP on social insurance (SI), 1.7 on SA, and about 0.1
percent on the LM, compared to about 8 percent, 2 percent, and 0.5 to 1 percent respectively in the
average Europe and Central Asian region country. Programs intended to serve the work-able population
as direct beneficiaries include primarily Active Labor Market Programs (ALMPs), and, to some extent, SA
benefits that cover the working population, such as the FBP; although these programs and services
represent only 6 percent of all SP spending. Thus, the limited protection available for the vulnerable
work-able population may indirectly incentivize some of them to enter inactivity-related programs, such
as disability pensions or early retirement.

The FBP is the paramount mechanism for protecting the poor. The FBP covers 80 percent of
households registered in the SA system and represents .76 percent of expenditure in SA (in 2012); in
addition, an emergency benefit provides coverage to a smaller number of households that do not reach
the vulnerability threshold to qualify for the FBP (7 percent of households registered). Less than a
quarter of all households living below the poverty line received the FBP in 2012. Ninety seven percent of
the population knows about the program, and most applicants understand its eligibility criteria in broad
terms, so under coverage cannot be explained by lack of information, but rather by the fact that the
program size is designed to be relatively small. Although about 60 percent of beneficiaries were pre-
transfer poor in 2012, the inclusion error has grown year on year since 2011, suggesting the importance
of adjusting coefficients to the new economic structure of poor households in order to make the best of
the limited resources.



                                                                     8
In terms of activation potential, about half of the individuals who benefit from the FBP could be
considered work-able, though many have high caretaking duties. According to the administrative
database, 49 percent, or about 200,000 individuals, could be considered work-able, that is, of working
age (15–64 years) and not recorded as disabled or as students in the family benefit (FB) registry. This
figure closely matches the share of work-able individuals derived from the 2011 ILCS of households (46
percent). More than 80 percent of households have at least one work-able member, though a significant
share has dependents (see Figure H).

Figure G. FBP beneficiary households typology                             Figure H. Probability of exit from the program by
                                                                          evaluation score at entry
                No work-able member                                                               Probability of long-term exit from Family Benefit Program
                1+ work-able, no dependents                                                                                     By evaluation score quartile
                1 work-able with dependents
                2+ work-able with dependents




                                                                  0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50
                                17%
                  36%

                                                                                                  0                      5                   10             15                           20
                                                                                                                                   Months ( 0=January 2012)

                                    36%                                                                                      qeval = mean 30                     qeval = mean 31
                                                                                                                             qeval = mean 33                     qeval = mean 37
                        11%                                                                       Kaplan Maier Failure Function. Long term exit defined as out of program for 4 months



                                                                          Source: Authors’ calculations based on MOLSI administrative data
Source: Authors’ calculation based on MOLSI administrative data           2013.
2013.

However at present the benefit formula leaves limited space for beneficiaries to try to work in the
formal LM. Households with at least one work-able individual and no dependents are much more likely
to have an evaluation score close to the threshold of 30 compared to all other household typologies. On
the other side of the spectrum, households that have no work-able member, or households with a single
earner and many dependents, exhibit a distribution that is more skewed toward higher evaluation
scores, and thus with more room to earn a formal income without being disqualified. The OECD tax
benefit model applied to Armenia indicates that FBP beneficiary households close to the eligibility
threshold may find it too costly to enter the formal LM at low pay. If members take a formal job just
above the minimum wage, most of their new income is lost through the combination of paying new
taxes and losing their previous benefits. The actual relevance of these incentives will depend to the
extent that formal sector jobs at low pay actually exist in the market and are coveted by beneficiaries.

Among beneficiaries, ‘graduation’ is infrequent and highly associated with the vulnerability score at
entry, and not necessarily driven by substantial improvement in household conditions. Survival
analysis applied to a section of the administrative data1 indicates that by month 16, a quarter of the

1
 This was computed using 2,131 households that were followed for 20 months and were registered in the program
for the first time in January 2012. The choice to follow households for 20 months was dictated by data availability.
Because the administrative dataset does not report the actual date of permanence in the program, we define as
new entrants those households that were registered in January 2012 but were not beneficiaries in the previous
periods available to us: October 2011 to December 2011, and in October of 2008, 2009, and 2010.


                                                                  9
households exit the program for at least 4 months. As shown in figure H, the chances for graduating are
highly dependent on the score of the household at entry, not much on their level of welfare at exit.
Households that graduate do not on average substantially change their economic condition since per
capita household incomes increase only by about 5,000 AMD per capita per month (about US$12). This
calls for a new set of rules to define when households should leave the program, more geared to
changes to their actual well-being.

Priorities for a nascent activation system
The impact of SP spending on poverty and inclusion could be maximized through improvements at the
program and system levels. Armenia’s benefit system already displays important strengths—in terms of
programs, infrastructure, and resources—to build on for the second generation of integrated SSNs.
Figure I provides a summary of the overarching recommendations. The rest of the chapter will focus
specifically on areas that are considered a priority, particularly the reform of the targeting system, the
potential to introduce benefit conditionalities, and client profiling. There are other important areas for
development, such as an integrated information system, the design of new ALMPs, integration models,
and case management approaches that are not addressed in this study.2

Figure I. Overview of the main recommendations

    1. Redesign targeting system for social assistance benefits based on best practices to
    improve coverage and coordination across benefits.

      Eligibility based          2. Prepare social services for activation.
       on likelyhood
            to be
       consumption
            poor                   Integrated case
                                  management, MIS
           Reduce                                        3. Reform benefit design to improve the impacts
         unintended              Advanced profiling
          incentives             for prioritization of
                                                         on poverty and incentives.
                                       ALMPs
                                                                 Introduce viable            Consider human capital
      Allow to target                                      conditionalities for activation     conditionalities for
                                    Design new
      multiple social              ALMPs for the            of work-able beneficiaries            dependents
         benefits                  most vulnerable


Source: Authors’ illustration.



First, reforming the FBP targeting formula could simultaneously address multiple issues and serve as
the basis for a more integrated protection system. The current formula has served well the needs of
the program until present, but now it could be revamped to improve its incentive compatibility with
activation, and to adjust to the evolving characteristics of poor households. Simulations based on the
ILCS data indicate that using a proxy-means test (PMT) formula in Armenia could help reduce the

2
 Many of these topics are being addressed as part of the upcoming World Bank Social Protection Administration
Project II, or they were defined in the previous project.


                                                                   10
inclusion error. In addition, a renewed PMT formula that ranked households in terms of predicted
poverty would facilitate a differentiation of benefit eligibility according to different income thresholds—
some more geared toward subsistence, others more focused on facilitating graduation. Finally, a gradual
phasing out of benefits would reduce the implicit costs of leaving the program for beneficiaries, while
safeguards should be maintained for groups that, though not poor, are considered socially vulnerable.
The latter could be allowed into the program at a higher eligibility threshold; in addition, the one-off
assistance program could complement the FBP to protect individuals who suffer sudden income-shocks,
which are not well captured by a PMT formula.

Second, the impact of benefits on poverty could be enhanced if the benefits are tied to
conditionalities that have a proven beneficial impact. Activation measures differ broadly based on their
objectives, but overall they could be divided in two groups: (i) those that aim to incentivize inclusion in
the LM of work-able members who are out of work, and (ii) those to build the human capital of the
future workforce. In particular, conditionalities can maximize the impact of transfers if they increase the
utilization of services that should—either immediately or in the long run—facilitate poverty reduction.
Any mutual obligation program requires an adequate supply of services at the local level in order to be
enforceable and fair for beneficiaries. In addition, in some circumstances, conditionalities can
discourage individuals from applying for the benefit, if they are not in real need.

Activation programs for work-able individuals will require a combination of LM services and active
case management in order to direct individuals toward LM integration. At present, only a small
percentage of the work able beneficiaries of the FBP seem to be registered in the public employment
services (PES). In addition, currently the PES system does not have the capacity to provide active
programs even to one work-able beneficiary per household, due to the low availability of vacancies and
of ALMPs. Thus, the introduction of activation conditionalities for all work-able will first require a series
of system-level improvements, including: (i) strengthening the incentives to utilize existing services (for
instance, by making it mandatory to consult with employment services); (ii) further investing in
expanding the capacity of the PES to serve a large number of work-able beneficiaries, both in terms of
vacancies collected and of ALMPs; (iii) modifying the benefit formula to reduce disincentives from entry
into formal jobs or ALMPs; and (iv) integrating information systems to allow monitoring compliance with
conditionalities.

In light of capacity constraints, the use of an advanced system of profiling of work-able beneficiaries,
could help identify those who are more likely to need access to the services offered by the State
Employment Service Agency (SESA). The introduction of mandatory activation of all work-able
beneficiaries does not seem feasible in the short run. To address these constraints, Armenia could
consider adopting a statistical profiling system that would prioritize some households for ALMPs.
Examples from Ireland, Sweden, and Australia show that administrative data can be used to generate
statistical models that are easily implementable in the PES and can predict the duration of the
unemployment spells of the registered unemployed, from the day of registration. This allows the early
identification of different segments of jobseekers who are more vulnerable, which are then either
prioritized for case management meetings or offered ALMPs at higher intensity from the start. Such a
system would help one-stop shops or employment services manage the large inflow of beneficiaries and

                                                     11
prioritize clients. A similar model could be generated to identify the typology of households that are
least likely to graduate from the FBP over time

For households with children, access to the FBP could be made conditional on fulfilling responsibilities
that can help address the health, nutrition, and education deficit accumulated among poor children
from a young age. There are a number of potential human capital conditionalities that could tie receipt
of the family benefit to the use of services that are critical for the development of children at different
ages. For instance, the high rate of malnutrition in poor households among children below 5 years is
alarming, and the gap in secondary school graduation rates between the poor and nonpoor is significant
and it has recently increased. Thus, in line with experiences in other European and Central Asian
countries, secondary education attendance could become a potential benefit conditionality for youth in
beneficiary households. Or, if supply was adequately expanded, conditionality for pre-primary education
would meet the dual goals of supporting female labor force participation and improving children’s life-
long learning outcomes. Conditionalities could also be used to expand the attendance of preventive
health services for some non-communicable diseases particularly common in Armenia, or to enhance
utilization of maternal and child health services to correct severe malnutrition observed among poor
children.

From a political economy perspective, the introduction of conditionalities would enhance public
support to expand coverage of safety nets to reach a greater share of the poor. Recent opinion polls
commissioned for this report suggest that less than half of the adult population in Armenia would
support an expansion of the FBP as currently designed. However, as shown in Figure J, if benefits were
provided with some conditionalities, such as sending children to school or requiring beneficiaries to look
for work, public support for the expansion of SSNs in a budget neutral way would substantially increase.

Figure J. Support for increasing coverage of the FBP if benefit came with conditionality

                         Total                                                  37                            28
 Income groups




                   Low income                                                   39                            27

                 Middle income                                               38                              29

                   High income                                        31                                40

                                 0      10    20       30        40        50        60       70        80         90      100
                                                            Percentage

                  Completely disagree         Disagree             DK/DA              Agree            Completely agree
Source: Caucasus Research Resource Center (CRRC), South Caucasus Barometer Survey 2013.
Note: Figure shows response to the question: “In other countries, SA is given to a larger share of the poor than in Armenia, but, in exchange,
recipients are required do certain actions like searching for work, or sending children to school. To what extent do you agree or disagree to
extend the number of poor families included in the FBP in exchange of requiring some of these actions from recipients?”

Finally, at the system level, Armenia will need to strengthen coordination across functions, in the
context of social service integration. Armenia has already made significant strides in the integration of


                                                                      12
its services into ‘one-stop shops’ as a basis for building more synergies across SP functions. Under the
first Social Protection Administration Project (SPAP), and in its incipient follow-up investment, SPAP II,
the GoA has invested in the colocation of all its SP service functions across the country, with new or
upgraded facilities, an integrated management information system, the introduction of new case
management procedures, and built up innovative interventions. As a next step, the GoA will need to
ensure that the incentives and designs of different programs are mutually reinforcing and compatible.
Regardless of the specific activation menu chosen, implementing mutual obligations programs will
require trained case managers and a good household profiling system to identify needs and match those
with services. These tools seem essential to build a more effective SSN system that makes the best of
existing resources.




                                                   13
Chapter 1. A profile of the clients of activation in Armenia
Key Messages

This chapter presents a profile of the potential clients of activation measures.
      Activation is a policy ‘package’ that includes incentives, programs, and financial support to favor
       the inclusion of the vulnerable population into the LM as a means of sustainable poverty
       reduction. Among the vulnerable, activation policies focus on work-able individuals.
      This note identifies as targets of activation policies both safety net beneficiaries—FBP
       beneficiaries in particular—and the poor who are not covered by safety nets.
      Focusing on the work-able SSN beneficiaries alone is unlikely to substantially impact the LM
       outcomes of Armenia’s poor, because so many of them remain uncovered by SSN.

Large shares of the work-able remain out of work, particularly among vulnerable groups.
      Armenia can count on a relatively large share of the population (60 percent) that can be
       presumed able to work. The share of work-able among the poor who are not covered by safety
       nets, on average, mirrors the rest of the population.
      On the other hand, households that receive LRSA have on average many more members that
       cannot be expected to work.
      In spite of this large potential, only one out of three individuals who could work is actually
       employed. Vulnerable groups lag behind the population in most LM outcomes. In fact, though
       labor force participation rates are nearly the same among the poor and the general population,
       employment rates are 12 percentage points lower for the poor. The situation is particularly dire
       for beneficiaries of the FBP, who exhibit the lowest labor force participation and employment
       rates.

Low work-intensity is a major cause of poverty for most households…
      The sectoral and employment characteristics of the poor outside safety nets are not radically
       different from the average population, given the prevalence of informality and agricultural work
       in the economy as a whole.
      For instance, the hourly earnings for the poor not covered by the FBP appear similarly
       distributed to the rest of the population. And nearly half of the employed population reports
       that they wish to change their job, but cannot find any better opportunity.
      This means that although low wages contribute to poverty, the presence of many household
       members who do not work is a primary reason for poverty in Armenian households.




                                                   14
… while FBP beneficiaries work in jobs of particularly poor quality.
      Working FBP beneficiaries stand out for having a much higher share of informal jobs, working in
       agriculture, and being out of wage employment than the rest of the poor.
      The hourly earnings of working FBP beneficiaries, and their hours worked, are markedly lower
       than the rest of the poor.
      The skewed distribution of safety nets in favor of informal and low paid work is driven by the
       FBP targeting method.

Vulnerable groups face high constraints to join the labor force.
      The household structure in poor and SSN beneficiary households is radically different from the
       general population. On average, in FBP beneficiary households there is one dependent for each
       work-able individual, twice as much as in the general population.
      As many as 41 percent of FBP beneficiaries live in single-parent households, and a quarter of
       them live in households with a young baby.
      Cultural norms on the division of roles in the household are also important, as many women
       reported that they were prevented from working by other family members.
      In addition, beneficiaries of LRSA may face disincentives to participate in formal employment
       due to the design of the LRSA benefits.

Further investigation is needed to understand their skills constraints.
      Worse employment outcomes among vulnerable groups compared to the general population
       could be attributed to a number of reasons that relate both to their household structure and to
       their individual characteristics.
      In terms of employability, the demographic and the education profile of vulnerable groups is not
       radically different from the rest of the population. More than a third of the poor and SSN
       beneficiaries hold tertiary education degrees. Education quality and the relevance of the skills
       that they own are likely to play a more important role than the data allows exploring.

Introduction

High rates of joblessness and low-paid work are major causes of poverty in Armenia. A recent
assessment (Rutkowski 2012) provided an overview of the main challenges that affect the Armenian LM
and the connection with poverty. Armenia’s LM is characterized by low employment rates by
international standards. In 2011, only 54 percent of the working age population was at work: this is
lower than in any other country in the European Union (EU) member states and any other country in the
South Caucasus or Central Asia (Arias et al. 2014). Low employment can be traced to two main factors:
(i) high unemployment rates, particularly among youth, which underscores a difficult school-to-work
transition and (ii) women’s limited participation in the labor force. The incidence of poverty is
particularly high among the unemployed (54 percent) and, to a lesser but non-negligible extent, among
the employed in low-paying and low work-intensity jobs (28 percent in 2011).


                                                 15
Low employment rates can be attributed to the general scarcity of job opportunities although
vulnerable groups face additional challenges that put them at a disadvantage in the LM. Despite the
recent rebound in economic growth, the economy creates relatively few jobs (see World Bank, 2013b
for a recent analysis of demand side issues). The underutilization of labor translates into limited
opportunities to enter the labor force or to move up to better quality jobs. However, the likelihood of
being employed in a productive job in Armenia is skewed along several sociodemographic factors,
including age, education level, and experience, which suggests the importance of policies to improve the
employability of the vulnerable.

This study focuses on informing social policies to favor the inclusion of the vulnerable population in
the LM (‘activation’), with the view of contributing to sustainable protection from poverty. The
current note has the objective of providing a strategic direction for the GoA in the definition of
integrated social policies to combat poverty through LM inclusion and improvement of labor
productivity. This set of measures, broadly defined as activation, is foremost directed toward the
population that can be considered capable of working (‘work-able’), and in particular to the large
population that is either out of work or in low-productivity jobs.

SSN beneficiaries are an important vulnerable group for activation policies, but the even larger
number of nonbeneficiaries living below the poverty line remains a priority for activation. Figure 1
shows the distribution of Armenia’s population according to ability to work and status as an SSN
beneficiary. SSN beneficiaries represent only 6 percent of the total population in Armenia (and 10
percent of the work-able population). Moreover, even when taking into account the work-able
population living below the poverty line (33 percent in 2011), only half of the work-able poor are
covered by any SSN, and only a quarter of them by the FBP, the main LRSA program. Because poverty
levels in Armenia remain consistently high and because SSN beneficiaries remain a very small share of
the population, any activation policy aimed at fostering self-sufficiency will have a limited impact on
poverty and LM participation unless it focuses on the broader group of poor individuals. Finally, it is
important to note that a number of services such as the PES and ALMPs currently target the even larger
population of the unemployed, only half of whom are actually poor.

Figure 1. Population distribution according to work ability and SSN beneficiary status


        Total
                        3 3                         55
      population

              Poor            14             15                29

                     0%        10%        20%     30%    40%         50%    60%     70%     80%     90%     100%

                 Work able - FBP Beneficiaries                             Work able - Other SSN beneficiaries
                 Work able -No SSN benefit                                 Old
                 Child                                                     Disabled
                 Student
Source: Authors’ calculations using ILCS 2011.


                                                                16
This first chapter provides a LM profile of the poor, SSN beneficiaries, and other out-of-work
individuals, as these are the main targets of activation measures. Using the ILCS 2011,3 this section
draws a profile of the population that could benefit from activation measures, according to three main
groups: (1) beneficiaries of SSNs, especially those under the main SA program (the FBP); (2)
nonbeneficiaries who live below the national poverty line; and (3) the nonpoor population that is out of
work. This grouping is drawn for policy planning purposes since the government aspires to serve each of
these population segments through a different package of measures according to their needs and
characteristics. The first chapter of this note provides a LM profile of these vulnerable populations, with
the purpose of identifying the constraints to their active inclusion in the LM.

The profile of Armenia’s vulnerable population

Armenia is endowed with a large share of work-able individuals. Of its 3.1 million inhabitants, about 60
percent (1.9 million) could be considered work-able. For the purpose of this study, a person is
considered work-able if s/he is of working age (15–64 years); is out of full-time education; and has no
limitations that prevent him/her from working.4 Thus, a large share of Armenians could be participating
in the country’s economic life (see Figure 2).5

Figure 2. Population work ability and status in Armenia, 2011




        Student, 7
    Disabled, 2
                                                      Employed, 37                      Unemployed, 9


Children, 17                      Work-Able
                                     61



     Old, 13                                                                            Out of labor
                                                                                         force, 15




3
  This analysis focuses on specific population subgroups, such as SSN beneficiaries, that represent only about 12
percent of the population. In order to achieve sufficient statistical power, the analysis is pursued with ILCS 2011 in
light of the significant drop in sample size, from 7,872 to 5,184 households, between 2011 and 2012.
4
  Countries increasingly move toward providing further work possibilities to those impaired by disabilities,
including Armenia, but the set of policies and programs for this specific population is not the focus of this note.
5
  Between 2010 and 2030, the share of young people who are of working age is set to shrink by about 6 percentage
points, although the overall growth in the share of the population of working age will remain positive in the same
period. (Arias et al. 2014).


                                                         17
Source: Authors’ calculations using ILCS 2011.

The poor exhibit a similar demographic structure to the rest of the population, while households that
receive SA benefits have on average many more non-work-able members. Surprisingly, perhaps, there
is no substantial difference in terms of demographic composition between those poor and the total
population, and this can be partly explained by the fact that poverty rates are high in Armenia. In
contrast, the SSN system by design is skewed toward households with a greater share of non-work-able
people—an issue that will be discussed in Chapter 2. As a consequence, the share of non-work-able
members is greater among SA beneficiaries, particularly among those who receive the FBP, who have
many more children and disabled among their household members (see Figure 3).

Figure 3. Demographic composition across population groups
  100%
   90%
   80%
   70%
                                                                                   Student
   60%
                                                                                   Disabled
   50%
                                                                                   Child
   40%
                                                                                   Old
   30%                61                    58.61      61.03
                                                                                   Work-able
                                                                    46.23
   20%
   10%
     0%
                Population                  Poor    Non FBP Poor   FBP Ben
Source: Authors’ calculations using ILCS 2011.


However, a large share of the work-able population, including SSN beneficiaries, is not employed.
With only 6 out of 10 work-able employed, Armenia is facing an ‘activity deficit’. Among work-able
individuals in the population, 25 percent do not participate in the labor force. Nonparticipation is
significantly higher for the poor population (at 30 percent), and it peaks among FBP beneficiaries (33
percent). Unemployment is also higher among the work-able poor and SSN beneficiaries than among the
general population. Nearly half of the unemployed are first-time jobseekers, indicating a slow transition
from education to the world of work (see Figure 5), and half of the unemployed have been looking for
work for more than two years.




                                                         18
Figure 4. Labor                                       force    participation         and Figure 5. Characteristics of the unemployed
employment rates
                                  80                                                          60
                                                    Employed         Unemployed                          51
                                  70                                                                                  48             48
                                           14                                                 50
                                                                                                                                                   43
                                  60                 19         19
 Labor Force Participation Rate




                                                                             17               40
                                  50
                                                                                              30
                                  40
                                                                                              20
                                  30       61
                                                     51         52           49               10
                                  20
                                                                                               -
                                  10
                                                                                                        Population      Poor          Non FBP      FBP Ben
                                  0                                                                                                     Poor
                                       Population   Poor   Non FBP Poor    FBP Ben                 Had ever had a paid job     Less than 7 month   >24 months

Source: Authors’ calculations using ILCS 2011.

Among the employed, FBP beneficiaries are much more likely to work in informal and seasonal jobs,
while working conditions of the poor are not much worse than all of the employed population. Figure
6 shows the incidence of some indicators of job quality across population groups. Overall, informality
remains high in Armenia, at 58 percent (Rutkowski 2012), but it is nearly the norm among those FBP
beneficiaries who are employed—87 percent of them work without any contract. FBP beneficiaries also
tend to be more involved in seasonal work (43 percent versus 31 percent of the nonbeneficiary poor and
28 percent of the population) and to work fewer hours per week. Interestingly, poor people who do not
receive family benefits tend to resemble the general population profile more closely, showing only
slightly worse outcomes. Most likely, the skewed distribution of FBP coverage in favor of informal
workers is driven by the program’s eligibility criteria, which is biased against formal labor incomes
(which will be discussed further in Chapter 2).

Figure 6. Incidence of low-quality jobs among the Figure 7. Distribution of hourly earnings in the
employed population                                   population, by formality status and agriculture
                 Job is below qualifications
                 Informal
                 Occasional/ seasonal
                 Working Hours (per week)
100                                87
  90
  80                   67
  70                                            64
           58
  60
  50                                  43
  40                      33                       31
              28
  30        37           35     17               36
  20    13          11               29      11
  10
   0
                                       Population   Poor       FBP Ben    Non FBP Poor



Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS 2011.                                           Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS 2011.

                                                                                       19
Note: Job quality indicators are not mutually exclusive.

Informality is associated with lower earnings, primarily driven by those employed in agriculture.
Earlier analysis discussed how the wage dispersion in Armenia is relatively high (Rutkowski 2012). For
the purpose of studying activation, it is also useful to examine the extent to which formal and informal
jobs differ strongly in returns. However, a full analysis is beyond the scope of this report. Figure 7
compares the distribution of reported hourly earnings from labor across informal jobs in agriculture,
informal jobs outside agriculture, and formal jobs. The graph indicates that agricultural employment is
significantly lower paid than work in any other sector. On the other hand, formal and informal
nonagricultural hourly earnings do differ, but less markedly, as shown in Figure 7.6 Yet, considering the
lack of benefits associated with informal jobs (leave, sick leave, and, very often, contracts), formal jobs
could still be considered on average of higher quality, and, as shown later (Figure 13), they are
correlated with a lower risk of poverty.

There is suggestive evidence that most of the inactive labor population and those who have informal
seasonal work would switch to permanent full-time jobs if these were available. Figure 8 shows that
nearly half of the employed population reports that they wish to change their job, and this is particularly
the case among SSN beneficiaries (53 percent) and especially FBP beneficiaries (63 percent). This might
be directly associated with the fact that more than half of the FBP beneficiaries could not find a
permanent job, in contrast with less than one-third of the total population (Figure 9). As informality
entails avoidance of taxation and social contributions, it is often debated whether this is the result of
workers’ decisions (in collusion with employers, if in wage employment), or if this is an outcome that
workers cannot avoid. In this case, it seems that those who face the worse employment outcomes could
be ready to move to stable wage employment (presumably formal) if they were given the opportunity.




6
  According to recent estimates (Armstat 2013), average monthly incomes in informal jobs were 82 percent of
after-tax earnings of formal jobs in 2012. The differential is high in some sectors such as trade and food services,
and less than 20 percent in other sectors such as construction, industry, and agriculture. Our computations, based
on hourly earnings, are not directly comparable but yield similar findings. Obviously this information does not
inform on whether individuals in informal jobs may be qualitatively similar or different than those in formal
occupations.


                                                           20
Figure 8. Would like to change current job            Figure 9. Reasons for not being in a permanent job
                                                      100%
 70%                                                     90%
                                          63.4
                                                         80%
 60%                                                                                                       40
                                                         70%
                      50                                 60%
 50%      46.5                 47.8                                            39
                                                         50%      39                         40

 40%                                                     40%
                                                         30%
                                                                                                           52
 30%                                                     20%
                                                                  31           35            31
                                                         10%
 20%
                                                         0%
                                                               Population     Poor        Non FBP        FBP Ben
 10%                                                                                       Poor
                                                                       Other
                                                                       Specifics of work / seasonality
  0%                                                                   Unable to take a permanent job
       Population   Poor      Non FBP    FBP Ben                       Could not find a permanent job
                               Poor

Low work intensity is a key factor for explaining poverty, except for FBP beneficiaries, who tend to
earn considerably less than any other group. Figures 10, 11, and 12 show the wage distribution of
different analytical groups. Surprisingly, the earnings of the poor are only slightly lower than the rest of
the population; this suggests that the differences between poor and nonpoor households should not be
attributed mainly to earnings differential. On the other hand, Figure 13 shows that the presence of
household members without work is a key factor that determines poverty (discussed further in
Rutkowski 2012). The situation is rather different for FBP beneficiaries at work; their hourly earnings
appear particularly low compared to the rest of the poor (Figures 10 and 11) and so does their monthly
take-home pay. In fact, labor income accounts for only 28 percent of total consumption among FBP
beneficiary households, compared to more than 70 percent among the rest of the poor (see Annex 2).
As discussed later, markedly lower earnings could be related to the composition of FBP beneficiary
households as well as to some of the incentives given by the program to supply labor only in the
informal LM.




                                                    21
Figure 10. Distribution of labor hourly incomes      Figure 11. Wage quintile distribution by population
                                                     group




Figure 12. Distribution of monthly earnings          Figure 13. Incidence of poverty among work-able,
                                                     by LM status
                                                      60%
                                                                                               Formal
                                                      50%                                      employed
                                                                                               Voluntary
                                                      40%                                      inactive
                                                      30%                                      Informal
                                                                                               employed
                                                      20%                                      Discouraged
                                                      10%
                                                                                               Unemployed
                                                       0%                                      <=6m
                                                            Household head Other members       Unemployed
                                                                                               >6m
Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS 2011.

While most workers in Armenia are salaried employees, including most of the poor, FBP beneficiaries
stand out for their much higher propensity to be self-employed or do unpaid family work. Safety net
beneficiaries, in particular those who receive the family benefit, stand out compared to the rest of the
vulnerable population in terms of employment typology. In particular, a majority of FBP recipients are
self-employed (Figure 14), while among the rest of the population, wage employment is prevalent. This
peculiarity is correlated with higher participation of FBP in agriculture, the sector with the lowest levels
of productivity and wages (Figure 15). Interestingly, the sectoral composition of employment among the
poor who do not receive family benefits is not as different from the population average. An important
share (22 percent) of the working poor who are not covered by the FBP works for the public sector.




                                                    22
Figure 14. Distribution of employment status, by Figure 15. Sector of employment, by group
group
 100%                                                                                        100%
                                                                                                                                                                          9              Public sector,
   90%                                                                 Employer              90%                                    20              22                    1              health,
                                                                                                                26
                                                                                                                                                                         11              education
   80%                                                                                       80%                                      2              3
   70%                                                                 Unpaid                70%                 5                                                       17              Skill intensive
                                                                                                                                    16              17
                                                                       worker                                                                                                            services
   60%                                                                                       60%                16
   50%                                                                 Self-                 50%                                    19              19                                   Basic services
   40%                                                                 employed                                 16
                                                                                             40%
   30%
                                                                       Salaried              30%                                                                         61
   20%                                                                 Employee                                                                                                          Manufacturing,
                                                                                             20%                37                  42              40
   10%                                                                                                                                                                                   Utilities,
                                                                                             10%                                                                                         Construction
    0%
          Population        Poor     Non FBP     FBP Ben                                      0%                                                                                         Agriculture,
                                      Poor                                                                   Population          Poor         Non FBP                  FBP Ben           Mining
                                                                                                                                               Poor

Note: ‘Other employed’ largely represents unpaid family work.

       The distance of vulnerable groups from the LM is highly varied according to gender, age, and location,
       which suggests the importance of prioritizing interventions in the LM. Figure 16 displays the likelihood
       of different sociodemographic groups to be on a spectrum of LM states of decreasing distance from a
       good quality job. In the first place there are formal sector jobs—which earlier analysis showed to be of
       overall better quality—followed by informal employment (which includes agricultural work),
       unemployment of short and then long duration, and finally inactivity (divided between
       discouragement—which is involuntary—and voluntary inactivity). This illustration of LM distance can
       inform to some extent the broad targeting of interventions designed to confront specific LM challenges.

       Figure      16.       Work      status           of   all       work-able              individuals                     living        below             the         poverty            line
         100%

         80%                                                                                                                                                                  Formal Employed

         60%
                                                                                                                                                                              Informal
                                                                                                                                                                              Employed
         40%
                                                                                                                                                                              ST Unemployed
         20%

          0%                                                                                                                                                                  LT Unemployed
                                                                                                                                                             No-poor
                                                                                                                  Secondary
                                      15-24


                                                25-54


                                                             55-64




                                                                                                                                                                poor
                                                                                                Elementary




                                                                                                                                 Tertiary
                              Male




                                                                            Urban
                   Female




                                                                                     Rural




                                                                                                                                             poor
                                                                                                                                             Poor




                                                                                                                                                                              Discouraged
                                                                                                                                                            non




                       Gender                  Age                            Location                        Education                                                       Inactive

                                                                     Poor                                                                           Total


       Source: ILCS 2011.
       Note: Work-able is defined as individuals of working age, able-bodied, and not in full-time education. ST = short term; LT = long term, more than
       12 months.




                                                                                         23
Among the work-able poor, women and urban youth suffer the most from discouragement and
unemployment. Compared to the rest of the work-able poor, the share of work-able who are not
employed is particularly high among young people aged 15–24 years (72 percent out of work—and by
definition—out of school) and women (Figure 16). Note that for both groups, the percentage of shadow
unemployed (those who are out of the labor force because of discouragement) is even higher than
those looking for work. In other words, a key reason for low participation in the labor force is the lack of
suitable opportunities. In fact, a higher share of poor women are inactive or discouraged compared to
poor men. More than 40 percent of poor women do not have a job and are not looking for one
compared to 22 percent of poor men. At the same time, a larger percentage of working women are
employed in the informal sector compared to the percentage of men working informally. Among the
work-able individuals who receive FBP,

The rural poor are generally working but in low-productivity jobs or underemployed. Conversely,
informal low-productivity employment characterizes the rural poor, especially male and elderly workers.
Interestingly, education level is not directly associated with a different risk of unemployment, although
the tertiary educated poor are much more likely to have a formal job. This suggests that program
targeting is more likely to be effective through a gender-age-geographic level rather than only along skill
levels.

Figure 17. Employment status of work-able individuals who receive FBP

100%
 90%                                                                                                                                           Formal Employed
 80%
 70%
 60%                                                                                                                                           Informal
 50%                                                                                                                                           Employed
 40%                                                                                                                                           ST Unemployed
 30%
 20%
 10%                                                                                                                                           LT Unemployed
  0%
                                                                                                                                     No-poor
                          Male




                                                                                                                     Poor
             Female




                                 15-24


                                         25-54


                                                 55-64




                                                                                                                                        poor
                                                           Urban




                                                                                                          Tertiary
                                                                              Elementary


                                                                                              Secondary




                                                                                                                     poor
                                                                    Rural




                                                                                                                                               Discouraged
          female


                      male




                                                                                                                                    non




                                                                                                                                               Inactive

                 Gender                  Age                 Location                      Education                        Total

Source: ILCS 2011.
Note: Work-able is defined as individuals of working age, able-bodied, and not in full-time education. ST = short term; LT = long term, more than
12 months.

Similar trends are visible within the FBP work-able population, although at higher levels of magnitude:
joblessness reaches extreme levels among urban residents (70 percent) and youth (80 percent).
Compared to the rest of the work-able poor and of young people who are poor but do not benefit from
the FBP, inactivity is extremely high among FBP beneficiaries below the age of 25. As shown in Figure 17,
65 percent of the young people out of school are either inactive or discouraged: this group corresponds
with the so-called NEETs (“not in education, employment, or training”). Conversely, informal, low-
productivity employment characterizes the rural poor, especially male and elderly workers. Informal
jobs particularly characterize poor FBP beneficiaries with elementary education who live in rural areas.
Not surprisingly, the share of those with formal employment arrangements among FBP beneficiaries is

                                                                        24
usually less than half of the share among the poor population. Among FBP beneficiaries, youth, rural
informal workers, and urban unemployed are priority groups for active measures.

What can explain the bleak employment outcomes among poor and SA
beneficiaries?
The demographic characteristics of the vulnerable groups tend to match those in the general
population. Although employment and welfare outcomes tend to vary quite markedly between
vulnerable groups and the average population, their demographic composition in terms of age,
geographic, and gender structure is not markedly different. The share of traditionally more vulnerable
age groups in the LM is similar: 15 percent of FBP beneficiaries and 17 percent of the general population
are young (15–24 years) and out of school, while prime age individuals (55–64 years) are also close to
the population average of 16 percent. The share of work-able women who benefit from safety nets is
nearly identical to that of all poor and to the general population (around 53 percent) (see Annex 2). Even
in terms of geographic distribution, a third of the work-able population lives in rural areas (34 percent),
as does an identical share of the poor. The important exception is among FBP beneficiaries, whose
coverage in rural areas is significantly higher (41 percent) (see Annex 2).

Box 1. Unpacking Employability Barriers

Employability can be defined as the characteristics that “raise the probability of an individual moving from
nonemployment to employment and lower the probability of moving from employment to nonemployment” (Card
et al. 2011). These factors include personal characteristics that affect labor productivity (such as skills,
certifications, and attributes); personal factors that influence the ability and willingness to supply labor (work
culture, household composition, ability to decide to work); and market factors (such as labor demand) (McQuaid
2006; Rutkowski 2012). In the case of SA beneficiaries, an additional question relates to the incentives built into
the benefit toward labor supply (explored in more detail in Chapter 2). The activity deficit observed earlier could
be directly related to any of these issues or more likely be the product of their interaction.

Figure 18. Analytical framework on supply-side barriers to productive employment




Source: Authors.


                                                        25
In terms of educational background, the profile of the poor and SSN beneficiaries does not differ
starkly from the general population. Compared to other countries, such as those in the Western
Balkans (World Bank 2014a), Figure 20 shows that more than 90 percent of individuals across groups
completed secondary diplomas; just less than a third of FBP beneficiaries and nearly 40 percent of the
poor have a tertiary education, which is remarkably good by international standards.

Figure 19. Age distribution, by population Figure 20. Educational attainment, by population
segment                                    segment

                                                                                    Population    5           47                  48
       Poor        18          26             19         21         15


    Non FBP                                                                               Poor     8               55               37
                   19          26             18        22          15
     poor

                                                                                  Non FBP Poor     8           54                   39
    FBP Ben        15         27               28             18     11

                                                                                       FBP Ben    10                61                   29
                   17         24          18           25          16
Population
                                                                                                 0%     20%        40%    60%     80%         100%
              0%        20%         40%        60%          80%      100%                         Elementary school
      [15-24]       [25-34]         [35-44]         [45-54]        [55-64]                        Secondary/Vocational
                                                                                                  Higher education (college or higher)



Unobserved differentials in cognitive and behavioral skills could be a factor that explains the poor LM
outcomes of vulnerable groups. Although educational attainment is fairly similar across population
groups, differences in the actual level of skills, as opposed to formal education certification, could be
one of the factors affecting the observed differentials in employability. The recent Skills Survey for
Armenia (World Bank, forthcoming) suggests that even controlling for the education and demographic
characteristic, individuals at school age who lived in households with lower socioeconomic status
displayed lower average reading skills and lower socioemotional skills as adults.7 This is particularly
relevant for Armenia, where individuals’ job-relevant skills, rather than their credentials, are highly
rewarded in the LM. For instance, every additional year of education was found to increase hourly
earnings by 4.7 percentage points, but “such rate of return virtually disappears when one accounts for
different skill groups”. On the other hand, this may be heartening to the extent that such skills can still
be taught even outside formal education, for instance, through well-designed ALMPs.

In addition, household-level constraints are potentially very binding for women in poor households,
who are care givers to more dependents than the general population. Figures 21–24 suggest that FBP
beneficiaries are the population group with the highest share of single parents, and the highest number
of children per household, compared to the other groups. Female-headed households are also higher
among the FBP, at 35 percent, although this rate is generally high across the population (30 percent).
7
  Cognitive skills include literacy, numeracy, and the ability to solve abstract problems; socioemotional skills
include traits covering multiple domains (social, emotional, personality, behaviors, attitudes, and so on).


                                                                             26
The disproportionate presence of dependents compared to the non-covered population, including the
rest of the poor, shows the impact of the current design of the eligibility formula and its social
vulnerability component in determining coverage (explored further in Chapter 2).

   Figure 21. Single-parent households                                        Figure 22. Households with 2 or more children
                                                                              aged 0–15 years
       Population                                                       22      Population                      27


              Poor                                                 21                 Poor                                 40


     Non FBP poor                                                       22    Non FBP Poor                            35


          FBP Ben                                  13                             FBP Ben                                              64


                     -
                     0          5        10        15        20          25                  -0          20          40          60            80

   Figure 23. Households with one or more babies Figure 24. Dependency ratio
   aged 0–2 years

       Population                                  16                                 Population                          0.46

                                                                                  Non SSN benef
             Poor                                             23                                                                  0.76
                                                                                      poor

                                                                                  Non FBP benef
    Non FBP poor                                             22                                                                          0.97
                                                                                      poor

          FBP Ben                                                  24                    FBP Ben                          0.47


                     0
                     -      5       10        15        20    25         30                        0.0
                                                                                                    0     0.2   0.4        0.6   0.8     1.0
   Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS 2011.
   Note: Ratio computed as the number of non-work-able to the number of work-able adults in the household.

Qualitative evidence suggests that the lack of decision-making power for women in the household is a
significant constraint to their participation in work. A qualitative study (see Box 2) conducted among
employed and unemployed men and women, as well as employers, revealed that social norms on
women’s role in the household is a significant factor that constrains women in entering the labor force.
Interviewed women reported lacking the ability to decide autonomously whether they can work or not,
with husbands and mothers-in-law pressurizing them to stay home. Women reported that they earned
the respect of their peers by taking care of the house, the children, and any elderly family members.
Interestingly, social norms also had an impact on male employment but through a different channel:
men reported that stigma is attached to taking low-paid or unskilled jobs, which would be considered
humiliating.




                                                                        27
                         Box 2. Qualitative assessment of barriers to women in the LM

A qualitative study was commissioned to further understand the barriers that men and women face in
obtaining productive employment. It relied on focus group discussions with employed and unemployed men
and women in Yerevan and in key selected marzes, as well as on in-depth interviews with employers, policy
makers at different levels, and civil society.

Barriers to work stemming from social norms. Men and women face different constraints to engage in
employment. Husbands and mothers-in-law exert pressure on women to stay at home: “My husband does not
let me work and I cannot do anything about it, even though I want to work; but he is the head of the family,”
said an inactive woman in Gegharkunik. However, women also feel a more general social pressure that staying
home is the best way to earn the respect of their peers: “There is always public critique toward women who
are active and want to go further in their career, and not all women are ready to face this criticism and negative
attitude from society,” said one inactive woman. Another inactive woman in Gegharkunik explained, “I am the
best daughter-in-law in our family so I decided to stay at home and organized everything: take care of my
children, sick mother-in-law, do housework, and I feel very happy that I did it. I was also very respected and
accepted by the members of my family.”

Men, on the other hand, feel a lot of pressure to take up a job, but it has to be high paying. “Men dream about
big money only; they want to be bosses, but instead it would have been much better to stand up from the
couch and actually just do something to earn some money,” said an employed woman in Aragatsotn. According
to an unemployed woman in Yerevan, “Unemployed men are in a more vulnerable position today than
unemployed women because it is the man who should take all responsibility and provide for a family, not the
woman.”

Barriers to work stemming from household responsibilities. Women are in charge of several household
chores, such as taking care of children, the house, and the elderly, that leave them with less time to devote to
productive work. As one unemployed woman in Yerevan put it, “I have so many things to do at home, it seems
impossible to balance work and family duties.” Child care is expensive and women would use all their earnings
to pay for it. Said an unemployed woman from Lori, “It is not worth it to work because you spend all your
money on transportation and kindergarten.”

Social norms and household responsibilities affect employers’ perceptions of and actions related to women.
Most employers are male, and despite recognizing that women have better skills than men for many jobs, they
prefer not to hire women because they believe their place is at home or because their household
responsibilities will interfere with work. As one employer said, “Almost every day we have some woman saying
that I should go earlier to pick up my child from the kindergarten, I will be late tomorrow because I should take
my child to the school, I should go to parents’ meeting at school today , etc.” In addition, staying at home makes
it almost impossible for women to get back into the labor force. “People in their 40s, especially women who
were busy bringing up children, got Soviet education, which is not competitive now, hardly have computer
skills, and mostly don’t know English,” said one employer. “ I realize, it is not good and I am contributing to the
discrimination, but I don’t even look at the resumes of those who were born in 1965–70s.”

Social norms affect men’s perceptions of jobs, wages, and the jobseeking process. Because of these
perceptions, men might be unwilling to accept job offers or be active in the job search. “I don’t have any hope
that I will find a job; I am not looking anymore,” said an unemployed man in Yerevan. “Anyway, you either
should have very influential connections or pay a bribe in order to find a job, so why should I even bother.”
“How can a man work as a clerk? Clerks should make coffee for their bosses.”
                                                        28
Source: qualitative study on constraints to female labor force participation.
Economic factors—such as the cost and scarcity of child care services and important gender wage
gaps—support this traditional division of labor in the household. In addition to social norms, focus
group participants added that high costs of private child care services and the scarcity of cheaper
options make it harder for them to justify—on economic grounds—taking a job outside the house. This
is especially the case for women with limited earning capacity.8 In fact, the findings from qualitative
evidence are in line with the predictions of the theoretical simulation (the OECD tax and benefit model)
that will be introduced in detail in the next chapter. The model shows that in light of the high
opportunity costs of leaving one’s home and the cost of child care, most women cannot afford to take
low-wage jobs.

Implications for design and targeting of services

It is unlikely that a single approach across all the PES would be suitable, given the heterogeneity of
barriers that the poor face. The operational implication of this profile analysis will be further discussed
in Chapter 3.




8
 As shown in Rutkowski (2012), Armenia displays very significant gaps in wages across genders, and thus many
more women than men face only low-paying work prospects.


                                                      29
Chapter 2. Is the social protection system ready for activation?

Key Messages

Armenia’s spending on SP is low by regional standards, and it is almost entirely allocated to
individuals that are presumed unable to work.
   In 2012, Armenia spent 5.4 percent of the GDP on SI, 1.7 percent on SA, and about 0.1 percent on
    the LM, compared to about 8 percent, 2 percent, and 0.7 percent respectively in the average
    European or Central Asian country. The FBP is the paramount SA mechanism for protecting the
    poor, complemented by the one-time benefit.
   Programs intended to serve the work-able population as direct beneficiaries primarily include
    ALMPs and the FBP. As such, the share of the SP budget to support the population that could be
    active in the LM is only 6 percent of all SP spending. The limited protection for the vulnerable work-
    able may indirectly incentivize them to enter inactivity-focused programs such as disability pensions.

The targeting system builds on strong empirical and operational foundations, but it could be
further strengthened to maximize coverage of the poor with a formula.
   The FBP has shown significant strengths in terms of benefit administration, eligibility determination,
    and outreach. However, still only about a quarter of all households living below the upper poverty
    line receive the benefit. This is the result of the stringent eligibility formula.
   Although fairly well performing, the formula could be updated to match the best performing
    programs in the region, given the high capacity already in place. Moreover the coverage of the
    benefit varies across marzes for reasons uncorrelated with poverty.
   Several reasons explain this mixed performance, but ultimately a formula that tracked proxies of
    consumption-poverty, rather than proxies of incomes, would be better placed to identify the poor in
    Armenia, where poverty is measured with consumption.

Most households currently covered by the FBP could potentially have one member
participate in activation measures, if appropriate support services were in place.
   Going into activation, about half of the individuals who benefit from the FBP could be considered
    work-able, though many have high caretaking duties, especially women. However, even after
    accounting for caretaking needs, most FBP beneficiary households would have spare labor for
    activation.
   The existing information system does not identify the extent to which work-able individuals are
    already productively employed. In the administrative data, only 7 percent of the work-able are
    recorded as employed. This contrasts with the evidence from the ILCS, which shows that half of the
    work-able population in the FBP is employed.




                                                   30
However, the combination of taxes and of the current benefit formula could act as a
disincentive to enter formal work at low-pay.
   Administrative data shows that new entrants in the FBP have about a 25 percent chance of exiting
    the program after 16 months, but graduation is largely happening for households that had a score
    very close to the eligibility threshold at entry, and not because the households’ financial conditions
    have improved substantially.
   Mobility of beneficiaries in and out of formal jobs is minimal. This is consistent with the fact that the
    benefit formula’s current design leaves limited space for work-able beneficiaries to experiment with
    returning to the LM without being quickly removed from the program. As new simulations using the
    OECD model shows, if an adult from a two-earners couple household take a formal job just above
    the minimum wage, most of their new income would be lost through the combination of paying new
    taxes and losing their previous benefits.
   In the context of activation, the formula may actually reduce incentives for household members to
    join ALMPs for fear of losing eligibility for the program.
   Finally program rules seem to favor households with more informal sources of income, while the
    accumulation of productive assets such as owning a car, opening a company, or acquiring livestock
    or land.

In addition, the supply of programs to activate individuals remains limited compared to the
demand that introducing co-responsibilities would generate
   Very few of the beneficiaries who are not recorded as employed appear to be registered in the PES.
    The current benefit formula provides some limited incentive, but no obligation, for household
    members to register, unlike in most countries in the region.
   While increased coordination with the PES could be desirable, at the moment the system does not
    have the capacity to provide sufficient activation services even to one work-able beneficiary per
    household, due to the low availability of vacancies and of ALMPs.
In light of these capacity constraints, there is scope to enhance the level of profiling of beneficiaries to
make the best use of a scarce supply of services.

Introduction

The purpose of this chapter is to analyze the extent to which Armenia’s benefit system is geared to
favor poverty reduction as well as for the active inclusion of the vulnerable population in the LM. This
analysis is conducted in three sections. Section 1 provides a general overview of Armenia’s benefit
system, and takes a new look at the extent to which social expenditures are oriented toward an
activation objective. Section 2 focuses on how effectively the system mitigates poverty. Finally, Section 3
analyzes on the one hand the potential for activation among safety net beneficiaries, from the
perspective of administrative data, and on the other the readiness of the system for their activation. In
particular, we take a systematic look at the extent to which the FBP favors the LM inclusion of its stock
of beneficiaries, through a combination of empirical analysis of beneficiaries’ graduation patterns and


                                                     31
simulations of the incentives generated by the benefit formula. Finally, we take stock of active LM
policies currently in place, and the extent to which these are coordinated with SA.

Overall, this analysis suggests that Armenia’s benefit system is heavily skewed toward the protection
of those who are unable to work, as is customary in the region. Spending focuses on old age and
disability pensions. Benefits to protect work-able individuals from poverty, as well as programs to
facilitate their integration into the LM are limited compared to the need, which may put pressure on
inactivity-related benefits such as disability. The FBP represents the main income protection tool for
Armenia’s poor and plays an important role in poverty reduction among the work-able. However, the
program deteriorated slightly over time in terms of targeting precision, and the current benefit formula
design displays important exclusionary filters that keep its coverage low and biased in favor of certain
categories of households.

Although there is activation potential among SA beneficiaries, the benefit’s design does not
incentivize graduation, particularly among those with the highest potential. Once a household enters
the FBP, its probability of graduating over time is rather low; even fewer households graduate because
they effectively move out of poverty. While the program is not particularly generous by regional
standards,9 the formula design could be improved to reduce potential disincentives to join formal jobs at
low pay, and to incentivize participation in activation measures. SESA currently offers an array of ALMPs
that appear to be effective in reducing unemployment, but their supply and number of private sector
vacancies is low with respect to the need.

Main characteristics of Armenia’s social assistance and labor benefit system
Like most other European and Central Asian countries, Armenia’s SP system consists of three main
pillars: SI, LM programs, and SA.10 This section reviews the main characteristics of the SP system, with a
particular emphasis on those benefits and programs that cover the work-able population.11 The overall
SP system is administered by the Ministry of Labor and Social Issues (MOLSI) and implemented by
specialized agencies. The State Social Security Service (SSSS) is in charge of state pension benefits; the
SESA is responsible for active and passive LM policies; the territorial social services units (TSSUs)
distribute SA benefits, including the FB; and the Social Medical Expertise Commission (SMEC) distributes
disability benefits.


9
  The FBP represents about 33 percent of the post-transfer total consumption aggregate of the beneficiaries in the
poorest quintile. Generosity of LRSA programs in the Europe and Central Asia region varies between 8 percent
(Romania in 2011) and 45 percent (Georgia in 2011) (ECA SPeeD 2014).
10
   SI programs are designed to help households insure themselves against sudden reductions in income. SA
programs are noncontributory transfer programs targeted in some way at the poor and those vulnerable to
poverty and shocks. LM programs include active programs aimed at increasing skills, employment, and the long-
run earning potential of participants, and passive programs that provide income support in the event of
unemployment.
11
   The forthcoming Armenia Public Expenditure Review (World Bank 2014b) carries out a complete analysis of SP
expenditures, from which this section has drawn some key elements to illustrate the main characteristics of the SP
system.


                                                        32
Figure 25. Spending on SP in select European and Central American countries, and on SA in Armenia

                                                                  Other   Armenia SA 2012
                                                                   SA
                                                                  15%

                                                             Disabili
                                                                ty                  FBP
                                                             Benefits               55%
                                                              13%


                                                             Family
                                                             allowan       Social
                                                                ces       pension
                                                               13%          4%




Source: ECA SPeeD (2014). Latest available year used.

Compared to the rest of the region, Armenia’s spending remains relatively low in terms of GDP. While
on average, European and Central American countries spend about 8 percent of their GDP on SI, 2
percent on SA, and 0.5–1 percent on LM programs (both active measures and unemployment benefits
[UBs]), Armenia spent 5.4 percent on SI, 1.7 on SA, and about 0.1 percent on LM in 2012 (Figure 25).
Nevertheless, in Armenia the total spending on these three pillars accounts for a major share of the
general government budget. According to the 2014 budget, spending on SP is expected to increase from
6.7 percent to 7.6 percent of GDP from 2013 to 2014. Table 1 provides a detailed breakdown of SP
programs in Armenia, as well as 2012 figures for the share of spending relative to GDP and number of
beneficiaries.




                                                        33
Table 1. Main SP and SI programs, 2012
 Category       Programs                             Targets    Work-       %    of   % of   Direct          % of Poor
                                                     able population        GDP       SA     Beneficiaries   Covered
                All SI programs                                             4.4       73.7   n.a.            59.3
                Pensions                             No                     4         71     459,800         59.3
 Social
                Other social insurance (for          No                     0.16      2.7    64,678          n.a.
 insurance
                example, paid sick leave, parental
                leave)
                All LM programs                                             0.07      1.2    n.a.            n.a.
 Labor          ALMPs - training, employment         Yes                    0.01      0.1    2,225           n.a.
 market         incentives
                Unemployment benefits                                       0.06      1      12,818          1
                All SA programs                                             1.5       25.1   n.a.            23.7
                FBP and emergency benefit            Mixed      (45%        0.8       14     97,500          21.6
                                                     work-able)
                Social pension                       No                     0.23      4.2    42,045          n.a.
                - old age                                                   0.01      0.2    (disability)    n.a.
                - disability                                                0.18      3.2    9,820           n.a.
 Social         - survivor                                                  0.05      0.8    (others)        n.a.
 assistance     Family allowances                    No                     0.18      3.2
                - childbirth grant                                          0.11      1.9    43,449          1.5
                - child care benefit                                        0.07      1.3    11,299
                Other social assistance benefits                            0.21      3.8
                - funeral grants                     n/a                    0.11      1.9    23,275          n.a.
                - health care benefits               Mixed         (45%     0.1       1.8    97,500          n.a.
                                                     work-able)
 Total                                               8% of direct           6.70      100                    69.1
                                                     beneficiaries
                                                     6%      of       all
                                                     expenditure
Source: ECA SPeeD (2014).
Note: Percentages are rounded.


Most SA is represented by the FBP, Armenia’s flagship anti-poverty program, which is complemented
by a set of non-means-tested benefits. About 0.79 percent of Armenia’s GDP in 2012 was spent on the
FBP, while the group of non-means-tested programs cost about 0.63 percent of the GDP. These
programs include categorical disability programs, old age and survivor pensions (for those who do not
qualify for the contributory tier), family allowances—including a child care allowance for employed
mothers until a child is two years old, schooling assistance for children entering school, and a new large
birth grant—as well as funeral grants.

In the last ten years, Armenia has undertaken several reforms of the SP and insurance system,
including increased emphasis on active support measures. Most SP and labor programs in Armenia
have undergone major reform during this period. The recent public expenditure review on Armenia
(World Bank 2014b) extensively discusses these changes. With the support of the World Bank, MOLSI
has taken big steps toward greater integration of SP services, by locating all the services in Integrated
Social Service Centers. These new centers feature a unified reception for benefit application and
administration, and will soon introduce case managers. In the area of LM, in 2013 the government
abolished the UB—which was first established in 2005—with the intention to substitute it with a
jobseeker allowance that has greater job search conditionalities attached, and higher financing for

                                                               34
ALMPs. In addition, the 2014 reform of state benefits will institute generous birth grants to large
families.

In spite of these changes, SP spending that is meant to sustain and incentivize the active and work-
able population represents a very small (and diminishing) share of SP expenditure. The programs that
focus on the work-able population as direct beneficiaries include primarily ALMPs, passive labor income
support programs, and, to some extent, SA benefits that cover the working population such as family
benefits. Although pensions, disability benefits, and child care allowances might also indirectly benefit
work-able household members, they are in general meant to replace incomes for individuals who are
not self-sufficient and do not incentivize (or even prohibit) participation in theLM. As shown in Table 1,
the share of the SP budget to support (either financially or with services) the population that is active or
could be active in the LM is rather small, at 6 percent of all SP spending. The introduction of a more
generous birth grant is set to even further increase the share of SA that is devoted to benefits not tied to
the work-able population. Although the integration of social services is aimed at enhancing the active
inclusion of the population and tackling the causes of poverty, financing for benefits that are pro-activity
will need to increase substantially in order to provide a sufficient number of effective programs to more
individuals.

Overall spending on LM policies, at 0.07 percent of GDP, is low by regional standards, and has been on
a declining trend since 2010, although the abolition of the UB will increase absolute funding for active
measures. Figure 26 shows the evolution of expenditures on LM policies by categories. Starting in the
mid-2000s, public spending on ALMPs (mostly training-related) and on the UB rose substantially in
Armenia. However, the number of people receiving benefits has decreased both in active and passive
programs. In particular, in the last two years before program closure, the number of unemployed people
covered by the UB had almost halved, driving down total expenditure. Part of this reduction was driven
by a reduction in the unemployment rate; nevertheless the low level of assistance conflicts with the
prevalent high levels of unemployment. The fall in ALMP spending was driven by the shrinking of wage
subsidies and public works. Among the ALMPs, spending on integration of the disabled and on start-up
incentives has a negligible contribution to the overall budget. While in 2006 most of the resources were
directed to wage subsidies, in 2013 they were almost equally split between training and wage subsidies.




                                                    35
Figure 26. Expenditures on Active LM Policies
                                     0.04%
                                     0.03%


                    Percent of GDP
                                     0.03%
                                     0.02%
                                     0.02%
                                     0.01%
                                     0.01%
                                     0.00%
                                             2000

                                                    2001

                                                           2002

                                                                  2003

                                                                         2004

                                                                                 2005

                                                                                        2006

                                                                                               2007

                                                                                                      2008

                                                                                                               2009

                                                                                                                      2010

                                                                                                                             2011

                                                                                                                                    2012

                                                                                                                                           2013
           Start up incentives                      Support for the integration of disabled                  Wage subsidy              Training

Source: ECA SPeeD (2014)
Note: Data for 2005 are not available.




Performance of the social assistance system in protecting from poverty

The FBP system is the paramount mechanism for income protection of work-able individuals and their
families. Of all SA benefits, the FBP remains the largest and the best targeted. Unlike other minimum-
income programs in Europe and Central Asia, the FBP was conceived as a last resort SA that targets
households, which are both poor and socially vulnerable. Eligibility for the FBP is determined through its
multiplicative formula that factors in incomes, a few proxies for poverty and ‘social vulnerability’ of
members (see Box 3). To achieve the minimum eligibility score of 30, the household needs to score
sufficiently high on the social vulnerability scale and display an income within an established threshold.
A score of 0 is assigned to households that display either excessive formal income or because they own
certain assets that are used as filters.

In addition, a more limited one-off benefit provides coverage to households that are not eligible for
the FBP. Households with a score above 0 and below 30 do not qualify for the FBP but can be granted a
one-off benefit at the discretion of social welfare offices. This benefit covers only about 9,000
households, or about 10 percent of FBP families. These households tend to have a substantially higher
per capita recorded income than FBP beneficiaries (see Table 2). As shown in Figure 27, all households
with a score of zero in the registry are among the nonbeneficiaries. This stresses the importance of
vetting the fairness of the automatic disqualifiers associated with the formula.




                                                                                36
Box 3. The FBP eligibility formula
Eligibility for the FBP is determined through a multiplicative scoring formula: households need to pass the
threshold of 30 points to receive transfers. The amount of transfers depends on the households’ exact score,
number of children, and geographic area of residence. The formula takes into account three main factors: the
social conditions of the household members, the actual and imputed incomes of the household, and other proxies
of welfare. The first term of the formula is the household’s mean social vulnerability. Each family member is
categorized into a social group, to which a specific score is assigned. For example, children below the age of 5
receive 35 points; scores for disabled persons range between 28 and 48 points based on the disability level;
employed adults receive the minimum score of 18 points; and the registered unemployed receive a score of 22.
The average social vulnerability score of the household is augmented when disabled members are present. The
second term considers family income averaged over the household, and the coefficient is calculated as 1.2 –
0.000033* (per capita income). Furthermore, housing conditions and geographic area of residence with respect to
security are taken into account with scores ranging between 1 and 1.2 points. Finally, the formula contains a set of
automatic disqualifiers: possession of a motor vehicle, acquisition ofreal estate by a family member, registration as
a company, or electricity expenditure above a certain threshold. If one of these disqualifiers applies, the family
                                                                                                           12
automatically becomes ineligible for benefits, irrespective of the scores of the other formula components.




Table 2. Average number of households with Figure 27. Distribution of evaluation score in FBP
evaluation scores above zero, and recorded database by beneficiary status in 2012
income levels, 2012
                       Frequency (h.h.)       Recorded
                                                                                                Family Benefit                              Emergency benefit
                       Number %               per capita
                                                                      .15




                                              income
 Family benefit        96,867        80%      5,361
                                                                        .1
                                                                      .05




 One-off emergency     8,996         7%
                                              14,739
                                                                             0




 benefit
                                                            Density




                                                                                                                                 0    10   20   30   40   50   60

                                                                                              Non Beneficiary
                                                                      .15




 Not a beneficiary     15,566        13%      13,592
                                                                        .1




 Suspended benefit     399           0.3%     5,987
                                                                      .05




 Total                 121,827       100%     5,689
                                                                             0




                                                                                 0    10   20    30   40    50   60
                                                                                                             Family Vulnerability Score
                                                                            Graphs by beneficiary status. Source: FBP database, Jan-Dec 2012.
Source: MOLSI administrative data, January–December 2012.


In 2012, 21 percent of all households living below the poverty line were covered by the FBP, and
about 60 percent of beneficiaries were pre-transfer poor. Administrative data indicate that 96,867
households were covered by the FBP on average in 2012, amounting to about 400,000 beneficiaries. In
terms of targeting, 60 percent of the program’s beneficiaries lived below the national poverty line in
2012 (Figure 30).13 According to the ILCS, FBP beneficiaries represent 13.5 percent of the total

12
  For a detailed explanation of the eligibility formula see Karapetyan (2014).
13
  This represents a decline compared to 2011, when 60 percent of beneficiaries were poor. This development
could be in part explained by coverage expansion (beneficiaries increased by about 10 percent), or because some


                                                                      37
population, and the program covers 36 percent of the pre-transfer bottom quintile, or 24 percent of all
those living below the national poverty line (Figure 29). Although the program is larger than most
countries in Europe and Central Asia in terms of share of the population covered, the program has much
room to grow in light of the high poverty rates that Armenia continues to face.

Figure 28. Coverage of Last Resort Social Assistance (LRSA) programs in Europe and Central Asia and
PPP harmonized poverty rates
                          45
                                                                                                  Georgia
                          40
                                                Kyrgyz Republic                                  ARM 2010
                          35
                                                                             ARM 2011
                                                                                               ARM 2012
       Poverty rate (%)




                          30                                          ARM 2009
                                                                                              Kosovo
                          25
                          20
                          15
                          10
                                                                      MKD
                                                        MDA     ALB
                          5                       BGR
                                   KAZ                   JPOL
                          0              UKR
                               0     5     10   15      20      25        30           35         40        45
                                                Coverage Bottom Quintile (%)
Source: ECA SPeeD (2014). Figure uses Europe and Central Asia harmonized poverty lines at US$2.5 PPP per day. Welfare quintiles net of all SA
transfers.
Note: Program coverage is the share of population in each group that receives the transfer. Coverage is: (number of individuals in the group
who live in a household where at least one member receives the transfer)/(number of individuals in the group).
Country codes: ALB-Albania, ARM-Armenia, BIH-Bosnia-i-Herzegovina, BGR-Bulgaria, HUN-Hungary, KAZ-Kazakhstan, MKD-FYR Macedonia,
MDA-Moldova, POL-Poland, UKR-Ukraine.




of the existing beneficiary households may have improved their welfare as the economy recovered, and such
change is not immediately captured in the recertification process.


                                                                      38
Figure 29. Coverage of the FBP                                          Figure 30. Targeting accuracy of the FBP
                           40                                                                           70




                                                                         Share in total beneficiaries
 % receiving the benefit

                           35                                                                           60
                           30                                                                           50
                           25
                                                                                                        40
                           20
                                           36.2                                                         30   59.7
                           15                                                                                              52.2
                                24.4                                                                    20          40.3
                           10
                            5                     13.7                                                  10                        21
                                       8                 8.6 5.1 3.9                                                                   12.9 7.8 6.1
                            0                                                                            0




Source: ILCS 2012.
Note: Welfare level computed before the FBP transfer, and including any other transfer. Poor defined as individuals living below the upper poverty
line.

Undercoverage of the poor is geographically uneven, and some of the poorest marzes have low
coverage rates. Since the socioeconomic characteristics of poor households vary considerably across
marzes, the undercoverage of the program is heterogeneous. Some of the marzes with the highest
poverty rates such as Shirak and Kotayk display relatively low coverage, while Vayots Dzor, the region
with the lowest poverty headcount in 2012, has the highest coverage rate of the poor.

Figure 31. Regional coverage of the FBP

       50.0
       40.0                                                                                                                              % population
       30.0                                                                                                                              covered by FBP

       20.0
                                                                                                                                         % poor covered by
       10.0                                                                                                                              FBP
                   0.0
                                                                                                                                         Poverty Rates




Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS, 2012.




                                                                       39
Figure 32. Reasons for not registering in the FBP Figure 33. Perception about the proportion of
database                                          FBP recipients that are vulnerable
100%                                       Other                          100%
                12             17                                          90%
 90%                                                                       80%                                          Don’t know
 80%            12                         I have been rejected            70%
                               17          once                            60%                                          A few of them
 70%
 60%                                       Difficult to get the            50%
                                           required documents              40%                                          Less than the
 50%            48                                                         30%
                                           Bad attitude of the                                                          half
 40%                           43                                          20%
                                           social workers                  10%                                          Half
 30%                                       In any case, I wouldn’t          0%
 20%                                       get anything                                                                 More than the
 10%            24                         I have no information                                                        half
                               16
  0%                                                                                                                    Almost all
           Population      Non-SSN         I considered myself
                         Benefic. in Q1    well-off

Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS, 2011.
Note: To gather the data for Error! Reference source not found., the question was, “Which proportion of the FBP recipients do you think are
vulnerable?”



Undercoverage is unlikely to result from information deficit, as the program is well known and most
applicants understand the eligibility system in broad terms. The survey data indicates that overall, the
population is familiar with the FBP, particularly the poor (Figure 32); almost no individual reported
failing to register in the FBP because they did not know about it. This is matched by the qualitative
research conducted in 2014 on a sample of 216 FBP beneficiaries (Rebosio 2014), which suggested that
households are aware of the program’s main eligibility requirements, including the filters that prevent
access even to vulnerable households (cattle, cars, and electricity), and of the advantage brought by
particular social conditions such as having a lot of children. For this reason, the program’s low coverage
cannot be explained by a lack of awareness among the eligible.

The overall perception is that the program’s eligibility criteria are stringent, and it may not be worth
applying given the uncertainty of the application process. Figure 32 shows that the most frequent
reason the noncovered poor did not register in the FBP is because they believe that their chances of
getting into the program are low, while only 17 percent reported to have applied and actually been
rejected. Documentation burden is also rarely seen as an obstacle. Qualitative interviews complement
this finding, and suggests that the documentation burden at application is perceived as an obstacle, not
because getting documents is difficult (Figure 32), but because it represents a considerable costs in
terms of time, while the outcome of the application process remains uncertain given the complexity of
the eligibility formula.




                                                                     40
Figure 34. Perceptions about the FBP program’s application and implementation process
             Registered non benef.           Non-SSN Benefic. in Q1            FBP Benef.

                         Consider that the FBP is fair

                Found the application process easy
     Informed of any hh conditions change after
                  registration (%)
               Paid for any document/certification

             Found reason for benefit refusal clear

                                                            -    10   20   30     40    50         60      70      80
                                                                           % responding yes
Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS, 2011.
Note: All responses reported represent individuals 15–64.

At the same time, among nonbeneficiaries the perception of targeting accuracy is less positive than its
actual performance. While most individuals seem to understand how the program is designed and
believe that the targeting criteria are stringent, a large share may not regard its outcomes as fair.
Quantitative data suggest that in 2011, only 40 percent of valid respondents14 in the population thought
that a majority of the FBP beneficiaries were poor, which contrasts with the high targeting performance
of the program in the same year (Figure 33). The perception of the program’s targeting quality is
polarized: among FBP beneficiaries, 70 percent of valid respondents believed that more than half of the
beneficiaries are poor; among the nonbeneficiaries, 70 percent believe that less than half of the
beneficiaries are poor. Similarly, less than a quarter of the noncovered individuals who are poor (quintile
1) believe the system is fair (Figure 34).

Effectively, as currently designed, the eligibility formula excludes many poor households, especially
due to its automatic disqualifier filters, which nevertheless are important to keep the nonpoor out of
the program. The following analysis of exclusion and inclusion errors of the FBP formula is based on a
simulation conducted by the 2011 ILCS,15 which imputed an eligibility score to each household using all
the criteria adopted by the FBP system that were available in the household survey. The simulated score
had a significant margin of error in identifying beneficiaries,16 but is still indicative of the elements that
can lead to high rates of exclusion of the poor. The simulation suggests overall, that the binary filters are
more effective at excluding the nonpoor than the poor. However, these filters could potentially also be



14
   Excluding those who reported that they did not know the answer.
15
   This section is based on Nikitin (2013).
16
   The simulated eligibility score relied on the household information available in ILCS 2011, which is a subset of all
criteria used by social workers. The simulated evaluation score resulted in coverage rates of 10.5 percent of the
population—against 12 percent in reality—and it successfully identified 50 percent of the actual beneficiaries.
Also, the difference in inclusion error is greater for the simulated score, as the FBP covered only 4 percent of total
nonpoor, while the simulated covered 8 percent of the total nonpoor.


                                                                41
important barriers to access the program, as 14 percent of the poor are simulated to be excluded due to
their formal incomes, and 13 percent due to car ownership (Figure 35).

Figure 35. Simulated disqualification of poor                                Figure 36. Income sources by household type
and non-poor at total poverty line
                                           Non-poor    Poor                  100%       0.05
                               45%                            42%             90%
                               40%                                                                                     0.32
                                                                              80%
                                                                                                                                      0.48
                                     33%                                      70%
                               35%                                                                        0.69
                                                                              60%
  % ineligible due to filter




                               30%                                            50%       0.89
                               25%                                            40%
                                                                                                                       0.61
                                                                              30%                                                     0.44
                               20%                                            20%
                                                                14%   14%                                 0.24
                               15%     13%                                    10%
                                                                               0%       0.06              0.03         0.05           0.05
                               10%                                                  No work-able 1+ work-able, no 1 work-able w. 2+ work-able w.
                                                      5%                6%
                                                        4%                            member       dependents      dependents      dependents
                               5%
                                               0%0%                                 Other income                      Work Income
                               0%                                                   Pension income                    Unemployment benefit
                          K real      K
                                     K car   K formal K                             Agricultural income
                          estate business income electricity
Source: Authors’ calculation based on ILCS, 2011.

The reliance on formal income sources to identify welfare may skew coverage in favor of households
with informal labor income and remittance recipients. According to the FBP administrative data, most
households rely entirely on pensions or imputed revenues from land ownership or cattle as their income
sources (Figure 36). In practice, however, a large share of poor households in Armenia relies on informal
jobs outside agriculture, which the FBP is unable to capture. In fact, according to the ILCS, the share of
labor earnings in total consumption for FBP beneficiary households is 25 percent, significantly less than
for the poor nonbeneficiaries (75 percent), but more than the share of labor income reported in the FBP
database. For this reason, program coverage is skewed in favor of informal workers (Chapter 1, Figures 6
and 14), and this translates into a lower probability of poor households being included, if they have
formal labor incomes. A similar, though less stark, pattern emerges for poor remittance-recipient
households, which have 6 percentage points higher inclusion rates than poor households without
remittances (Figure 37). In rural areas, as shown in Figure 38, not having agricultural incomes or cattle
slightly increases the likelihood of being covered by the program. Although these are relatively small
differentials, qualitative research conducted on FBP beneficiaries (Rebosio 2014) also suggests that
households act strategically in response to the formula’s biases against formal and agricultural income
and livestock; several respondents reported selling their livestock in order to secure their entry into the
program (which undermines the family’s long-term income sustainability) or refrain from entering low-
paid formal jobs (an issue that will be explored in greater detail in the next section). A number of policy
options, discussed in Chapter 3 of this note, could maintain the targeting property of the information
collected through the current MIS, while moderating exclusion errors.




                                                                              42
Figure 37. Coverage rate by presence of non- Figure 38. Coverage rate by income typology in
detected income sources, for poor and nonpoor rural poor and nonpoor households
households

                                 Non-poor               Poor                                             Non-poor            Poor
                   30%                                                                      30%
                   25%                                                                      25%




                                                                          Coverage in FBP
 Coverage in FBP




                   20%                                                                      20%

                   15%                                                                      15%

                   10%                                                                      10%
                                                                                            5%
                   5%
                                                                                            0%
                   0%
                            No         Yes         No          Yes
                                                                                                    No        Yes       No          Yes

                         Informal labor income   Remittance income                                Agriculture income   Livestock income

Source: Authors’ calculations based on administrative database on FBP beneficiaries.


Performance of the family benefit program in terms of activation
This section provides an in-depth assessment of the extent to which the FBP is facilitating entry into
productive employment.17 Given the recent abolition of the UB, the FBP remains the only sizable
transfer in Armenia focused on the work-able population. This assessment is conducted largely by
exploiting an anonymized section of the administrative database of the FBP beneficiaries, accessing data
for the period October 2008 to October 2013. The descriptive statistics shown in this section refer to the
situation in May 2013, at which time 430,459 individuals from 102,540 households were included in the
database.

How much potential for activation exists in the family benefit program population?

About half of the individuals who benefit from the FBP could be considered work-able. According to
the administrative database, 49 percent, or about 200,000 individuals, could be considered work-able;
they are of working age (15–64) and not recorded as disabled or as students in the FB registry. This
figure closely matches the share of work-able derived from the 2011 ILCS (46 percent).




17
  Incentives to labor supply have already been deeply investigated by Levin (2011) on 2009 data, who found no
real difference around the simulated cut-off threshold. She did, however, find a slight difference in formality
propensity, consistent with the profiles shown above. Methodologically, it is important to distinguish that benefit
design incentives may differ depending on the outcome considered (formal employment versus labor force
participation in general).



                                                                     43
Figure 39. Beneficiary status by work ability                               Figure 40.      FBP         beneficiary       households’
                                                                            typology

                                                        Work-able                         No work-able member
    Non                                                                                   1+ work-able, no dependents
                       33,408                                                             1 work-able with dependents
 beneficiary
                                                        invalid                           2+ work-able with dependents
                                                        type I or II
     One-off                                            student                                           (17,080),
                       23,609
     benefit                                            under age                                           17%
                                                                                           (36,993) ,
                                                        23                                    36%
                                                        above 65
     Family                                                                                                  (37,226),
                    198,870                                                                                    36%
     Benefit                                            child                                (11,241),
                                                                                               11%
                                                        under 18
               0%               50%              100%

Source:     Authors’    calculations     based     on        administrative    database     on     FBP       beneficiaries,   May   2013.
Note: Absolute numbers in parenthesis.

Most FBP beneficiary households have at least one individual who could be considered work-able,
although many have important caretaking duties. In planning for potential activation measures to be
attached to benefit receipt, it is useful to detect the extent to which households include a member who
could be part of an activation requirement. Hence, households with work-able individuals are
catalogued in three further groups, based on the presence of members who are very likely to require
caretaking from work-able individuals. We define as dependents, individuals who suffer from a severe
disability (category I or II), children aged 0–5 years, and elderly aged 75 years or more. According to this
breakdown, a minority group of FBP beneficiary households (17 percent) have no member who could be
presumed to work; most of these households include either a dependent elder person or a person with
disability. Another 11 percent of households have only one work-able individual but have at least one
dependent, most often a young child or a person with a disability. On the other hand, 36 percent of
households had at least one member who is work-able and had no dependents, and an additional 36
percent included more than one work-able member with dependents (in most cases the dependents are
young children).

Thus, in theory, most FBP beneficiary households could be subject to activation measures, particularly
those that exhibit spare labor after accounting for caretaking needs. However, it is important to note
that different definitions of caretaking may strongly affect these household distributions. For instance, if
one assumes that children up to the age of 18 are dependents who constitute an effective constraint to
working, 75 percent of all households in the program have one such dependent. For the purpose of this
study, it is assumed that any household with at least one dependent needs the attention of only one
able-bodied adult caretaker. This implies that, irrespective of the reason for dependency (whether age
or disability), the caretaker would not be available for any type of participation in the formal LM.




                                                                       44
Figure 41. Caretaking duties by household typology

                                  Total

     2+ work-able w. dependents
                                                                                                  Elder 75+
      1 work-able w. dependents
                                                                                                  Child 0-5
     1+ work-able, no dependents                                                                  Disabled
            No work-able member

                                          0           0.2       0.4       0.6        0.8
                                                   % household with a dependent in need of care
Source: Authors’ calculations based on administrative database on FBP beneficiaries.

However, the existing information system is not tasked to identify the extent to which work-able
individuals are already productively employed. Given that the information system in the FBP is geared
toward capturing formal income through social security records, solely for the purpose of income
verification, its accuracy in detecting employment status is limited. Hence, while ILCS data suggest that
half of the work-able population in the FBP is employed, even if with lower intensity than the rest of the
population in terms of hours and at lower pay, it is not surprising that only about 7 percent of the work-
able are recorded as employed in the FBP database.

Mobility and graduation patterns among social assistance beneficiaries
The administrative data suggest that a quarter of FBP beneficiary households exit at least once from
the program by the 16th month. According to the ILCS, in 2011 the average FB recipient has been
enrolled in the program for 6 years. To further analyze the patterns of persistence of households in the
program, we apply survival analysis to the administrative data to follow, for 20 months, the 2,131
households that were newly registered in the program in January 2012.18 Figures 42 and 43 represents
the probability of graduating from the program at different durations from enrollment in January 2012;
by month 16 (April 2013), a quarter of households had left the program for at least 4 months. This rate is
only slightly higher when taking one month as a definition of exit.




18
  The choice to follow households for 20 months was dictated by data availability. Because the administrative
dataset does not report the actual date of permanence in the program, we define as new entrants those
households that were registered in January 2012 but were not beneficiaries in the previous periods available to
us—October 2011 to December 2011, and the month of October of 2008, 2009, and 2010.


                                                                     45
Figure 42. Probability of exit from the FBP for Figure 43. Probability of exit from the program by
at least 4 months among new entrants evaluation score at entry
                 Probability of long term exit from the program                                                 Probability of long-term exit from Family Benefit Program
                         (Exit = not receiving the benefit for 4 months)                                                                      By evaluation score quartile
0.30




                                                                                0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50
0.20
0.10




                                                                                                                0                      5                   10             15                           20
                                                                                                                                                 Months ( 0=January 2012)
0.00




                                                                                                                                           qeval = mean 30                     qeval = mean 31
       0                        5                     10             15    20                                                              qeval = mean 33                     qeval = mean 37
                                             Month, 0=January 2012
                                                                                                                Kaplan Maier Failure Function. Long term exit defined as out of program for 4 months
       Note: Kaplan-Meier failure function




Source: Authors’ calculations based on administrative database on FBP beneficiaries.

Graduation from the FBP is highly associated with a household’s evaluation score at enrollment, as a
large share of exiting households seem to do so for administrative reasons rather than substantial
changes in welfare. Figure 43 represents a similar survival analysis as in Figure 42, divided by beneficiary
households according to their position in the distribution of evaluation score at enrollment. The bottom
quartile is composed of households very close to the eligibility threshold (a mean evaluation score of
30). More than 40 percent of households in this group are likely to graduate by the 20th month, and by
the 6th month a third had left the program. Surprisingly, graduating patterns are strikingly different for
households that are just one point above those at the threshold: households in the second bottom
quartile (with a score of 31) had a 15 percent chance of graduating by the 20th month. Finally, the
chances of graduating among the top two quartiles were only around 10 percent. Although households
must recertify every six months, the system is also able to perform routine updates by cross-checking
other databases or demographic changes (such as age of members). Figure 44 suggests that higher
income at entry is also associated with higher exit rates, which is in line with the finding that
beneficiaries with lower vulnerability scores comprise the bulk of those leaving the program.

Households without dependents are more likely to be out of the program 20 months after enrollment.
Error! Reference source not found. reproduces hazard rates of graduation, according to the household
composition typology presented earlier. The graph suggests that up to a third of beneficiary households
with work-able adults and no dependents will be nonbeneficiaries after 20 months. On the other hand,
households with no work-able members, as well as those with only one potential earner and at least one
dependent, have a smaller chance of exit (22 percent).




                                                                                                46
       Figure 44. Probability of exit from the program Figure 45. Probability of exit from the FBP by
       by income quartile at entry                     household type

                                Probability of long-term exit from Family Benefit Program                                               Probability to exit from the program, by household type
                                                            By starting p.c. income quartile                                                       (Exit = not receiving the benefit for four months)




                                                                                                                             0.40
0.00 0.10 0.20 0.30 0.40 0.50




                                                                                                                             0.30
                                                                                                                             0.20
                                                                                                                             0.10
                                                                                                                             0.00
                                0                      5                   10             15                           20           0                      5                 10                15                      20
                                                                 Months ( 0=January 2012)                                                                         Months since entry (Jan 2012)

                                                                 Q1=321                        Q2=11035                                                   No work able                           1+ work-able no dep
                                                                 Q3=22801                      Q4=29999                                                   1 work-able +dep                       2+work-able +dep
                                Kaplan Maier Failure Function. Long term exit defined as out of program for 4 months                Note: Kaplan-Meier failure function. N = 2131 unique observations



       Source: Authors’ calculations based on administrative database on FBP beneficiaries.

       Overall, mobility in and out of formal employment seems to be very limited. The average recorded
       employment rate among work-able household members does not vary over the months of the year,
       which indicates that seasonal work is not captured. Table 3 shows the average probability that a work-
       able individual who was in the program in October 2011 changed his or her employment status between
       one semester and the following. The table indicates that the average transition rate from out of work
       into employment was less than 1 percent, and similarly only 3 percent of those who were recorded as
       employed moved out of work.

                                                             Table 3. Formal employment transition matrix from one semester to
                                                             the next over 5 semesters for work-able beneficiaries

                                                                                    Following                    Not formally working          Working formally                          Total
                                                                Previous
                                                                Not formally working                             99.65                         0.35                                      100
                                                                Working formally                                 3.41                          96.59                                     100
                                                                Total                                            93.92                         6.08                                      100
                                                             Note: Average probability that an individual changes employment status between one semester
                                                             and the following, between October 2011 and May 2013. The table includes only work-able
                                                             individuals who were beneficiaries in October 2011.




       The low level of labor mobility can be explained at least in part by the design of the benefit formula,
       which leaves little room to acquire labor income without almost automatically losing the benefit. Box
       4 describes in detail the income that a household is allowed to earn before being disqualified.
       Beneficiary households with the highest work potential are also those that can least enter the formal LM
       without losing their benefit. For instance, households with at least one work-able person and no
       dependents are much more likely to have an evaluation score close to the threshold of 30, compared to
       all other household types. On the other side of the spectrum, households that have no work-able



                                                                                                                            47
member or households with one single earner and many dependents are skewed toward higher
evaluation scores, and thus with more room to earn a formal income without being disqualified.

Box 4. The FBP benefit formula prioritizes individuals who cannot be self-sufficient, but leaves limited space to
experiment with the formal LM for work-able beneficiaries.

Unlike other guaranteed minimum income programs in the Europe and Central Asia region, the FBP was conceived
as an LRSA program that targets households that are both poor and in socially vulnerable situations, through its
multiplicative benefit formula (see Box 3 for more detail). A household is eligible only as long as it receives an
evaluation score of 30 or above, and to achieve this it needs to score sufficiently high on the social vulnerability
scale as well as have an income within an established threshold.

Figure 46. Income-threshold for program eligibility by household vulnerability score

                          Per capita income-threshold for program eligibility
                                  by average household social score
                     60
 Eligibility Score




                                                                                Score 25

                     30                                                         Score 30
                                                                                Score 40
                                                                                Score 50
                     -
                              0


                          12000
                          16000
                          20000
                          24000
                          28000
                          32000
                          36000
                          40000
                          44000
                          48000
                          52000
                          56000
                          60000
                          64000
                           4000
                           8000




                                   Per capita income

Source: Authors’ calculations based on administrative database on FBP beneficiaries.

Holding other factors in the formula constant, the social vulnerability score determines the maximum level of
income that can be ’disregarded’—that is, the amount of recorded income that the household is allowed to earn
                                                           19
while remaining in the program. With minimal exceptions, a household should score at least 25 in terms of social
vulnerability to be eligible. Hence, a household composed only of work-able unemployed adults would receive an
average social vulnerability score of 22, and cannot qualify for the program even if it earns zero income. On the
other hand, the level of income that a household is allowed to earn while remaining eligible ( ‘disregarded’
income) increases with the level of social vulnerability. For instance, a household composed of an unemployed
parent, an old age pensioner, and an orphaned child would be evaluated at 37 points and could be eligible for an
income of up to 28,000 AMD per capita.

Furthermore, the combined effect of benefit design and taxes can constitute a disincentive for some
types of households to participate in future activation measures or accept low-paid formal jobs at
employment offices. The OECD tax and benefit model for Armenia simulates the cost for a household
member to move into a formal job, compared to not working or working informally, at different wage
levels (Box 5). This modeling tool can shed light on the implicit costs faced by SA beneficiaries when


19
  A household could potentially be eligible for the program even with a score below 25 if they had zero income
and a geographic score above 1, which happens only for areas declared geographically distressed.


                                                                        48
deciding whether to take jobs at low pay (around minimum wage [MW]), as many of the vacancies in the
PES are. The model shows that a beneficiary in a two-parent household with children, where one parent
decided to take up a formal job just above MW, would lose about 80 percent of additional gross
earnings through the loss of family benefits and additional taxes. On the other hand, single-parent
households (as are 33 percent of FBP households) are given a larger income allowance by the FBP
formula. In such cases, the work able-able member would face lower marginal tax rates when entering
work at low pay, and in addition would be able to retain eligibility for FBP. Nevertheless, the additional
cost of child care could make entering the formal workforce not worthwhile. This may not be a major
issue given the low availability of formal jobs in the market, in any case. However, the strict conditions
could impact the willingness of beneficiaries to join activation measures, which provide small formal
incomes, unless these are disregarded.

Figure 47. Change in demographic status of Figure 48. Distribution of household per capita
members and effect on exit from program    income         by       beneficiary      status
                                10%                   7.83%                                                                                                               Income of beneficiary and non beneficiary households
  Margina effect of change in




                                                                                                                                                                                   all households entering family benefit in January 2012
                                 5%                                                                                                 .00002 .00004 .00006 .00008
     demographic status




                                       2.29%

                                 0%
                                                                                                                                           Density




                                -5%                                                                                    -1.96%
                                                                  -4.91%
                                -10%
                                                                                 -9.08%
                                                                                                                                                                     0




                                -15%                                                  -11.40%
                                                                                            -12.99%                                                                       0                  20000           40000             60000
                                                                                                                                                                                              Recorded per capita household income
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       80000
                                                                                   Child 0-5

                                                                                               Child 6-17

                                                                                                            Disabled
                                        Working age




                                                                                                                         Very Old
                                                       Employed

                                                                    Unemployed




                                                                                                                                                                                                                Non beneficiary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Family benefit ben.
                                                                                                                                                                         March 2012-October 2013. Excludes households no longer recorded in database




Source: FB beneficiary panel for periods May 2011 to May 2013.                                                                                                    Source: Authors’ calculations based on administrative database on
Note: Results show marginal effects of changes in household member                                                                                                FBP beneficiaries.
composition on probability to be in the program each semester,
controlling for household fixed effects, and k-income coefficient.



Empirically, entering into formal employment is directly associated with higher chances of graduation,
although average income after exit does not differ very significantly. Empirical analysis suggests a
similar finding to those in the tax-benefit simulation. Figure 47 illustrates the effect of having a change
in social status for a household member, controlling for household-level idionsyncratic characteristics
(fixed effects) and household income (k-income factor). Entry into formal employment on average
increases the propensity to exit the program, even after controlling for changes in household income. In
other words, not only does the formula make households graduate if their income changes above the
allowed limit, but the social scoring factor further penalizes those who enter formal jobs. This can be a
problem if earnings after exit remain low. Figure 48 suggests that this may be the case, though the




                                                                                                                                        49
evidence is not conclusive.20 After graduation, on average per capita household incomes are higher than
during the program (as the two are correlated), but the difference is relatively small, at about 5,000
AMD per capita, which means that households that graduate on average have not substantially changed
their economic condition.

Among those who leave the program, about one-third move to the one-off emergency benefit. Figure
49 complements the evidence above on exit probability by showing the simple share in household
beneficiary status over time among the same sample of households that registered in January 2012. By
the 20th month, about 71 percent of households were still benefitting from the FBP. About 10 percent
of households had moved to emergency assistance. The remaining 19 percent were no longer
beneficiaries, and most of these were no longer in the active registry (which means that they had not
recertified their documentation at the welfare offices). This may suggest that social workers are able to
mitigate the strict eligibility conditions by providing support to households that have been
administratively excluded but remain vulnerable.

Figure 49. Beneficiary status of new entrants in the FBP in January 2012, over 20 months
       Family Benefit                Emergency benefit   Non Beneficiary   Removed from database

2,000
           Number of beneficiaries




1,500

1,000

     500

      0




Source: Authors’ calculations based on administrative database on FBP beneficiaries.


Table 4. Formal employment transition matrix over one year for work-able beneficiaries

 Status in May 2012       Status in May 2013
                          Family Benefit One-off Nonbeneficiary Suspended from FBP                     Total
 Receives one-off benefit 9.77            49.56  40.49          0.18                                   100
 Suspended from FBP       12.24           2.93   84.6           0.23                                   100


Half of the recipients of the one-off benefit remain in the system for a long period of time (one year or
more). Table 4 represents a transition matrix of the status in May 2013 of 111,000 beneficiary
households that were enrolled for the one-off benefit in May 2012. The table suggests that half of all


20
  The differential in formal household incomes does not necessarily reflect total household income or
consumption, for the reasons explained earlier. In addition, the differential in incomes may be downward biased
because some households that graduate are no longer registered in the database and their incomes are not visible.


                                                                             50
recipients of the one-off benefit remained beneficiaries 12 months later. Moreover, this benefit is likely
to be used as a temporary measure to protect individuals until they can re-enter the FBP program (10
percent did so over the observed period).

Box 5: Modeling the cost of entering formal jobs for low-earners through the OECD tax benefit model

The combination of taxes and benefit rules pose significant disincentives for some beneficiary households to
enter the formal LM. The OECD tax benefit model illustrates the costs and benefits for individuals when they take
up formal employment based on the fiscal and benefit legislation in 2012 in Armenia (see annex 3 for full
assumptions and formula). The basic opportunity costs taken into account are the reduction in earnings arising
                    21
from income taxes and the withdrawal from family benefits. In addition, the model can also factor in the child
care costs incurred by single parents and spouses whose partner is already working, and lost income from informal
labor. The analysis focuses exclusively on the incentive to take up a formal employment that pays minimum and
below-median wages, which are the most common options for the FBP population. The OECD model is applied to
four standard household types in which all adults are assumed to be work-able: (1) a household with one work-
able person taking up formal employment; (2) a household with two married work-able adults, in which one
spouse remains inactive and the other spouse takes up formal employment; (3) a household with a work-able
single parent with two children; and (4) a household with two work-able adults, of whom one is employed and one
is not, and two children. In Armenia’s case, only the household types with children have sufficient points to qualify
for the family benefit. Note that this model assumes that the household has no formal income sources other than
                                          22
labor earnings, family benefits, and UBs.

Taking into account the combined effect of taxes and the FBP criteria, a beneficiary in a two-parent household
with children, where one decided to take up a formal job just above MW, would lose about 80 percent of
additional gross earnings. The first scenario considers the effect of taxes and benefit rules for households taking
up a job at 33 percent of average wage (AW), which corresponds to 613,831.7 AMD, or about 1.1 times the MW of
45,000 AMD per month in 2013. Families with two children and two work-able adults, in which one spouse remains
inactive and the other spouse takes up work at 33 percent of AW, will lose the family benefit. As a consequence,
their opportunity costs of formal employment are over 80 percent. In other words, from 100 AMD additional
earnings less than 20 AMD contribute to family income. A similar situation emerges at 50 percent of AW. Yet,
higher labor income counterbalances parts of the loss of the family benefit, which explains the lower opportunity
costs at 50 percent.

Single-parent households with children face fewer disincentives from tax and benefits, but if child care costs are
incurred, moving to a formal job may be a net loss. The opportunity cost from taking up a job is relatively low
(26.4 percent) for a single parent with two children, mainly because, even at 33 percent of AW, the household
does not face a complete withdrawal from family benefits (Figure 50). This household type, however, is likely to
incur child care costs if it cannot rely on other forms of help. Table 5 indicates that single parents would spend
nearly 100 percent of their net income, if they took up a job just above minimum wage, which required them to


21
   Since 2013 wages up to 120,000 AMD per month are subject to a unified tax rate of 24.4 percent, combining
both income tax and social security contributions.
22
   Taking into account other forms of income such as pensions and imputed agricultural incomes, which are
accounted for in the FBP eligibility formula, the withdrawal of the FBP would take place at lower levels of
additional income than shown in this model. In May 2013 FBP beneficiary households reported 20,000 AMD in
nonlabor income per month.


                                                         51
take their children to private kindergarten. Even using community child care, 43 percent of their additional income
would be forgone. Child care costs do not vary with income, therefore they constitute a relatively higher burden
for low-income earners; and their impact is lower for women who take up slightly better paying jobs at 50 percent
of AW.


 Figure 50. Share of gross earnings taxed away                      Figure 51. Share of gross earnings taxed away
 at 33% of AW                                                       at 50% of AW
  100%                                                              100%
   80%                                                                   80%
   60%                                                                   60%
   40%                                                                   40%
   20%                                                                   20%
   00%                                                                   00%
              Single    One-earner    Single   One-earner                      Single   One-earner Single One-earner
                          couple   parent with couple with                                couple parent with couple with
                         without    2 children 2 children                                without 2 children 2 children
                         children                                                        children
                        FB      Income tax                                              FB     Income tax

 Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS, 2012.

   Table 5. Share of gross earnings that is taxed away with and without child care
   costs
                                               Gross earnings foregone due to taxes and
                                                           child care costs
                                                                 Public          Private
   One adult with 2 children                    None                  *
                                                         kindergarten     kindergarten**
   Taking up a job at 33% AW1                 26.40%            42.50%           93.90%
                              1
   Taking up a job at 50% AW                     27%            37.70%           71.50%
   Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS, 2011.
   Notes: Simulation does not take UBs into account;
   *49,649 AMD per child per year; **207,223.2 AMD per child per year.



The model could be also updated with additional scenarios that take into account the opportunity cost
of relinquishing one’s informal earnings after taking a formal job (see annex 3). After making certain
assumptions, the average person who is married with two children and receives the family benefit
would not find it worthwhile to enter the formal LM at 33 percent of AW, if this implies giving up his
informal job.

Could activation measures enhance graduation of social assistance beneficiaries?
If activation measures were applied to one work-able individual in each household with spare labor,
nearly 50 percent of households would ‘graduate’ from the program without necessarily being better
off than before. Figure 52 shows the impact of a potential application of activation measures to all
beneficiary households where there is at least one spare work-able member (households with two or
more work-able members, and households with one work-able member and no dependents). If one
member in each of these targeted households (or about 74,000 in total) was offered, and was required

                                                                  52
to take on, a formal job at minimum wage (or public works paying minimum wage), the additional
earnings would push more than 50 percent of these households below the eligibility threshold. As
shown in the tax benefit model, these households would not necessarily be better off than they were
with the benefit, and could run a net loss if the newly employed individuals had an informal job that
they relinquished. Chapter 3 will discuss the policy solutions adopted in other countries to avoid such
sharp losses of eligibility when entering work at low wages.

Figure 52. Impact on program eligibility of applying a mandatory activation measure on one work-
able member per household not busy with caretaking duties
                                                No activable hh member                     1+activ/no/dependents
                                   .2
                                   .1
                         Density




                                    0




                                                  1activ/w/dependents                       2+activ/w/dependents
                                   .2
                                   .1
                                    0




                                        0         20         40        60      80   0       20       40      60    80
                                                                    Family Vulnerability Score
                                                                            Density
                                                                            kdensity eval_sim
                                                                            kdensity eval
                                   Graphs by HH type by activable shares




Source: Authors’ calculations based on administrative database on FBP beneficiaries.
Note: Distribution of households’ FBP vulnerability scores in May 2012 (eval), and simulated distribution of the new vulnerability score
(eval_sim) if one work-able member per household was forced to take a minimum wage job.

Currently, few of the FBP work-able not recorded as employed appear to be registered with the PES. A
potential way to help those who are not formally employed find better work could be to require
registration with SESA, as is customary for LRSA programs across most European and Central Asian
countries. However, the information system reveals that only a minority of the 186,000 work-able
individuals who are not recorded as working were actually registered as unemployed in 2012 (see Figure
51). Part of these individuals could be assumed to be workers in the agriculture sector and therefore
uninterested in moving to other jobs, and in fact the registration rates among households not relying on
agriculture is 10 percent, compared to only 2 percent among households that own agricultural assets.
Interestingly, women tend to make larger use of employment services than men. In practice however,
the current benefit formula provides few incentives for household members to register with
employment services. Households that have reached a sufficiently high score to qualify without
registering their members with SESA have no incentive to participate in SESA activities once they are in
the program.

Figure 53. Work-able beneficiaries registered as unemployed according to their social score, May 2013




                                                                               53
                                15-24       25-54                   55-64           All                                     13%




                                                                                                 % registered unemployed
      % Registered unemployed             12%
                                                                                                                                                    10%
                                     9%
                                              8%                                                                                        7%
                                                                             7%
                                                                        5%
                                                                                  4%
                                                                                                                                                               3%
                                                                                                                                                                               2%
                                2%                                                                                                                                     2%
                                                                   1%

                                                                                                                           female       male        Total     female   male   Total
                                     Female                             Male
                                                                         Non Agr. Income                   Agric. Income
     Source:
     Note: Work-able beneficiaries registered as unemployed in May 2013. An individual is counted as registered unemployed if he or she
     receives the corresponding social score in the database.

At the moment, the PES would not have the capacity to impose activation on one work-able
beneficiary per household, due to the low availability of vacancies or ALMPs. Among the pool of
registered unemployed observed during one month, only 3 percent received training. As many as 30
percent of the registered unemployed, however, reported to be interested in receiving vocational and
business development training. Similarly, the number of filled vacancies or job placements through SESA
in 2012 was 11,538.23 While this number is impressive given the LM conditions, it is limited compared to
the total registered (62,000 in 2012). This stock of services would be even more inadequate if all work-
able FBP beneficiaries not formally employed (186,000), or even just one work-able person per
household (85,000), were required to register in the PES.

                                                              Figure 54. Training incidence by beneficiary status
                                                              40
                                                                                                                                                        34
                                                              35
                                                              30                                                                             27
                                                              25
                                                    Percent




                                                              20
                                                              15
                                                              10
                                                               5              3            3

                                                               0
                                                                             Received training                                               Wants training

                                                                                                       Non FBP                    FBP

                                 Source: Authors’ calculations based on the administrative database on registered unemployed GORTS (October 2013).

Among the registered PES beneficiaries, FBP beneficiaries are equally likely to get an ALMP than other
individuals. Both FBP and non-FBP beneficiaries were equally likely to receive training, but the demand
is more pronounced among FBP recipients. While 27 percent of the non-FBP recipients are interested in
receiving some type of training, 34 percent of the FBP recipients are interested (see Error! Reference
source not found.). This suggests that the FBP recipients are aware of the importance of training to

23
     Official data provided by SESA in 2013.


                                                                                                                           54
receive job offers and are willing to take this next step, and many of them would probably not see the
system of mutual obligations as a burden if useful services were provided.

These results suggest there is scope for more profiling to solve supply constraints and to better target
beneficiaries of training to maximize effectiveness. The supply constraint immediately raises the
question of who should receive training first. One can think that those with the most urgency—
measured in terms of a higher risk of vulnerability—should receive training first. Also, it can be argued
that those for whom the training will most increase the probability of receiving a job offer should get it
first. Although not necessarily mutually exclusive, the first argument favors equity while the second
favors efficiency. Whatever policy makers decide, implementation would require a mechanism that
allocates people into training. For this the PES will need to develop a profiling tool and assess the quality
of the collected information (discussed in Chapter 3).




                                                     55
Chapter 3. Priorities for a nascent activation system

Key Messages

The impact of SP spending on poverty and inclusion could be maximized through
improvements at the program and system levels.
   The targeting system for SA benefits could be reformed to increase the focus on the poor, facilitate
    coordination across different programs, and improve incentives to join formal jobs.
   The structure of the Armenian economy suggests that a PMT formula would be more suitable to
    identify the consumption poor and thus reduce the error of inclusion.
   A PMT formula would also provide an evidence basis to target different benefits at different
    thresholds of welfare, so as to allow the integration of all programs into a single system.
   In terms of in-kind service provision, significant strides were made in the integration of social
    services through the creation and rolling out of the ‘one-stop shops’.
   As a next step, the GoA will need to ensure that the designs of different programs are mutually
    reinforcing and compatible, and that a single coordinating figure can assess needs of household
    members and coordinate the interventions of specialized agencies.

The benefit system could incentivize employability of the work-able, but this would require a
substantial expansion of specialized services and a strong profiling system
   Activation programs for work-able beneficiaries combine financial assistance, services, and sanctions
    to direct individuals toward LM integration.
   Introducing conditionalities in Armenia would require a number of system level improvements: (i)
    strengthening the incentives to utilize existing services; (ii) investing in the expansion of the capacity
    of PES to serve a large number of work-able beneficiaries, both in terms of vacancies collected and
    of ALMPs; and (iii) modifying the benefit formula to reduce disincentives from entry into formal jobs
    or ALMPs.
   In light of capacity constraints, a strong profiling system will be important to help case managers
    deal with the increased inflow of beneficiaries, and prioritize access to services.
   In addition, the provision of services would need to be tailored to beneficiaries’ needs in order to
    make conditionalities enforceable and fair. Services would need to relieve female participants from
    caretaking duties, include options for self-employment in light of the low level of wage employment
    in many target areas, or address basic skill deficits of some participants, in addition to building job-
    specific skills.

Conditionalities of benefits could also be used to preserve and increase the human capital of
children.
   SA could also be leveraged to build children’s human capital, help break intergenerational poverty,
    and lower future dependency on transfers.


                                                     56
   Unconditional cash transfers (UCTs) have by themselves been found to have significant positive
    impacts on child health and education. However, programs that condition benefit receipt to the
    utilization of services that build human capital, and where utilization would otherwise be low, could
    increase the returns of such an investment.
Possible forms of human capital conditionality could include requiring teenage students to attend
secondary schools, or requiring mothers and children to attend regular health checks. In all these areas
poor children in Armenia have shown a gap with respect to children born in nonpoor households.

Introduction

The previous chapters detail the main strengths and weaknesses of the SA system in terms of fulfilling its
basic function of protecting individuals from temporary shocks and alleviating poverty and supporting
the vulnerable work-able population in entering productive employment. The assessment indicated that
the system already has a number of important strengths to build on, in terms of programs,
infrastructure, and resources, as summarized in Figure 55. However, the impact of social expenditure on
the work-able population and their households could be further maximized through a number of
improvements at the program and system level.

Figure 55. Achieving protection and activation


                               Ensure minimum living standards                 Promote self-sufficiency

     OBJECTIVES

                                                                         Building human          Incentivize
                            Mitigate chronic        Protect from                                 productive
                                poverty           transient shocks           capital
                                                                                                employment

                                                                       - FBP supports
                                                 - FBP has flexible                           - PES offer range
                                                                       living standards
                                                 entry and exit                                   of ALMPs
                           - FBP has                                   - Case
          Strengths
                           significant poverty   - Emergency                                     - Integrated
                                                                       management
                           reduction (1.8%)      benefit for ad-hoc                            service centers
                                                                       under
                                                 needs                                               built
                                                                       development

                                                                                             - Design
                           - FBP coverge is      - No                                        disincentives to
         To improve        limited               unemployment              - No explicit     take up formal jobs
                                                 benefit to protect       incentives to      at low pay
                           - Needs other than                            human capital
                           financial             those above                                 - No activation
                                                 vulnerability           accumulation
                           assistance                                                        component in
                                                 score                                       benefit design




Source: authors

In particular, in light of the findings of this analysis, activation for vulnerable groups could be facilitated
by the following three sets of actions:


                                                       57
   (i)     Develop a new targeting system to maximize the poverty impact of programs and align their
           incentives with activation objectives.
   (ii)    Prepare social services for activation, through an integrated functional model, a profiling
           methodology, and the expansion of services.
   (iii)   Improve the design of SA programs to incentivize and support the activation of work-able
           individuals and of the future workforce.


Redesign the targeting system to reduce coverage gaps and enhance coordination

The design of the FBP’s targeting formula captures the program’s aspiration to address vulnerability
under an income dimension and a social vulnerability dimension. However, as shown in Chapter 2, the
current design suffers from two main shortcomings: (i) biases in program coverage favor certain
categories of households (such as those with informal urban workers, remittance recipients) and (ii)
potential disincentives to join the formal labor force at low wages or ALMPs out of fear of becoming
ineligible for the program. In light of its low generosity, the program was not found to disincentivize
participation to the labor force in general.

Some high-income countries have tried to address the issue of disincentivization by raising the level of
non-taxable labor income and/or have targeted such exemptions specifically to SA beneficiaries. In
other words, beneficiaries are allowed to earn more while in the program than the maximum amount
allowed when they enter the program. For example, in France, beneficiaries continue to receive
minimum income benefits while getting paid up to 750 hours per year (lasting up to 12 months); in the
Netherlands’ internship program for young unemployed, a one-time remuneration of €450 for a three-
month internship does not disqualify beneficiaries from receiving the UB. Other countries like the
United States have introduced permanent tax credits for low-income workers. However, these measures
are likely to be fiscally more costly than alternatives, unless such income exemptions are temporary in
nature. In addition, high-income countries tend to couple benefits with strong mutual obligations to
ensure that beneficiaries make all efforts to find a sufficiently well-paying job but also as a way to
discourage applicants who are not in need (discussed in the next section).

Alternatively, many middle-income countries use PMT schemes to target their safety nets, which are
inherently less sensitive to changes in formal labor incomes. PMT targeting is widely used in middle-
income countries, including Albania, Georgia, Kosovo, Moldova (with a hybrid formula including means
and proxy-means testing), or large programs such as Oportunidades in Mexico or Juntos in Peru. While
this method is used less in Europe and Central Asian countries, each type of design has advantages and
disadvantages that have been extensively discussed by academics, policy makers, and development
organizations, including the World Bank (Grosh and Baker 1995; Tesliuc et al. 2014). Thus, it is not the
objective of this note to review the pros and cons of each design but simply to highlight the main
expected gains and costs of switching targeting methods, given the current needs of the FBP. Some of
these programs, such as in Georgia and Kosovo, perform extremely well in terms of targeting while
maintaining a high coverage of the bottom quintile, as in the case in Armenia (see Figure 56).




                                                  58
Figure 56. Coverage and targeting performance of countries in the Europe and Central Asia region
                                                                95                         MDA 2011
                                                                         ROU 2011
                                                                90                          MNE 2011             KSV 2011




                            Share spent on bottom 2 quintiles
                                                                     LVA 2010               POL 2011
                                                                                          BGR 2008
                                                                85           UKR 2010
                                                                           EST 2004
                                                                                        SRB 2010

                                       (targeting)
                                                                80                                              GEO 2011
                                                                                  HUN 2007         MKD 2010
                                                                                                                  ARM 2010
                                                                          KAZ 2010                    KGZ 2007    ARM 2012
                                                                75
                                                                                                         ARM 2011

                                                                70

                                                                65           BIH 2007                 ALB 2012

                                                                60
                                                                     0        5        10      15        20      25        30   35   40
                                                                                  Coverage (percent of 2 bottom quintiles)
Source: ECA SPeeD (2014). Figure uses Europe and Central Asia harmonized poverty lines at US$2.5 PPP per day. Welfare quintiles net of all SA
                                                                 transfers.

PMT formulas combine information on assets; household composition; traceable expenditures (such as
utilities); and incomes (transfers, wages) to compute the probability for a household to be at a specific
consumption level through statistical techniques. In theory, a PMT is more likely to avoid direct
disincentives to join formal jobs or ALMPs among households close to the eligibility threshold because
labor income is just one of multiple factors taken into account to estimate program eligibility, rather
than acting as a binary filter, as is currently the case in Armenia. Households graduate only once their
overall economic situation improves—as shown by assets accumulation.

The literature has found negligible effects of PMT-targeted programs on the labor supply of recipients,
with few exceptions. In the current literature, evidence on this issue remains overall limited, and it has
been recently summarized (Tesliuc et al. 2014). In the case of PROGRESA, Alzúa et al. (2012) found a
small positive effect on the number of hours worked by female beneficiaries, while Skoufias and Di Maro
(2008) found no significant impact on the same programs. No effects were found in either Nicaragua or
Honduras (Alzúa et al. 2012). A recent impact evaluation in Georgia (Kits et al. 2014) found that labor
force participation rates of young women from households benefitting from targeted SA was
significantly lower than women from similar households that are just above the eligibility threshold. The
higher income provided by the program was the likely cause for lower participation and only among
women who had caretaking duties.




                                                                                                   59
           Box 6. Targeting benefits with a PMT formula: a preliminary simulation based on ILCS 2013
 Preliminary simulations suggest there is potential to revise Armenia’s targeting system for improved
 performance. The PMT would rely on data from the ILCS on assets; household composition; traceable
 expenditures (such as utilities); and incomes (transfers, formal labor) to compute the probability of a
 household being at a specific consumption level. This formula would rely on data that can be verified by social
 welfare officers through the solid database that is already in place in Armenia and through a household visit.
 The formula can be tested ex ante in its capacity to successfully identify households that are poor at different
 thresholds. Figure 57 graphically shows the change in coverage that would take place. A PMT targeting
 formula would increase coverage among the bottom deciles while reducing coverage on all welfare deciles
 that are beyond the upper poverty line. Most of the gains would take place by increasing inclusion among the
 people in the second and third deciles of the distribution. The formula appears to be particularly capable of
 identifying poor households in the bottom quintile of the score distribution. Compared to the actual FBP, the
 best-performing PMT model would allow increasing coverage of the bottom quintile from 33 percent to 47
 percent and of the poor from 23 percent to 33 percent. Results assume that the program covers the bottom
 12.2 percent of the individuals in the PMT distribution. The best performing model (PMT Marz) would
 increase, by about 14 percentage points, the coverage of the bottom 20 percent. The biggest numerical
 change would occur in terms of coverage of the total poor, with a 30 percent increase in coverage from 23
 percent to about 33 percent. The Residence model, though less performing, would also allow improving
 coverage of the poor by about 25 percent (from 23 to 31 percent) while making only a more limited impact on
 the improved coverage of the bottom 20 percent.
           Figure 57. Distribution of beneficiaries with simulated PMT and current FBP system

                                             0.80
                % of decile of pop covered




                                             0.70
                                             0.60
                                             0.50
                                             0.40
                                             0.30
                                             0.20
                                             0.10
                                               -
                                                    D1     D2     D3     D4      D5     D6     D7     D8     D9     D10
             FB current                             0.49   0.17   0.08   0.14    0.08   0.07   0.04   0.05   0.06   0.04
             PMT National                           0.60   0.23   0.17   0.09    0.05   0.02   0.02   0.02   0.01   0.01
             PMT Residence                          0.58   0.27   0.15   0.10    0.04   0.03   0.02   0.02   0.00   0.01
             PMT Marz                               0.67   0.27   0.14   0.08    0.03   0.01   0.01   0.00   0.00   0.00

 Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS 2013




In addition, several programs allow the household to reach a level of income that is higher than at
entry, with the view of incentivizing income generation. Chapter 2 highlighted how most graduating
households in Armenia do so because they are very close to the eligibility threshold at entry, but even
after graduation, their level of recorded income has changed little. In addition, households find

                                                                            60
graduation an unpredictable event that they can hardly prepare for, and they are wary of experimenting
with new entry in the LM if this might cause immediate disqualification. On the other hand, several
established programs around the world, such as Oportunidades in Mexico or Bolsa Família in Brazil, have
in place a comprehensive graduation strategy that combines the following elements: (i) the use of a
higher threshold for program graduation than the one used for program eligibility, so that households
stop relying on the transfer only when they have established a sustainable livelihood out of poverty
rather than being eliminated by any temporary increases of income; (ii) several months’ advance notice
before the household loses the benefit even when they have stopped qualifying, so that households can
be prepared and are less afraid to experiment with new jobs; (iii) the offer of a transitory package of
benefits, less generous then the full package given to the poorest households, to facilitate a more
gradual transition. In addition, as discussed later, most of these programs combine cash with other
human capital interventions that are meant to support long-term poverty reduction by also removing
the nonfinancial constraints to poverty.

A renewed PMT formula in Armenia could improve targeting precision and facilitate a differentiation
of benefit eligibility according to the target groups’ needs, to tailor graduation strategies at different
thresholds. Preliminary simulations indicate that using a PMT formula in Armenia could help reduce
inclusion error of SA, thus allowing more poor individuals to be covered with the same budget (see Box
6). Having a flexible formula that allows different benefits to be targeted at different income
thresholds—some more geared toward subsistence, others more focused on facilitating graduation—
would reduce the implicit costs of leaving the program for beneficiaries. The main reason for the
superior performance of a PMT over the current formula in targeting the poor is that the FBP at present
also targets socially vulnerable individuals, who are not necessarily income-deficient. Therefore, a
change in the formula would require identifying other means to give preferential access to vulnerable
groups such as orphans and single parents—as the FBP does at the moment. In addition, since a PMT
score does not adequately capture households that fall into poverty due to temporary loss of labor
income, it would remain important to provide in parallel a flexible safety net for people who lose their
job; in Armenia, this role could be played by the existing one-off benefit.

Enhance program design to improve employment prospects of work-able individuals
and the human capital of the future workforce
The Armenian population is evenly divided between supporters and opponents of expanding coverage
of the FBP in its current design. In 2013, questions were added to the regular public opinion survey
called the South Caucasus Barometer (CRRC 2014) to elicit preference from the Armenian population on
the design and coverage of safety nets. The first question asked the population whether they would like
to see a greater share of the poor covered by the FBP in a fiscally neutral way (even at the cost of higher
taxes or cuts in other social services).24 Figure 58 shows that there is no unanimous support of public



24
  Respondents were asked to take a position on the following two options: Option 1: SA should cover fewer poor
families than it does today, and the savings should be spent on other public services or go toward lowering taxes.


                                                        61
opinion to expand coverage of the FBP as it is currently designed. About 42 percent of respondents were
either strongly or mildly inclined toward greater coverage, but a similar share was against it.

High income groups are those showing greater concern for increasing the protection of the poor by
safety nets. Fifty-two percent of high-income households were supportive of coverage expansion.
Surprisingly, middle- and low-income households seem to be less supportive of an expansion of the
program, perhaps in fear that other essential services (currently with universal access) could be
penalized, while an expansion of coverage would not guarantee that the individual household could
become a beneficiary.

Figure 58. Support for increasing coverage of the FBP, as currently designed
                              Total                                                         25              17
       Income group




                        Low income                                                           21             18
                      Middle income                                                     29                  17
                        High income                                                    36                   16

                                      0              25                    50                     75             100
                                                                      Percentage
       Lower coverage: strongly agree              Lower coverage: agree                    Neutral+DK/DA
       Increase coverage: agree                    Increase coverage: strongly agree
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the CRRC South Caucasus Barometer - 2013.


However, support for coverage of the poor by the FBP would significantly increase if benefits were
provided on the condition that beneficiaries fulfill actions that increase human capital. The mixed
support shown by the Armenian audience for greater coverage of safety nets would change if these
programs came with some human capital conditionalities, such as school attendance or job searching
(Figure 59). As many as 65 percent of respondents favored having higher coverage, even at the cost of
lowering other services or higher taxes, if SSN beneficiaries were asked to participate in other activities.
In contrast, the share of those supporting lower coverage decreases to 16 percent, from the previous 44
percent. While the introduction of conditionalities enhances support across income groups, it is
interesting to note that low-income individuals are those who show the highest net increases in their
level of support under this new policy scenario. Conditionalities have played an important role in
building public acceptance for the expansion or preservation of safety nets both in Latin America, and,
with a different angle, also in Europe and the United States.




Option 2: SA should cover more poor families than it does today, even if this results in having fewer public services
or higher taxes.


                                                                    62
Figure 59. Support for increasing coverage of the FBP, if transfers were given conditionally
                          Total                                                37                             28


                   Low income                                                  39                             27
 Income groups




                 Middle income                                                38                             29
                   High income                                          31                              40

                                  0    10       20       30        40        50      60        70       80         90      100
                                                                        Percentage
                 Completely disagree         Disagree             DK/DA               Agree             Completely agree

Source: Authors’ calculations based on the CRRC South Caucasus Barometer - 2013.
Note: Respondents were asked: “To what extent do you agree or disagree with extending the number of poor families included in the FBP in
exchange for requiring some actions from recipients, like searching for work or sending children to school?”

The preferences of Armenian citizens are in line with the experience of minimum income programs in
middle- and high-income countries, which include mutual obligations principles. Respondents in favor
of introducing conditionalities for benefit receipt were also asked which benefit conditionality they
would support, including job searching, attending mandatory health check-ups, participating in public
works, or mandatory school attendance for children.25 The South Caucasus Barometer survey results
show generalized support for any of these measures, including among the poor. This suggests that the
potential beneficiaries of safety nets are ready to engage in more demanding program designs as long as
useful services are made available.

The following sections explore two main sets of changes at the program level that Armenia could
consider to enhance the impact of cash transfers through the introduction of conditionality. A first set of
programs are widely used in OECD countries (referred to here as activation programs); these target
work-able adults and focus on increasing the demand for services that should either assist them in
finding a job or in moving to a more productive one. A second set of programs (known as conditional
cash transfers [CCTs]) have been very popular in middle-income countries across Latin America, and they
are emerging in some European and Central Asian countries. These are meant to increase the human
capital of dependents, particularly the future labor force.

Activation programs for the labor market insertion of work-able beneficiaries
Activation programs originated in OECD countries with the objective of facilitating work-able SA
recipients’ entry into employment and thus reduce reliance on benefits. In Western Europe, major
reforms took place in Germany in 2003–2005 called “Commission for Modern Services in the Labor
Market,” more commonly known as the Hartz Reforms and in the U.K. as the “New Deal.” Nordic
countries, notably Denmark and Norway, also reformed at about the same time (Almeida et al. 2012;
Eichhorst and Konle-Seidl 2008; Van Berkel and Borghi 2008). These programs rely on the mutual
obligations principle, which is an example of program conditionality that involves public investment in
the provision of services (such as counseling, training, and on-the-job apprenticeships) in exchange for

25
       These conditions were drawn from among the most common examples around the world.


                                                                  63
beneficiaries’ commitment to make use of the newly available opportunities in the most effective way.
Titles of successful activation programs often already reflect the incentives and project the image of
rewarding reintegration into the LM; for example, in the U.K.’s “New Deal,” these are called Jobseekers
Allowance; Income Support; and Employment Support Allowance.

Common design features include registration with the PES and mandatory participation in social and
employment services if deemed necessary. Annex 1 illustrates a full set of country-specific behavioral
requirements attached to the receipt of SA. The primary requirement, which in Armenia’s case remains
optional, is the registration of all work-able adults with public employment offices. Most programs also
include an explicit obligation to search for a job and, if necessary, to participate in social integration
activities. Refusal to participate in these activities implies a temporary termination of benefits.

These programs require the presence of trained case managers and ideally a set of services that
address also psychosocial needs and caretaking duties of beneficiaries. Most OECD programs rely on
case management. A case manager is a social worker who is trained to (1) take an individualized
approach to beneficiaries, one that is based on their specific situation and potential; (2) determine
which activation services would work best; (3) facilitate effective referral; and (4) track beneficiaries’
progress and introduce remedial action when needed. A good case manager is able to secure
beneficiaries’ trust and full involvement in designing and implementing a personal graduation plan.
Maintaining regular contact and providing psychological support are important when dealing with hard-
to-serve recipients. Since SA recipients often face multiple barriers to entering the LM, activation also
benefits from supplementary services that help mitigate other constraints to participation, such as child
care, abuse counseling, and psychological support. The quality of supplementary services is critically
important.

There are several reasons for cautious optimism with respect to the benefits of introducing activation
in Armenia, compared to the results seen in OECD countries. The overall body of existing evidence
(from high-income countries) suggests that the introduction of activation conditionality has a significant
impact on work resumption rates of SSN beneficiaries (Almeida et al. 2012; Eichhorst and Konle-Seidl
2008). However, it is important to note that reforms across OECD countries were introduced against the
backdrop of generous welfare states, while the FBP program’s level of generosity (at less than 60
percent of the consumption of the bottom quintile) would not allow individuals to survive off the
transfer alone, and it is less likely per se to cause labor supply disincentives. This means that the success
of activation in Armenia will depend on the supply of quality services rather than on a significant change
in job search incentives. Secondly, global evidence suggests that the availability of sufficient labor
demand is an important determinant of the success of ALMPs (Betcherman et al. 2007; Betcherman et
al. 2004) as well as of exit rates from SA (Cappellari and Jenkins 2008). Thus, the impact of activation in
Armenia is likely to also be determined by such contextual factors. However, it is heartening to see that
in other countries the introduction of incentives and services to aid job seeking can have significant
employment effects even in a very slack LM, such as the one in Portugal during the economic crisis
(Martins and Costa 2014).




                                                     64
Activation in Armenia should be introduced at an appropriate pace to avoid damaging the protective
function of existing programs. Given the essential role that safety nets play in Armenia in poverty
reduction, it is crucial that the introduction of any conditionality is matched by sufficient capacity to
serve new clients and that the services offered are effective. The risk of not doing so is to waste scarce
public resources or even to deprive households of essential income support. In general, all the
behavioral requirements to which SA beneficiaries are subject internationally are well known by the
Armenian PES in the context of the (now eliminated) UB program. The question is whether such
behavioral requirements could also be tested for work-able SA beneficiaries, who are a much larger
number (an estimated 200,000) and face, in general, more constraints than the 12,000 beneficiaries of
UBs in 2012. A paced approach could first introduce light behavioral requirements for one work-able
individual per household (about 85,000), especially those near the graduation thresholds, after having
appropriately profiled all members and identified those who have work potential but are out of work.
Alternatively, this approach could be first tested on households without young dependents (the
beneficiaries of the new ‘social benefit’), which constitute about a third of the total households (see
Chapter 2) and are likely to face fewer constraints in joining active measures.

While the supply of ALMPs and vacancies should continue to grow, a strong profiling system will be
necessary to prioritize the neediest among the large inflow of new jobseekers . As shown in Chapter 2,
the current stock of ALMPs and vacancies represents a fraction of the existing clients of the Armenian
PES. Jobseeker profiling is used in a growing number of OECD countries to assess the strengths and
weaknesses of unemployed clients, estimate their chances of finding work, and design corresponding
intervention strategies. A profiling system is all the more essential in cases such as Armenia, where the
number of available interventions is a fraction of the potential beneficiaries. Hard-to-place categories of
jobseekers are usually offered services at higher intensity.

In a country like Armenia, this prioritization could take place through a statistical profiling model
applied to all newly registered PES beneficiaries. Loxha et al. (2014) provide a typology of the
approaches used by employment services in the OECD to profile jobseekers. Simple profiling methods
segment customers either at the full discretion of jobseekers and case managers or strictly according to
administrative rules (such as the duration of unemployment or age groups). Advanced profiling methods
make a deeper use of data to either guide, or determine, profiling categories. For instance, countries
such as Germany and Denmark make use of both software and interview-based tools that assist case
managers in identifying hard-to-place cases. This qualitative process requires significant capacity of case
workers to derive information from jobseekers in structured interviews and combine it with other
objective data sources to make a personal assessment.




                                                    65
                   Box 7. Piloting a statistical profiling model in Armenia’s employment services

 The World Bank team partnered with the Armenian State Employment Service Agency to pilot the feasibility
 of a statistical profiling model based on the agency’s information system (GORT). The project used the
 anonymized records of current and past registered jobseekers in October 2013 (270,304 individuals) to build
 a binary model that would predict the probability of individuals’ exit from the registry at 6, 12, and 18
 months since registration, which could be considered different measures of long-term unemployment (LTU).
 Being female, being elderly, being disabled, having basic secondary and postgraduate education, receiving
 UBs, receiving family benefits, and having a long contributory history were factors that were significantly
 correlated with higher probability of unemployment duration, while stated interest in entrepreneurial
 activity and in engaging in some ALMPs had the opposite effect.

 For illustration purposes, Table 6 shows the predicted probability of exit from the registry in 12 months for
 individuals who entered the registry in the period April –June 2012. At an 80 percent cutoff (that is, among
 the individuals at the top 20 percent and at the bottom 20 percent of the distribution of predicted
 probability of LTU), 97 percent of those predicted to be in LTU actually ended up in LTU 12 months later, and
 67 percent of those predicted to leave the registry ended up leaving before the 12th month. However, the
 model’s predictive power proved to be greater when computed on waves of unemployed who registered in
 the year 2012, when economic recovery in Armenia was taking place after a deep recession in 2009 –2010,
 compared to waves of unemployed who registered during periods of economic stagnation. The model
 proved to have a similar degree of precision as the models used in countries such as Ireland (at the 50
 percent cutoff rate).

    Table 6. Predictive precision of statistical model for males who registered in April–June 2012

          Cutoff                                                       0.5           0.6            0.7           0.8
          Total new registered in April–June 2012                      2,492         1,952          1,410         623
          Correctly predicted 12 months later                          1,814         1,522          1,180         561
          Percentage correctly predicted                               0.73          0.78           0.84          0.9
          Stayers correctly predicted                                  0.82          0.89           0.95          0.97
          Leavers correctly predicted                                  0.58          0.58           0.58          0.67
 Source: Nagler, Morgandi, and Dahlen (2014). Building a Statistical Profiling Model for Registered Unemployed in a middle-income
 country. A feasibility study with the Armenian GORT dataset.



Statistical profiling models, on the other hand, are automated and less human resource-intensive: they
attribute a ‘score’ to new registrants, based on their observable characteristics at registration, and allow
them to be divided into ‘categories’, which in principle reflects the risk that they will become long-term
unemployed. This in turn allows determining—at least to some extent—the level of service that should
be offered. In general, individuals who show the highest probability of becoming long-term unemployed
could be immediately targeted with intensive activation and support measures (as is currently the case
in Sweden), while those individuals who are likely to find a job on their own could be immediately
directed to self-services and job searches. In Ireland, the profiling tool was used to automatically define
the timing of the first in-depth interview with case managers (See Loxha et al. 2014 for a full


                                                                   66
illustration). Recently, the Bank worked with SESA to assess the suitability of the GORT dataset to
develop a statistical profiling model for Armenia (see Box 7), which produced encouraging results.
The different labor vulnerable groups described in the statistical profiling model face different barriers
to participate in the LM, which calls for specific services and programs to best serve their needs. As a
matter of fact, women’s participation in the Armenia LM is lower than for men due to both economic
and social reasons that need to be addressed through distinct interventions to encourage more women
to join the workforce. Among the FB beneficiary population, 64 percent of the households have two or
more children 15 years old or younger, stressing the care-giver duty needs of women in these
households. Furthermore, in terms of program outcome, international evidence shows that employment
and training programs have a larger employment impact on women than on men.

The rural/urban dichotomy also implies service differentiation. Rural workers will need support to boost
productivity as self-employed and diversify income sources from agriculture to minimize risks or
assistance on job intermediation when they move to urban areas. Traineeships and employer training
are unlikely to be feasible. Urban workers’ activation services, on the other hand, could use
intermediation and training to link the unemployed to existing jobs as well as to improve wage worker’s
employability. Additionally, first-time jobs seekers need programs that can provide them with
opportunities to build the first job experience while targeted entrepreneurship training and financing
could boost new enterprises and generate jobs.

Conditionalities to enhance human capital accumulation of the future generation
UCTs, such as the FBP, by themselves have significant positive impacts on the health and education
outcomes of young members of poor households. Under certain conditions, cash transfers with no
additional conditionality are sufficient to enhance the investments of poor households on the health and
education of their members, especially children. This is particularly the case when (i) the supply of
services, such as schools and clinics, is sufficient and (ii) households naturally have a preference
(demand) for using these services if they can afford to and finances are the only constraint that may
prevent them from doing so. In such contexts, cash transfers enhance the accumulation of human
capital of dependents (like school attendance) through an income effect and also by smoothing
consumption during income shocks. While the majority of research has focused on CCT programs, which
are most common in developing countries, a handful of studies also explored the impact of UCT
programs and proved that often, households’ main constrain is indeed mainly financial (see Box 8). In
light of the legacy of universal health and education coverage, Armenia could be a case where, in most
areas, households, if they can afford to, will naturally make decisions in favor of pursuing children’s
education and ensuring proper nutrition and healthcare access. In such contexts, cash can be essential;
there is evidence that Armenian households with limited smoothing mechanisms have been forced to
cut down on essential expenditures including food, which risks children becoming malnourished
(Makaryan and Zatikyan 2012); withdrawing children from school; or cutting medical expenses. Such
shocks have irreversible damages on children’s development and high long-term costs for society. For
this reason, cash transfers already in place should be considered an essential public investment to be
maintained and, if possible, expanded to improve coverage of the poor.

                                                   67
Increasing the next generation’s human capital translates into higher earnings in the future and
presumably less dependency on SA. The evidence is still scarce as there are very few CCT programs that
have been implemented for a long enough period to explore the long-term effects. Evidence from
PROGRESA indicates that the observed investments in education have long-lasting effects in terms of
higher wages. The long-term effects of PROGRESA show a reduction in work for younger youth
consistent with continuing education, an increase in the labor force participation of young girls, and a
shift from agricultural to nonagricultural employment (Berhman et al. 2011).

In the area of education, a possible form of conditionality in Armenia would be to tie receipt of the
family benefit to teenage children attending upper secondary education. Conditionalities could further
increase the returns of cash transfers, if they incentivize accumulation of human capital in areas where
the demand for services would otherwise be low. In the case of Armenia, attendance of upper
secondary education is an area where demand could be incentivized. ILCS 2012 shows that teenagers in
poor households have significantly lower graduation rates than those in better off families, and
completion rates could drop further in the wake of the enactment of the new secondary education
reform.26 Recent estimates based on ILCS 2012 suggest that failing to complete upper secondary
education could cost as much as 22 percent of lifetime earnings for young men and 29 percent for young
women (relative to primary education), if upper secondary diplomas become the standard in the
Armenian LM for secondary education completion (World Bank 2014c, 56). Table 7 shows a range of CCT
programs that had an impact on beneficiaries’ secondary education completion rates across the world.
Among the programs that focus on secondary education in Europe and Central Asia it is worth noting
the case of Macedonia, where the Social Financial Assistance is conditional on regular enrollment and
attendance in secondary school; the program resulted in an increase of 10 percentage points in
enrollment rates and reduced dropout of those closer to graduation.

Box 8. Recent evidence on UCTs and CCTs

Impact evaluations that explicitly disentangle the effect of imposing conditionality on beneficiaries from those of
the cash transfer itself are rare. The emerging evidence, however, suggests that conditionality may not always be
necessary, or it may be substituted by enhanced awareness raising on the benefit of specific behavior, to have an
impact. School enrollment conditionality was tested in a recent experiment in Morocco. The experiment was run
on two treatment subgroups: one received a small cash transfer to fathers of school-age children in poor rural
communities. The transfer was not conditional on school attendance but labeled as an education support program
(called a labeled cash transfer, or LCT); another subgroup received a conditional transfer implemented by the
government, the usual CCT. The analysis showed that adding conditionality and targeting mothers made almost no
difference in terms of school participation (Benhassine et al. 2013). A second example comes from an experiment
in Malawi that had the objective of empowering young women to stay in school longer (Baird et al. 2012). One
group received a monthly stipend conditioned on attending school (a CCT) while the other group simply received
the cash without any conditionality (a UCT). It was found that both the women in the UCT and those in the CCT
groups were less likely to drop out of school compared to women without transfers, which was the control group.


26
  This may stem from a number of reasons, including the high cost of tutoring, the perception that this additional
diploma may have no additional returns on the LM, or perceived low quality of education.


                                                        68
However, dropout was more mitigated in the group with conditionality. On the other hand, beneficiaries of UCTs
performed better in terms of delaying marriage and pregnancy (Baird et al. 2012).

A larger body of international evidence, including a recent meta-analysis of existing studies, exists for CCT
programs. CCTs that are conditional on school enrollment and attendance positively impact these outcomes
(Fiszbein and Schady 2009; Saavedra and Garcia 2012). In addition, CCTs have been found to have an impact on
other areas of child development (not necessarily through the conditionality but likely through the income effect).
In Mexico, larger cumulative transfers to the household significantly improved outcomes in many aspects of child
physical, nutritional, cognitive, and language development (Fernald et al. 2008). When looking at the impact on
educational achievement (rather than attendance), the picture is more nuanced. For example, in Cambodia, there
was no effect on math or language among the recipients. One explanation could be that the conditionality attracts
low performers and thus we should not expect a positive effect on education achievement (Filmer and Schady
2009). Instead, in Turkey, a positive impact was observed among low-income primary education students (Ahmed
et al. 2007).

Table 7. Selected cases of cash transfers with impact on secondary education

 Country            Program Name                     Target                   Condition               Program Impact
 Macedonia Social                Financial Secondary                          Secondary               10 percentage points on
           Assistance                      education                          education               enrollment
                                           youth                              attendance
 Colombia           Familias en Accion     Children aged                      Attendance rate of      5.5 percentage points
                                           8–17 years                         >80% of school days     on enrollment
                                                                              confirmed          by
                                                                              teacher
 Jamaica            Program           of             Children aged            Attendance rate of      Higher          school
                    Advancement                      7–17 years               >85% of school days     attendance rate
                    through Health and                                        confirmed          by
                    Education (PATH)                                          teacher
 Mexico             Oportunidades (rural             Children           in    Attendance rate of      No       change       in
                    youth)                           grade 0–9                >85% of school days     attendance,     modest
                                                                              confirmed          by   increase in mean grades
                                                                              teacher                 completed (+4.4%)
 Turkey             Social Risk Mitigation Children    in                     School attendance       10 percentage points on
                    Project                primary school                     and regular visits to   enrollment,            5
                                           and secondary                      health clinics by the   percentage points on
                                           school                             beneficiaries           attendance
Sources: Attanasio et al. (2005); Levy and Ohls (2007); Ahmed et al. (2007); World Bank (2013a).

If supply was adequately expanded, conditionality for pre-primary education would meet the dual
goals of supporting female labor force participation and improving children’s life-long learning
outcomes. Educational research has reached a consensus that accumulation of human capital at early
ages produces higher life-long returns than any other intervention later in life. Thus, incentivizing pre-
primary education is potentially an important investment in Armenia’s future labor force. At the same
time, this could help activate women, given the strong social pressure to stay home and take care of
children (see Chapter 1). However, for this conditionality to be effective, the government would need to


                                                                      69
ensure the availability of preschools, and their design should be tailored to the working women’s needs
in terms of hours, so that they can balance family and work.

Although less common, conditionalities on health utilization have also been impactful. Strong impacts
have been found in CCT programs that are conditional on preventive health services. Most of the health
services are directed toward children (and are very focused on vaccinations) and pregnant women. Most
CCT programs in Latin America with health checks conditionality for children, such as Red de Proteccion
Social (Nicaragua) and Familias en Accion (Colombia), have shown positive impacts in terms of
increased use of health care programs, especially among poor households (Attanasio et al. 2005). Other
programs are conditional on activities that are related to productivity or health improvements,
especially through mandatory participation in informational talks or preventive health care for adults.
For example, adult male health is an area for improvement in Armenia. Although the evidence from
many experiments to reduce sexually transmitted infections in African countries is still unfolding, there
are some other exercises that are closer to the interests of Armenia. For example, there have been
experiments in the United States to offer financial incentives to encourage weight loss (Finklestein et al.
2007; Cawley and Price 2011).

                                              Box 9. Chile Solidario

 Chile Solidario was a management model to coordinate all the country’s institutions responsible for providing
 social welfare that provided comprehensive support to the approximately 225,000 poorest families —about 5
 percent of Chile’s population of 17 million. It aimed for households to achieve 53 minimum living conditions
 across 7 dimensions, including individual and property identification, health, education, family dynamics,
 housing, employment, and income. This represents a holistic and unique approach to supporting extremely
 poor families. Trained counselors undertake personalized diagnostics of a household, its assets, and its
 constraints and goals, and help draw up plans that families commit to following to achieve targets across the
 seven dimensions. Social workers monitor families and help them achieve goals by advising and linking them to
 a range of services, including health, education, psychosocial support, microcredit, and public employment
 services. Cash benefit payments begin after signing an individual contract; payment is limited to two years,
 during which the value of the benefit gradually declines. Women receive benefits on behalf of families, and
 sanctions apply in the event of noncompliance with commitments.

 Chile had to reform its public employment services to serve Solidario beneficiaries who face multiple barriers
 to employment. This work included activation elements such as improving employability through provision of
 adult literacy courses, training, and skills development. Employment counselors had to be retrained to work
 proactively with clients who have no strong attachment to the LM.

 Source: Gotcheva 2014.


Successful poverty reduction programs have also experimented with a household-centered approach,
incorporating multiple interventions steered by case managers. While so far we have discussed the
introduction of specific conditionalities for specific target groups, modern social policy programs apply
this principle to the household level and form a plan for the entire household in a multidimensional
approach. The steps for such an approach include the assessment of needs and constraints of different
household members; the development of a personal or family plan (programs and services not directly

                                                       70
related to the LM are likely to be important); the establishment of referrals to different specialists;
service integration; counseling; and follow-up. Frequent and personalized interventions of agencies
during an individual’s unemployment spell are also a feature. One salient example is the case of Chile
Solidario (Box 9), which has implemented this holistic approach to reduce poverty in ultra-vulnerable
households.

These international experiences could be a reference for the development of a new functional model
of integration in Armenia. Armenia has already made significant strides in integrating its services into
one-stop shops, as a basis to build more synergies across SP functions.27 As a next step, integration of
these functions will ensure that the incentives and design of different programs are mutually reinforcing
and compatible. A salient opportunity for further integration could be the development of a holistic
poverty reduction program with the household at the center and case managers steering multiple
interventions. Case managers could rely on a quantitative targeting system, such as the one illustrated
earlier, to define eligibility criteria at entry and at exit, while exercising their discretion in the
identification of appropriate interventions.




27
   Under the SPAP I and in its incipient follow-up investment, SPAP II, the GoA has invested in the colocation of all
its SP service functions across the country, with new or upgraded facilities, an integrated management information
system, the introduction of new case management procedures, and building up innovative interventions (two new
ALMPs and a career orientation service).


                                                         71
References

Ahmed, A., M. Adato, A. Kudat, D. Gilligan, and R. Colasan. 2007. “Impact evaluation of the conditional
      cash transfer program in Turkey: Final report.” International Food Policy Research Institute,
      Washington, DC.

Almeida, R., J. Arbelaez, M. Honorati, A. Kuddo, T. Lohmann, M. Ovadiya, L. Pop, M.L. Sanchez Puerta,
       and M. Weber. 2012, March. “Improving access to jobs and earnings opportunities: the role of
       activation and graduation policies in developing countries.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
       http://siteresources.worldbank.org/SOCIALPROTECTION/Resources/SP-Discussion-
       papers/430578-1331508552354/1204.pdf

Alzúa, María Laura, Guillermo Cruces, and Laura Ripani. 2012. “Welfare Programs and Labor Supply in
        Developing Countries: Experimental Evidence from Latin America.” Journal of Population
        Economics 26 (October): 1255–1284.

Arias, Omar S., Carolina Sánchez-Páramo, María E. Dávalos, Indhira Santos, Erwin R.Tiongson, Carola
        Gruen, Natasha de Andrade Falcão, Gady Saiovici, and Cesar A. Cancho. 2014. Back to Work:
        Growing with Jobs in Europe and Central Asia. World Bank, Washington, DC.
        https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16570

Attanasio, O., E, Fitzsimmons, and A. Gomez. 2005. “The impact of a conditional education subsidy on
        school enrollment in Colombia.” The Institute of Fiscal Studies, Report Summary Familias 1.

Baird, S.J., R.S. Garfein, C.T. McIntosh, and B. Özler, B. 2012. “Effect of a cash transfer programme for
        schooling on prevalence of HIV and herpes simplex type 2 in Malawi: A cluster randomised trial.”
        Lancet 379: 1320–1329.

Behrman, Jere R., Susan W. Parker, and Petra E. Todd. 2011. "Do conditional cash transfers for schooling
      generate lasting benefits? A five-year follow-up of PROGRESA/Oportunidades." Journal of
      Human Resources 46 (1): 93-122.

Benhassine, N., F. Devoto, E. Duflo, P. Dupas, and V. Pouliquen. 2013. “Turning a shove into a nudge? A
       ‘labeled cash transfer’ for education. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Betcherman, G., A. Dar, and K. Olivas. 2004. “Impacts of active labor market programs: New evidence
       from evaluations with particular attention to developing and transition countries.” World Bank,
       Washington, DC.

Betcherman, G., M. Godfrey, S. Puerto, F. Rother, and A. Stavreska. 2007. “A review of interventions to
       support young workers: Findings of the youth employment inventory.” Social Protection
       Discussion Paper 715, World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                   72
Cappellari, L., and S.P. Jenkins, S.P. 2008. “The dynamics of social assistance receipt: measurement and
        modelling issues, with an application to Britain.” Discussion Paper no. 3765, Institute for the
        Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn.

Card, D., P. Ibarrarán, F. Regalia, D. Rosas-Shady, and Y. Soares. 2011. “The labor market impacts of
        youth training in the Dominican Republic.” Journal of Labor Economics 29 (2): 267–300.

Cawley, John, and Joshua A. Price. 2011. “Outcomes in a Program That Offers Financial Rewards for
       Weight Loss.” In Economic Aspects of Obesity, edited by Michael Grossman and Naci Mocan, pp.
       91–126. National Bureau of Economic Research and University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

De Walque, Demian. 2014. “Risking your health: causes, consequences, and interventions to prevent
      risky behaviours.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Doepke, Matthias, and Michèle Tertilt. 2014. “Does Female Empowerment Promote Economic
       Development?” NBER Working Paper 19888, National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
       MA.

Europe and Central Asia Social Protection Expenditure and Evaluation Database (ECA SPEED). 2014.
       World Bank, Washington, DC.

Eichhorst, W. and R. Konle-Seidl. 2008. “Contingent convergence: a comparative analysis of activation
       policies.” Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA), Bonn.

Ersado, L. 2012. “Poverty and distributional impact of gas price hike in Armenia.” World Bank, Social
        Protection Discussion Papers, Washington, DC.

Fernald, Lisa C. H., Paul H. Gertler, and Lynnette M. Neufeld. 2008. “Role of Cash in Conditional Cash
        Transfer Programmes for Child Health, Growth, and Development: An Analysis of Mexico’s
        Oportunidades.” Lancet 371 (9615): 827–37.

Filmer, D., and N. Schady. 2009. “School Enrollment, Selection and Test Scores.” World Bank,
        Washington, DC.

Finkelstein, Eric A., Laura A. Linnan, Deborah F. Tate, and Ben E. Birken. 2007. “A Pilot Study Testing the
        Effect of Different Levels of Financial Incentives on Weight Loss among Overweight Employees.”
        Journal of Occupational and Environmental Medicine 49 (9): 981–89.

Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert Schady. 2009. “Conditional cash transfers: Reducing present and future
        poverty.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Gotcheva, Boryana and Ramya Sundaram. 2011. Social Safety Nets in the Western Balkans. Design
      Implementation and Policy Options. World Bank. Europe and Central Asia Region.

Grosh, Margaret E., and Judy L. Baker. 1995. “Proxy means tests for targeting social programs:
       Simulations and speculation.” World Bank. Washington, DC.

                                                    73
Integrated Living Conditions Survey (ILCS) of Households. 2012. Armenia—Integrated Living Conditions
        Survey 2012. Yerevan: National Statistical Service of the Republic of Armenia.
        http://microdatalib.worldbank.org/index.php/catalog/5261/related_materials.

Levin (2011). Armenia: Social Assistance Programs and Work Disincentives. The World Bank.

Levy, D., and J. Ohls. 2007. “Evaluation of Jamaica’s PATH program: Final report.” Mathematica Policy
        Research            Inc,         Washington,          DC.           http://www.mathematica-
        mpr.com/~/media/publications/PDFs/JamaicaPATH.pdf

Levy, Santiago, and Norbert Schady. 2013. “Latin America’s Social Policy Challenge: Education, Social
        Insurance, Redistribution” Journal of Economic Perspectives 27 (2): 193–218.

Loxha, A., and M. Morgandi. 2014. “Profiling the unemployed: A selective review of OECD experiences
        and implications for emerging economies.” The World Bank Social Protection Discussion Papers.

Makaryan, A., and A. Zatikyan. 2012. “Strategies for Coping with the Effects of the Global Financial Crisis
      in Rural Armenian Households.” Norwegian Institute of International Affairs, Oslo.

Maluccio, John, and Rafael Flores. Impact evaluation of a conditional cash transfer program:
The Nicaraguan Red de Protección Social. Intl Food Policy Research Institute, 2005.


Martins, P.S., and S.P. Costa. 2014. “Reemployment effects from increased activation: Evidence from
       times of crisis.” https://www.nuim.ie/sites/default/files/assets/document/Convoc%202014-05-
       19.pdf

McQuaid, R.W. 2006. “Job search success and employability in local labor markets.” The Annals of
      Regional Science 40 (2): 407-421.

Nagler P., M. Morgandi and F. Dahlen (2014). Building a Statistical Profiling Model for Registered
       Unemployed in a middle-income country. A feasibility study with the Armenian GORT dataset.

Nikitin. 2013. “Quantitative assessment of the poverty scoring formula used by Armenia's family benefit
         program.” Background paper, based on ILCS 2011.Mimeo

Rebosio, Michelle. 2014. “Qualitative Study: Attitudes Toward Energy Reforms in Armenia.” World Bank,
       Washington, DC.

Rutkowski, Jan J. 2012. “Armenia: Promoting productive employment.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Saavedra, J.E., and S. Garcia. 2012. “Impacts of Conditional Cash Transfer Programs on Educational
       Outcomes in Developing Countries: A Meta-analysis.” RAND Labor and Population Working
       Paper WR-921-1, Rand, Santa Monica, CA.

Skoufias, E., and V. Di Maro. 2008. “Conditional cash transfers, adult work incentives, and poverty.”
        Journal of Development Studies 44: 935–960.

                                                    74
Teixeira, Clarissa Gondim. 2009. “What Is the Impact of Cash Transfers on Labour Supply?” International
        Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth (IPC-IG), Brazil.

Teixeira, Clarissa Gondim. 2010. “A heterogeneity analysis of the Bolsa Família Programme effect on
        men and women’s work supply.” Working Paper, International Policy Centre for Inclusive
        Growth, Brazil.

Tesliuc and GroshTesliuc, E., Pop, L., Grosh, M., Yemtsov, R., 2014. Income Support for the Poorest: A
        Review of Experience in Eastern Europe and Central Asia. World Bank Publications.

Van Berkel, R., and V. Borghi, V., 2008. "Introduction: The governance of activation." Social Ppolicy and
       Ssociety 7:, 331–340.


World Bank, forthcoming. “Armenia: Education, skills, and labor market outcomes of 15–64 year old
       adults living in urban areas.” World Bank, Washington, DC.


World Bank. 2013a. “Mid-term Review of the Macedonia Conditional Cash Transfers Project (CCTP).”
       Unpublished.

World Bank. 2013b. “Republic of Armenia: Accumulation, Competition, and Connectivity. Poverty
      Reduction and Economic Management Unit, Europe and Central Asia Region, World Bank,
      Washington,                                                                        DC.
      https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/16781/811370revision0Box03
      79837B00PUBLIC0.pdf?sequence=1

World Bank. 2014a. “Activation and Smart Safety Nets in the Western Balkans: Toward an Integrated
       Approach.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2014b. “Republic of Armenia: Public Expenditure Review. Expanding the Fiscal Envelope.”
       World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank 2014c. “Project Appraisal Document, Republic of Armenia Education Improvement Project.”
       Annex 6, page 54. The World Bank, Washington DC.




                                                   75
Annex 1. Behavioral requirements and benefit sanctions in
selected OECD and Eastern European countries
Country       Registered      Job     search     Job acceptance      Work and/or        Implications of     Other behavioral
              as              requirements       and exceptions      social             refusal/sanctions   conditions
              unemployed                                             integration
                                                                     requirements
Albania       Required        No                 Required            Yes                Denial of benefit   n.a.
Australia     Required        Yes, proof         n.a.                Yes                From ‘warning’ to   Behavioral
                              every two                                                 100% benefit        requirements can
                              weeks                                                     withdrawal          be extended to
                                                                                                            other family
                                                                                                            members
Austria       Required        Yes                ‘Reasonable’        n.a.               Denial of benefit   Cooperation with
                                                 work,                                                      employment
                                                 exceptions                                                 services
                                                 related to age
                                                 (men over 65;
                                                 women over 60)
Belgium       Required        Demonstration      Obligation to       Yes                Benefit             Participation in
                              of willingness     accept ‘suitable’                      (integration        employment,
                              to work and        job; exceptions                        income) can be      social integration,
                              evidence of job    are possible for                       denied to a         or individualized
                              search             health reasons                         person who is       social integration
                                                                                        unwilling to work   project offered
                                                                                                            by the
                                                                                                            municipality
Bosnia-i-     Yes             No                 No                  Yes, focus         n.a.                n.a.
Herzegovina                                                          made on
                                                                     social
                                                                     inclusion first,
                                                                     then labor
                                                                     activation
Bulgaria      Required for    To have not        Exceptions for      Work -             Denial of benefit   Could be
              at least 9      rejected any       able-bodied         required           to the person       identified and
              months          jobs offered or    with care                              who has refused     included in the
              before          qualification      responsibilities,                      job or training,    Individual
              claiming SA     courses            health                                 first refusal - 1   Employment Plan
                              offered by the     conditions, full-                      month; second -
                              employment         time students,                         1 year
                              offices            and pregnant
                                                 women
Canada        Required        Yes                Yes                 Yes                Up to 100%          Regular
                                                                                        withdrawal          confirmation of
                                                                                                            circumstances;
                                                                                                            verification
                                                                                                            periods vary by
                                                                                                            provinces
Czech         Recipients,     No specific        Accept any job,     Yes                Participation is    To actively look
Republic      unless          independent        even short-term                        obligatory and      for a job, accept
              employed,       job search         or less paid;                          subject to          any employment,
              must            requirement,       exclusions due                         verification;       participate in
              register with   but willingness    to age, health                         refusal to          active
              the labor       to work is basic   status,                                participate         employment
              office as       condition for      disability, or                         results in          programs, public
              jobseekers      being treated      family situation                       exclusion from SA   works, and public

                                                            76
Country     Registered     Job     search   Job acceptance      Work and/or     Implications of     Other behavioral
            as             requirements     and exceptions      social          refusal/sanctions   conditions
            unemployed                                          integration
                                                                requirements
                           as a person in   (care                               receipt             service
                           material need    responsibilities)
Denmark     Required       Required for     Appropriate job     Work -          Payment is          Behavioral
                           both spouses                         required        suspended if the    requirements are
                                                                                beneficiary or      extended to
                                                                                his/her partner     other family
                                                                                refuses without     members
                                                                                sufficient reason
                                                                                to participate in
                                                                                activation
                                                                                measures or
                                                                                repeatedly fails
                                                                                to report on job
                                                                                searches
Estonia     Required       Required         To be available     Yes             Refusal to grant    Fulfillment of
            registration                    for suitable                        the benefit to      other conditions
            with the                        work                                those capable of    and activities can
            Estonian                                                            work and            be agreed in an
            Unemploym                                                           between 18 and      individual job
            ent                                                                 pensionable age,    search plan
            Insurance                                                           who are neither
            Fund                                                                working nor
                                                                                studying and
                                                                                have repeatedly
                                                                                refused, without
                                                                                reason, training,
                                                                                or suitable work
                                                                                or have refused
                                                                                to take up social
                                                                                or employment
                                                                                services
Finland     Required       Required         Required,           Work -          100% benefit        Action plans
                                            suitable job        required        withdrawal for 60   mandatory for
                                                                                to 90 days          certain groups;
                                                                                                    regular
                                                                                                    confirmation of
                                                                                                    circumstances
France      Required       Obligation to    Suitable job        Work -          n/a                 To take the
                           look for work                        required                            necessary steps
                                                                SI - required                       to generate one’s
                                                                                                    own activity or to
                                                                                                    participate in
                                                                                                    integration
                                                                                                    activities
FYR         Proof of no    No, only         Required            Yes             Benefit             Monthly
Macedonia   work is        training and                                         suspension for 6–   confirmation of
            required       retraining                                           12 months; more     circumstances
                                                                                for refusing to
                                                                                participate in
                                                                                public works than
                                                                                for not taking up
                                                                                active
                                                                                LMmeasures
Germany     Required       Required for     Take up a           Yes             From 10% to         Specific

                                                        77
Country   Registered     Job     search   Job acceptance     Work and/or    Implications of       Other behavioral
          as             requirements     and exceptions     social         refusal/sanctions     conditions
          unemployed                                         integration
                                                             requirements
                         beneficiaries    reasonable job;                   100% withdrawal       conditions for (a)
                         capable of       exemption for                     for 1.5 to 3          the basic security
                         working and      people with a                     months                benefit—to take
                         persons living   disability and                                          part in all work-
                         with them in a   those taking                                            oriented inclusion
                         domestic unit    care of children                                        measures; to
                                          under 3 years                                           enter into an
                                                                                                  integration
                                                                                                  agreement with
                                                                                                  the job center;
                                                                                                  (b) occupational
                                                                                                  integration
                                                                                                  benefits; (c) the
                                                                                                  starting
                                                                                                  allowance and
                                                                                                  loans for self-
                                                                                                  employed
                                                                                                  beneficiaries.
                                                                                                  Taking up of
                                                                                                  services provided
                                                                                                  by the local
                                                                                                  authorities for
                                                                                                  the care of minor
                                                                                                  or disabled
                                                                                                  children and for
                                                                                                  home care of
                                                                                                  family members;
                                                                                                  debt counseling,
                                                                                                  psychological
                                                                                                  support, and
                                                                                                  addiction
                                                                                                  counseling.
                                                                                                  Update of action
                                                                                                  plan every 6
                                                                                                  months.
Hungary   Required for   Required         Suitable job       Work -         The entitlement       To cooperate
          benefit for                                        required       to the benefit is     with the public
          persons in                                                        terminated if the     employment
          active                                                            person is deleted     services; to
          age/employ                                                        from the registry     participate in
          ment                                                              of jobseekers due     training
          substituting                                                      to his/her own        programs,
          benefit                                                           fault, if (s)he       guidance, and
                                                                            refuses a proper      programs which
                                                                            job, works,           help to prepare
                                                                            cannot prove that     for work. Proof of
                                                                            in the previous       independent job
                                                                            year (s)he            search every 3
                                                                            pursued a gainful     months
                                                                            activity, or took
                                                                            part in training or
                                                                            a LM program for
                                                                            at least 30 days
Ireland   Required       Jobseeker’s      Required           Yes            Temporary 100%        All persons


                                                     78
Country     Registered     Job     search     Job acceptance   Work and/or     Implications of     Other behavioral
            as             requirements       and exceptions   social          refusal/sanctions   conditions
            unemployed                                         integration
                                                               requirements
                           allowance                                           benefit             unemployed for 3
                           recipients must                                     withdrawal          months must
                           be available                                                            participate in the
                           for, capable of,                                                        National
                           and genuinely                                                           Employment
                           seeking work                                                            Action Plan
                                                                                                   aimed at helping
                                                                                                   them enter or re-
                                                                                                   enter the LM;
                                                                                                   confirmation of
                                                                                                   circumstances -
                                                                                                   every 4 weeks
Japan       Not required   Required           n.a.             Work - no       From warning to     Confirmation of
                                                               SI - no         100% withdrawal     circumstances
                                                                                                   every 4 weeks
Kosovo      Required       No                 Required         Yes,            n.a.                Re-registration
                                                               participation                       with
                                                               in                                  unemployment
                                                               employment                          office every 3
                                                               counseling,                         months; re-
                                                               public works,                       application to
                                                               and other                           benefit every 6
                                                               employment                          months
                                                               programs
Latvia      Required       Yes                Suitable job     Work -          Total amount of     Beneficiaries are
                                                               required        benefit is          obliged to
                                                               SI - required   reduced by the      cooperate with
                                                                               part                social workers in
                                                                               corresponding to    order to
                                                                               the person who      overcome their
                                                                               has refused         situation through
                                                                                                   provision of
                                                                                                   information,
                                                                                                   personal
                                                                                                   attendance,
                                                                                                   participation in
                                                                                                   measures
                                                                                                   promoting
                                                                                                   employment,
                                                                                                   acceptance of
                                                                                                   medical
                                                                                                   examination, and
                                                                                                   participation in
                                                                                                   medical and
                                                                                                   social
                                                                                                   rehabilitation
Lithuania   Required       Required           Required         n.a.            Refusal of job      n.a.
            registration                                                       offer, training,
            with the                                                           public duties or
            local office                                                       works supported
            of labor                                                           by the
            exchange or                                                        Employment
            another                                                            Fund may cause
            employment                                                         suspension of, or

                                                         79
Country       Registered      Job     search    Job acceptance    Work and/or      Implications of      Other behavioral
              as              requirements      and exceptions    social           refusal/sanctions    conditions
              unemployed                                          integration
                                                                  requirements
              service                                                              refusal to grant
                                                                                   social benefits
Montenegro    Required        Required to       Not required by   ‘Soft’           From denial to       Monthly
                              access services   law               requirements     participate in       confirmation of
                              provided by                         to participate   activation           circumstances;
                              employment                          in activation-   programs to          there are no legal
                              agency                              related          denial of benefit    guarantees for
                                                                  activities, to                        reentry into SA if
                                                                  take a job or                         the activation
                                                                  training offer                        does not render
                                                                  while still in                        self-sufficiency
                                                                  unemployme                            and
                                                                  nt                                    independence
Netherlands   Required        Required; the     Required          Yes              Cut or reduction     The parent is
              registration    partners of       acceptance of                      of benefit in case   obliged to attend
              with the        unemployed        suitable                           of                   training courses.
              Institute for   should also       employment                         noncooperation.      If the children are
              Employee        look for work                                        Medical and          aged 5 years or
              Benefit                                                              social factors are   older, cases are
              Schemes                                                              taken into           examined
                                                                                   account, as are      individually to
                                                                                   child care           determine the
                                                                                   obligations          exemption from
                                                                                                        this obligation. If
                                                                                                        all attempts are
                                                                                                        unsuccessful,
                                                                                                        social services
                                                                                                        will help find
                                                                                                        work or training.
Poland        Required        Required          Obliged to        Work -           Refusal to grant     Cooperation with
                                                undertake         required         or withdrawal of     social services;
                                                offered work      SI - required    SA benefit;          regular
                                                                                   reduction of         confirmation of
                                                                                   integration          circumstances; in
                                                                                   allowance            certain cases
                                                                                                        proof of
                                                                                                        independent job
                                                                                                        search; individual
                                                                                                        plan
Portugal      Registration    Required          Required, any     Work -           Cancellation of      To obtain the
              with job                          offered job       required         registration with    benefit, the
              center is                                           SI - required,   the job center       claimant must
              required                                            with                                  accept the
                                                                  exceptions                            obligations
                                                                                                        stemming from
                                                                                                        the integration
                                                                                                        contract. The
                                                                                                        obligations
                                                                                                        contained in the
                                                                                                        integration
                                                                                                        contract include:
                                                                                                        accept proposed
                                                                                                        jobs and
                                                                                                        vocational

                                                         80
Country    Registered      Job     search   Job acceptance      Work and/or      Implications of     Other behavioral
           as              requirements     and exceptions      social           refusal/sanctions   conditions
           unemployed                                           integration
                                                                requirements
                                                                                                     trainings; attend
                                                                                                     courses;
                                                                                                     participate in
                                                                                                     occupational
                                                                                                     programs or
                                                                                                     other temporary
                                                                                                     programs
                                                                                                     stimulating LM
                                                                                                     integration or
                                                                                                     meeting social,
                                                                                                     community or
                                                                                                     environmental
                                                                                                     needs; undertake
                                                                                                     professional
                                                                                                     counseling or
                                                                                                     training actions;
                                                                                                     take steps
                                                                                                     regarding
                                                                                                     prevention,
                                                                                                     treatment, or
                                                                                                     rehabilitation of
                                                                                                     drug addiction
                                                                                                     and incentives to
                                                                                                     take up self-
                                                                                                     employment.
Romania    Required        No               Acceptance of       Work             Failure to comply
                                            community           required;        results in
                                            work;               one family       suspension of the
                                            exemptions for      member is        social aid
                                            non-prime age       obliged to
                                            recipients,         work in the
                                            attending           interest of
                                            vocational          the local
                                            training, or        authority
                                            professional or
                                            other activity
Serbia     Required        Required         Yes, suitable job   Yes              Sanctions exist     Assistance is
                                                                                 for recipients      granted for 9 out
                                                                                 who refuse a job    of 12 months a
                                                                                 offer or do not     year; eligibility
                                                                                 participate in      must be
                                                                                 activation          recertified every
                                                                                 measures, but       12 months
                                                                                 they do not apply
                                                                                 to non-work-able
                                                                                 family members;
                                                                                 sanctions are
                                                                                 rarely applied
Slovakia   Registration    Required for     Suitable work       Taking           The person          The taking up of
           with the        activation                           suitable work,   receives only the   activation
           Office of       allowance                            training, or     basic benefit in    allowance is
           Labor, Social                                        community        material need       conditional on
           Affairs, and                                         work is                              participation in
           Family is                                            optional for                         training,


                                                       81
Country    Registered   Job     search   Job acceptance       Work and/or      Implications of     Other behavioral
           as           requirements     and exceptions       social           refusal/sanctions   conditions
           unemployed                                         integration
                                                              requirements
           mandatory                                          the                                  municipal works,
           for                                                beneficiary                          or other suitable
           activation                                         but obligatory                       work
           allowance                                          for getting
                                                              the activation
                                                              allowance
Slovak     Required     Required         Required                              Refusal to grant
Republic                                 acceptance of                         the benefit or
                                         any job after                         benefit
                                         receiving SA for                      withdrawal in
                                         a certain time,                       case of voluntary
                                         that is, 9 times                      termination of
                                         in the last 12                        employment,
                                         months                                refusal of job
                                                                               offer, or
                                                                               refusal/abandon
                                                                               ment of ALMPs
Spain      Required     Required         Yes, suitable job    Yes              100% withdrawal     Confirmation of
                                                                               from 4 weeks to     circumstances
                                                                               indefinitely        every 3 months
                                                                                                   and intensive
                                                                                                   interviews every
                                                                                                   3 months
Sweden     Required     Required         Required             Yes              Sanctions exist,    SA is conditional
                                                                               they vary by        to participation in
                                                                               municipality        ALMPs; also on
                                                                                                   intensive
                                                                                                   interviews,
                                                                                                   regular
                                                                                                   confirmation of
                                                                                                   circumstances,
                                                                                                   individual action
                                                                                                   plans
United     Required     Required         Required - to be     Yes              Termination of      For jobseekers’
Kingdom                                  available for ’all                    benefit from 2      allowance—must
                                         work’                                 weeks to 26         sign a jobseekers'
                                                                               weeks               agreement
                                                                                                   detailing the type
                                                                                                   of work, hours,
                                                                                                   and activities to
                                                                                                   be undertaken by
                                                                                                   the jobseeker in
                                                                                                   their search for
                                                                                                   work; initial
                                                                                                   intensive
                                                                                                   interview with
                                                                                                   quarterly follow-
                                                                                                   ups, confirmation
                                                                                                   of circumstances
                                                                                                   every 2 weeks,
                                                                                                   proof of
                                                                                                   independent job
                                                                                                   search every 2
                                                                                                   weeks;

                                                    82
 Country          Registered        Job     search      Job acceptance       Work and/or       Implications of        Other behavioral
                  as                requirements        and exceptions       social            refusal/sanctions      conditions
                  unemployed                                                 integration
                                                                             requirements
                                                                                                                      requirements can
                                                                                                                      be extended to
                                                                                                                      other family
                                                                                                                      members after
                                                                                                                      recognizing
                                                                                                                      caring
                                                                                                                      responsibility
 United           Required          Required (for       Required (for        Required (for     100% withdrawal        Confirmation of
 States           (for food         food stamps)        food stamps)         food stamps)      for minimum of 1       circumstances
                  stamps)                                                                      month                  rules vary by
                                                                                                                      state; proof of
                                                                                                                      independent job
                                                                                                                      search can be
                                                                                                                      required;
                                                                                                                      requirements are
                                                                                                                      extended to
                                                                                                                      other family
                                                                                                                      members as well
Source: Gotcheva et al. 2011. Social Safety Nets in the Western Balkans. Design Implementation and Policy Options. Europe and Central Asia
Region. Based on data from European Commission (2012) and national legislation.




                                                                   83
Annex 2. Statistical profile of vulnerable groups
                                                                                               Male and Female
                                                                     Whole      Work-able Work-able Work-able Work-able Work-able
                                                                     Population Population poor        SSN Ben FBP Ben  Non FBP
Source: ILCS 2011                                                                                                       benef poor
Population shares
Sample size                                                              31,024      18,961     6,314     2,808     1,487     5,543
No of individuals                                                     3,162,084   1,928,609   632,700   317,344   152,022   548,183
Share in the Total Population                                            100.00       60.99     20.01     10.04      4.81     17.34
Share in Poor Population                                                                        55.38     27.78     13.31     47.98

Labor Status and Characteristicsa
Employed                                                                  52.18      60.54      51.09     49.70     49.28     52.37
   Salaried Employee                                                      55.57      58.86      55.44     54.55     33.51     57.80
    Employer                                                               0.64       0.71       0.36      0.78       -        0.41
    Self-employed                                                         29.77      27.18      27.68     30.96     43.29     26.44
    Zero Income                                                           14.03      13.25      16.52     13.70     23.20     15.35
Unemployed                                                                11.87      14.31      19.01     21.87     17.22     18.70
Out of labor force                                                        35.95      25.15      29.90     28.42     33.49     28.94
Housewife                                                                 24.86      44.61      42.76     41.00     40.96     43.95
    Disabled                                                               7.40        -          -         -         -         -
    Military service                                                       0.05       0.10       0.14      0.23      0.22      0.16
    Persons with other receipts                                           21.04       9.89       8.33     13.32      6.78      8.82
    Discouraged                                                           24.20      42.90      46.91     43.92     50.78     45.08
    Other                                                                 22.44       2.50       1.86      1.53      1.26      1.99
Labor Occupation
   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing + Mining, Quarrying                     40.24      36.71      42.18     39.32     61.28     39.92
    Manufacturing                                                          6.63       7.07       8.74      7.27      4.82      9.17
    Electricity, Gast, Water, Steam Sewerage, Waste management             3.00       3.15       3.05      3.65      1.01      3.35
    Construction                                                           5.73       6.18       7.07      8.44     11.10      6.20
    Wholesale and retail trade, repair of motor vehicles                   9.45      10.11      10.43     10.25      7.44     10.74
    Transportation and Storage                                             4.13       4.40       4.70      4.73      2.81      5.07
    Accommodation and Food Service Activities                              1.09       1.12       0.86      0.44      0.66      0.84
    Information and Comunication                                           1.46       1.62       0.76      1.10       -        0.85
    Financial and Insurance Activities                                     0.76       0.83       0.59      1.31      0.35      0.62
    Real State Activities                                                  0.17       0.18       0.06       -         -        0.07
    Professional, Scientific and Technical activities                      1.68       1.61       0.41      1.57       -        0.46
    Administrative and Support Service Activities                          0.86       0.88       0.59      0.90      0.66      0.59
    Public Administration and Defence                                      6.75       7.12       6.59      5.14      2.05      7.32
    Education, Health, Art & Recreation, other services activities        17.79      18.74      13.75     15.32      7.29     14.69
    Activities of HH as employers of domestic personnel                    0.24       0.27       0.18      0.56      0.54      0.07
Working Hours (per week)                                                  35.35      36.55      35.12     34.55     29.24     35.72
Work doesn't comply with qualifications                                   12.80      13.01      11.32     15.53     17.31     11.10
Informal Jobb                                                             60.15      57.97      66.92     64.10     86.99     64.00
Ocassional/seasonal jobs                                                  28.71      27.96      33.06     34.78     43.09     31.09
Had ever had a paid job                                                   49.70      51.36      47.78     54.69     43.49     48.30
Feel that need more training to be competitive in the labor market        26.13      28.66      31.05     26.89     29.30     31.72
Length of time looking for a job (for those unemployed)
    Less than 7 month                                                     30.46      29.98      30.47     31.58     30.91     30.02
    7 to 12 months                                                        16.87      16.95      16.47     12.50     11.83     16.98
    13 to 24 months                                                       20.15      20.50      19.81     22.39     26.85     19.12
    >24 months                                                            32.53      32.57      33.24     33.54     30.41     33.88
Method of job searchc
    Method 1: through labor office                                         7.59       8.02       8.53     31.46      9.93      8.56
    Method 2: through friends/relatives                                   89.95      90.35      90.19     86.63     95.60     89.07
    Method 3: others                                                      44.94      44.84      44.84     36.51     39.12     45.96
Registered in labor market programs (training) or Labor Offices            0.70       1.13       1.61      6.85      1.80      1.54
In Training or received training during the last year                      0.36       0.37       0.62      0.37      0.37      0.65




                                                                       84
                                                                                         Male and Female
                                                               Whole      Work-able Work-able Work-able Work-able Work-able
                                                               Population Population poor        SSN Ben FBP Ben  Non FBP
Source: ILCS 2011                                                                                                 benef poor
Socio-demographic characteristics
Male                                                                47.80     47.43      46.56     46.03      44.04     46.98
Age ranges
   [15-24]                                                          17.09     17.06      18.18     14.85      14.96     18.54
    [25-34]                                                         14.72     23.53      26.49     24.72      27.49     26.38
    [35-44]                                                         11.56     18.46      19.31     21.50      27.61     18.01
    [45-54]                                                         15.67     24.64      21.40     23.33      18.50     21.96
    [55-64]                                                         10.92     16.31      14.62     15.59      11.45     15.12
Marital Status
   Married/Cohabitation                                             62.35     69.85      71.45     72.79      74.82     70.71
    Divorced/separated                                               2.68      3.26       3.49      4.66       5.75      3.13
    Widow/er                                                        10.74      4.51       4.46      5.51       6.56      4.25
    Single                                                          24.22      22.38      20.60     17.04      12.88     21.91
Has a Disability                                                     3.43       -          -         -          -         -
Educational Level
Never attended                                                       0.63      0.03       0.07      0.08       0.16      0.07
No education completed                                               4.61      0.00       0.01       -          -        0.01
Elementary school                                                   14.34      5.46       8.17      7.90       9.79      7.58
Secondary/Vocational                                                39.58     46.84      54.93     48.34      61.34     53.63
Higher education (college or higher)                                40.85     47.65      36.83     43.67      28.71     38.70

Household Size and Structure
Lives in Urban Area                                                 66.26     66.19      66.58     71.85      58.84     67.32
Household size                                                       3.89      4.26       4.96      4.69       4.95      4.89
Single parent HH                                                    36.38     31.59      30.90     34.92      40.82     29.11
Female-Headed Household                                             30.85     27.29      26.40     30.78      35.42     24.92
Elderly-Headed Household (65+ )                                     34.88     25.83      29.65     22.71      24.33     29.48
Total number of dependents
  Children (0-15)                                                    0.72      0.83       1.17      1.25       1.78      1.03
  Elderly                                                            0.50      0.38       0.45      0.30       0.30      0.46
  Disabled                                                           0.13      0.12       0.17      0.18       0.23      0.15
Usage of preschool (if child present in hh)                         26.52     26.52      21.48     24.40      23.51     21.71

Socioeconomic Characteristics
Poor (upper poverty line)                                           30.59     31.70     100.00     53.67      71.83    100.00
Share of work related incomes in Total Consumption                  57.95     66.19      66.85     42.87      28.43     74.34
Household beneficiary of:
     SSN beneficiary                                                16.88     17.09      24.69    100.00     100.00     10.73
     Social assistance (FBP)                                         9.38      8.84      15.64     51.70     100.00       -
     Disability allowance                                            2.20      2.54       3.72     14.86       4.14      3.65
     Child allowances                                                0.74      0.85       0.62      5.00       0.25      0.73
     Scholarships and fellowships                                    2.40      2.53       2.28     14.80       2.16      2.42
     Unemployment Benefit                                            1.13      1.30       1.68      7.61       0.52      1.89
     Number of times HH received Emergency benefits (12 mon)         2.53      2.56       2.17      2.56                 2.17
Generosity of SA + SI benefits in Total Consumption                 25.25     17.23      26.13     29.90      37.38     22.28
Generosity of SSN benefits + Unemp. Ben in Total Consumption         3.15      3.01       5.84     17.61      23.99      1.52
Years being entitled to Family Benefits                              6.12      5.94       6.32      5.94       5.94
Main reason for not being registered in FBP
  I considered myself well-off                                      23.02     23.91      15.96     20.69                15.96
  Has no information                                                 1.54      1.49       2.03      1.80                 2.03
  In any case, I wouldn’t get anything                              48.43     48.53      48.61     51.24                48.61
  Bad attitude of the social workers                                 1.68      1.36       1.76      0.46                 1.76
  Difficult to get the required documents                            1.06      0.84       1.35      1.13                 1.35
  I have been rejected once                                         13.08     12.30      16.53     13.97                16.53
  Other                                                             11.20     11.57      13.76     10.71                13.76




                                                                 85
                                                                                                Female Only
                                                                     Whole      Work-able Work-able Work-able Work-able Work-able
                                                                     Population Population poor      SSN Ben  FBP Ben   Non FBP
Source: ILCS 2011                                                                                                       benef poor
Population shares
Sample size                                                              15,899       9,734     3,323     1,494       826     2,894
No of individuals                                                     1,650,641   1,013,881   338,091   171,275    85,064   290,626
Share in the Total Population                                            100.00       61.42     20.48     10.38      5.15     17.61
Share in Poor Population                                                 275.17      169.02     56.36     28.55     14.18     48.45

Labor Status and Characteristicsa
Employed                                                                  44.45      51.32      40.08     39.08     39.74     41.52
   Salaried Employee                                                      51.57      54.97      48.22     45.23     20.43     51.63
    Employer                                                               0.29       0.33       0.26      0.20       -        0.29
    Self-employed                                                         29.27      26.53      26.83     32.26     43.36     26.05
    Zero Income                                                           18.87      18.18      24.69     22.30     36.20     22.03
Unemployed                                                                11.00      13.41      16.88     20.29     14.30     16.91
Out of labor force                                                        44.55      35.27      43.03     40.64     45.96     41.57
Housewife                                                                 35.25      55.53      52.16     48.50     47.79     54.27
    Disabled                                                               5.10        -          -         -         -         -
    Military service                                                        -          -          -         -         -         -
    Persons with other receipts                                           19.38       7.45       6.15     10.98      5.28      6.28
    Discouraged                                                           23.08      36.16      41.14     39.46     46.09     38.88
    Other                                                                 17.18       0.86       0.55      1.07      0.84      0.56
Labor Occupation
   Agriculture, Forestry, Fishing + Mining, Quarrying                     45.81      42.28      50.67     51.08     76.67     47.20
    Manufacturing                                                          4.80       5.29       6.52      4.05      2.88      6.77
    Electricity, Gast, Water, Steam Sewerage, Waste management             1.19       1.21       0.78      0.86      0.95      0.88
    Construction                                                           0.23       0.24       0.31      0.20       -        0.34
    Wholesale and retail trade, repair of motor vehicles                   8.77       9.47      10.21      8.54      5.50     10.57
    Transportation and Storage                                             1.27       1.40       1.27      1.25      0.22      1.42
    Accommodation and Food Service Activities                              1.23       1.33       1.07      0.67      1.33      0.92
    Information and Comunication                                           1.11       1.23       0.38      0.45       -        0.43
    Financial and Insurance Activities                                     0.81       0.90       0.92      1.42       -        1.03
    Real State Activities                                                  0.10       0.11        -         -         -         -
    Professional, Scientific and Technical activities                      1.54       1.59       0.34      0.89       -        0.38
    Administrative and Support Service Activities                          0.54       0.58       0.57      0.44      0.31      0.65
    Public Administration and Defence                                      4.29       4.51       4.24      4.47      1.43      4.76
    Education, Health, Art & Recreation, other services activities        27.94      29.44      22.53     25.14     10.69     24.44
    Activities of HH as employers of domestic personnel                    0.36       0.39       0.14      0.54      0.02      0.15
Working Hours (per week)                                                  30.95      32.09      30.49     28.05     22.77     31.36
Work doesn't comply with qualifications                                   12.51      13.00      12.37     16.83     19.90     11.56
Informal Jobb                                                             59.15      56.72      67.07     62.77     85.93     64.22
Ocassional/seasonal jobs                                                  24.63      23.26      27.36     27.94     33.12     26.47
Had ever had a paid job                                                   45.76      44.63      40.67     47.04     30.77     42.45
Feel that need more training to be competitive in the labor market        27.04      29.04      31.52     28.60     31.18     31.97
Length of time looking for a job (for those unemployed)
    Less than 7 month                                                     27.02      26.30      25.22     28.23     24.16     24.67
    7 to 12 months                                                        15.53      15.26      15.18     11.63      9.07     16.16
    13 to 24 months                                                       21.10      21.44      23.53     22.58     28.11     22.90
    >24 months                                                            36.36      37.00      36.07     37.56     38.66     36.28
Method of job searchc
    Method 1: through labor office                                        10.18      10.71      11.91     41.62     14.35     12.20
    Method 2: through friends/relatives                                   89.28      89.66      88.62     84.54     93.29     87.72
    Method 3: others                                                      44.73      44.47      44.71     32.57     34.04     46.88
Registered in labor market programs (training) or Labor Offices            0.91       1.48       2.16      8.76      2.49      2.10
In Training or received training during the last year                      0.43       0.54       0.95      0.53      0.66      1.00




                                                                       86
                                                                                          Female Only
                                                               Whole      Work-able Work-able Work-able Work-able Work-able
                                                               Population Population poor      SSN Ben  FBP Ben   Non FBP
Source: ILCS 2011                                                                                                 benef poor
Socio-demographic characteristics
Male                                                                  -         -          -         -          -         -
Age ranges
   [15-24]                                                          16.22     15.40      17.58     12.68      14.29     17.83
    [25-34]                                                         14.34     22.84      26.46     26.05      31.56     25.68
    [35-44]                                                         12.15     19.50      19.82     21.73      24.23     18.73
    [45-54]                                                         16.09     25.26      21.08     24.00      17.62     22.14
    [55-64]                                                         11.31     17.00      15.06     15.54      12.30     15.62
Marital Status
   Married/Cohabitation                                             58.20     69.13      70.26     70.24      70.46     69.97
    Divorced/separated                                               4.19      5.20       5.64      7.78       9.03      5.06
    Widow/er                                                        16.59      7.53       7.10      9.31      10.87      6.74
    Single                                                          21.02      18.14      17.00     12.67       9.65     18.23
Has a Disability                                                     2.84       -          -         -          -         -
Educational Level
Never attended                                                       0.70      0.04       0.06      0.15       0.29      0.06
No education completed                                               4.17      0.00       0.01       -          -        0.01
Elementary school                                                   13.10      4.22       6.69      6.06       8.19      6.06
Secondary/Vocational                                                37.55     43.49      52.08     46.46      59.49     50.59
Higher education (college or higher)                                44.48     52.25      41.16     47.33      32.04     43.28

Household Size and Structure
Lives in Urban Area                                                 66.07     65.98      66.46     71.71      58.08     67.21
Household size                                                       3.96      4.33       5.01      4.74       5.02      4.94
Single parent HH                                                    34.74     30.28      30.30     33.69      39.46     28.56
Female-Headed Household                                             31.65     27.06      26.09     30.86      35.87     24.52
Elderly-Headed Household (65+ )                                     34.11     24.94      29.20     22.69      24.64     28.94
Total number of dependents
  Children (0-15)                                                    0.74      0.86       1.19      1.27       1.82      1.05
  Elderly                                                            0.49      0.37       0.44      0.30       0.30      0.45
  Disabled                                                           0.13      0.11       0.16      0.17       0.23      0.14
Usage of preschool (if child present in hh)                         26.52     26.48      21.48     24.40      23.51     21.72

Socioeconomic Characteristics
Poor (upper poverty line)                                           31.08     32.06     100.00     53.80      71.66    100.00
Share of work related incomes in Total Consumption                  58.86     66.90      67.45     43.67      29.09     75.06
Household beneficiary of:
     SSN beneficiary                                                16.95     17.37      25.03    100.00     100.00     10.99
     Social assistance (FBP)                                         9.39      8.96      15.78     51.56     100.00       -
     Disability allowance                                            2.22      2.50       3.70     14.42       3.13      3.71
     Child allowances                                                0.76      0.89       0.64      5.11       0.25      0.75
     Scholarships and fellowships                                    2.39      2.63       2.34     15.14       2.22      2.49
     Unemployment Benefit                                            1.15      1.28       1.72      7.39       0.53      1.94
     Number of times HH received Emergency benefits (12 mon)         2.33      2.40       2.22      2.40                 2.22
Generosity of SA + SI benefits in Total Consumption                 24.35     16.36      25.23     29.28      36.59     21.22
Generosity of SSN benefits + Unemp. Ben in Total Consumption         3.14      3.02       5.87     17.40      23.69      1.54
Years being entitled to Family Benefits                              6.18      5.97       6.38      5.97       5.97
Main reason for not being registered in FBP
  I considered myself well-off                                      22.98     23.57      15.52     20.77                15.52
  Has no information                                                 1.47      1.45       2.11      1.30                 2.11
  In any case, I wouldn’t get anything                              48.46     48.65      48.40     52.88                48.40
  Bad attitude of the social workers                                 1.62      1.40       1.80      0.42                 1.80
  Difficult to get the required documents                            1.18      0.99       1.57      1.65                 1.57
  I have been rejected once                                         13.32     12.71      17.05     12.77                17.05
  Other                                                             10.97     11.23      13.55     10.19                13.55




                                                                 87
Source: ILCS, 2011.
Notes:
Definitions: Work-able - population of working age (age 15–64) not disabled or in formal education.
             SSN beneficiaries - recipients of FBP, nonregular benefits, child allowance, and UBs.
             Poor - population living below the national upper poverty line.
a
  For the whole population (Group 0) the labor-related variables are only defined for those between 15 and 75
years old.
b
  Informality: unpaid family worker; employee with verbal agreement; employee with a written contract but not
entitled to paid annual leave or paid sick leave; self-employed or employer with no registered business.
c
  Not exclusive categories, more than one method is allowed.




                                                     88
Annex 3. Tax and benefit model: Additional simulations

In addition to the simulation on tax benefit incentives for individuals who join the LM while in benefits
presented in Chapter 2 (Box 5), this annex illustrates additional simulations that factor in the cost of an
UB (which could also be an ALMPs stipend), or informal labor income. Moving out of UBs (or other
programs that pay a similar stipend) to low levels of earnings entails high opportunity costs, but only
temporarily. The loss of employment benefits when finding a job normally entails a (temporary) higher
marginal tax rate attributed to the benefit withdrawal; however, this can constitute a strong barrier to
activation when the combined effect of taxes and benefits makes a person worse off while working than
as a beneficiary of activation programs.

Figure A1 shows that for a household with two work-able adults and two children on the family benefit,
if one adult member moved to a job paying just above the minimum wage, more than one Armenian
dram would be taxed away for every additional dram earned. Such a net loss would also occur if, instead
of UBs, the family member was part of ALMPs paid at the same rate (18,000 AMD) and not disregarded
from the FBP income accounting. However, it should be pointed out that in light of the recent
employment law, the UB is set to become a jobseeker allowance for the duration of only three months,
and therefore the labor supply disincentives may be negligible or null given the likely high value placed
by the jobseeker on securing a longer-term income source. At higher levels of AW, opportunity costs
remain above 80 percent but no longer cause a net loss of family income, if an adult takes up work.

Figure A1. Share of gross earnings taxed away at Figure A2. Share of gross earnings taxed away at
33% of AW                                        50% of AW
 140%                                                           100%
                                                                 90%
 120%
                                                                 80%
 100%                                                            70%
   80%                                                           60%
                                                                 50%
   60%                                                           40%
   40%                                                           30%
                                                                 20%
   20%
                                                                 10%
   00%                                                           00%
              Single    One-earner Single One-earner                   Single    One-earner Single One-earner
                          couple parent with couple with                           couple parent with couple with
                         without 2 children 2 children                            without 2 children 2 children
                         children                                                 children

                       FB    Income tax       UB                                FB   Income tax   UB

Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS 2012.

Including the opportunity cost of the potential income earned in the informal LM while receiving
benefits increases the cost of moving to formal employment further . In our final scenario, work-able



                                                           89
individuals who move to formal jobs are assumed to lose the average income earned by the working age
population in Armenia on the informal LM.28 At 33 percent of AW, in the case of married couples with
two children, taking up a formal job becomes no longer worthwhile. Although opportunity costs
decrease with increasing income from formal employment, they remain above 50 percent for single
parents who earn the average wage and for married couples with children with one earner earning the
average wage . Unless formal work pays these families more than the average wage, for every two
Armenian dram earned, more than one is taxed away. Consequently, adding the opportunity cost of
informal labor income constitutes an added disincentive to take up a formal job for a large number of
households.

Figure A3. Share of gross income taxed away at Figure A4. Share of gross income taxed away at
33% AW (without UB)                            50% AW (without UB)
 120%                                                            90%
                                                                 80%
 100%
                                                                 70%
     80%                                                         60%
                                                                 50%
     60%
                                                                 40%
     40%                                                         30%
                                                                 20%
     20%
                                                                 10%
     00%                                                         00%
             Single     One-earner Single One-earner                   Single    One-earner Single One-earner
                           couple parent with couple with                           couple parent with couple with
                          without 2 children 2 children                            without 2 children 2 children
                          children                                                 children
             FB       Income tax   Informal income                     FB       Income tax   Informal income
Source: Authors’ calculations based on ILCS 2012.




28
  This is computed as the mean annualized informal wage income (562,650 AMD), discounted by the incidence of
informal employment among the working age population (28.8 percent) (ILCS, 2011).


                                                            90
