                                                                                                98301




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM


BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA

STATE BANK GOVERNANCE

TECHNICAL NOTE
JUNE 2015
This Technical Note was prepared in the context of a joint World Bank-IMF Financial Sector Assessment
Program mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina during October-November 2014 led by Michael Edwards,
World Bank and Sonia Munoz, IMF, and overseen by Finance and Markets Global Practice, World Bank
and the Monetary and Capital Markets Department, IMF. The note contains technical analysis and detailed
information underpinning the FSAP assessment’s findings and recommendations. Further information on
the FSAP program can be found at www.worldbank.org/fsap.


                          THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                          FINANCE & MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE




                                                  1
Contents

Glossary                                                              3
Executive Summary                                                     4
Introduction                                                          9
Key tenents of effective corporate governance in state owned banks   12
Main Findings                                                        15
Detailed Recommended actions                                         33




                                              2
      GLOSSARY
BARS       Banking Agency of the Republic of Srpska
BCBS       Basel Committee for Banking Supervision
CEO        Chief Executive Officer
CoB        Chairman of the Board
DBFBiH     Development Bank of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
FBA        Banking Agency of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
FBiH       Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
FSAP       Financial Sector Assessment Program
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
IAS/IFRS   International Accounting Standards/International Financial Reporting Standards
IDBRS      Investment and Development Bank of the Republic of Srpska
IMF        International Monetary Fund
ISA        International Standards on Auditing
IFRS       International Financial and Reporting Standards
JSC        Joint Stock Company
KM         Convertible Mark
KPI        Key Performance Indicator
LoB        Law on Banks
LoE        Law on Enterprises
MoF        Ministry of Finance
NBFIs      Non-bank financial institutions
NPLs       Non-Performing Loans
OECD       Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
SFIs       State Financial Institutions
SME        Small and Medium Enterprise
SOE        State-Owned Enterprise
UBO        Ultimate Beneficial Owner
RS         Republic of Srpska
WBG        World Bank Group


                                                      3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.      The governments of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) and the
Republic of Srpska (RS) are involved in their domestic banking systems through equity
stakes and subordinated debt investments in certain banking institutions. The FBiH owns the
Development Bank of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (DBFBiH) and a commercial
bank, the Union Bank. Recently, the government of the Republic of Srpska (RS) has sharply
increased its participation in the banking sector through a 100% stake in Banka Srpska and through
preferred, convertible shares in two other commercial banks, Pavlovic Banka (21%) and Bobar
Banka (8%). Additionally, Nova Bank has a 6.7% stake in Bobar Banka, and the RS also holds
subordinated debt in Nova Banka and Srpska Banka. The RS holdings are managed by the
Investment Development Bank of Republic of Srpska (IDBRS).

Common governance practices and concerns in State commercial banks in the FBiH and the
RS

2.      Banks’ supervisory boards are not performing their in tended leadership role.
Supervisory boards provide little strategic direction (in terms of business approach and risk
appetite), seemingly focused on conducting high level compliance activities rather than holding
bank management accountable for executing strategy, prudent operation of the bank, or
establishing strong systems and controls. As a result, the management board is de facto placed in
a stronger leadership and decision making position, resulting in an important blurring of lines of
responsibility and accountability and overlapping operational roles with management. In the two
minority held banks in RS, the founders play a key role in the supervisory board and through their
positions, have influenced the operation of the subject banks. 1 State banks suffer from an
inordinate level of related party transactions, many which are classified as NPLs.

3.      Despite the existence of a structured recruitment process for most banks’ supervisory
board members, boards are often seen to lack sufficient experience, skills and independence
to effectively guide their institutions. Selection criteria are rather basic (including a university
degree and five years of professional experience). The LoB and LoE are silent regarding
independence requirements of supervisory board members and do not limit the number of civil
servants who can serve on supervisory boards of state banks. As a result, many board members do
not have important sector specific skills needed to direct and oversee a bank. In state controlled
banks, the MoF recruitment committee does not engage with existing board members to determine
the essential skills necessary to building a board with relevant experience and qualifications.
Moreover, state bank recruitment committees do not include non-government individuals which
impact the independence and objectivity of the process.



1
 The founder of one of the banks, in concert with reform efforts begun in the first part of 2014, resigned his position
at the same time.


                                                          4
4.      The audit board structure does not promote effective monitoring of the banks’ control
environment. The audit board operates as a separate corporate body rather than as a subcommittee
of the supervisory board. This arrangement has the effect of diffusing responsibility and
accountability for internal audit oversight and effectiveness.2 As a result, the supervisory board is
not fully accountable for the integrity of the internal audit function. Banks’ internal audit
departments suffer from understaffing and cannot comprehensively cover bank operations with a
high level of quality. The effectiveness of the external audit function is substantially compromised
given that the appointment of the audit firms occurs late in the financial year and is many times
based on a lowest-cost basis. External audit results are rarely presented and discussed at the
supervisory board level, thereby mitigating the independence of the activity.

5.      The risk management function in state banks is a relatively new concept. Banks report
that the functions typically support the credit approval process (which involves them in the
business line), determine credit classification according to regulation, and periodically perform
portfolio monitoring. Moreover, the head of the functions are accountable to senior management
rather than to the supervisory board and currently are not independent.

6.      Both supervisory authorities have made progress in enhancing the regulatory
framework and supervisory processes since the 2006 FSAP. The regulatory framework has
been broadened by the issuance of regulations on corporate governance, credit risk management
and capital, and comprehensive regulations on risk management have been drafted.. As well, legal
and/or regulatory amendments are warranted to enhance the selection process and independence
of state bank supervisory boards. The law on accounting requires updating to capture the most
current version of IFRS, and there is a need to strengthen both internal and external audit oversight
by the supervisory board, in part by making the existing audit board a supervisory board
subcommittee.

Institution-specific Governance Shortcomings

Development Bank of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (DBFBiH)

7.     The DBFBiH is charged with promoting social and economic development in the
FBiH. The DBFBiH lends directly to the market but has not set targeted strategies or policies to
support specific sectors of the economy (e.g. SMEs, agriculture, etc.). Moreover, the DBFBiH
faces important long term financing difficulties as according to Article 3 of the Law on the
DBFBiH, it should have operating capital of 400 mn KM. However its capital has not exceeded
180 mn KM since its inception.


2 The supervisory board is responsible for both appointing and remunerating the internal auditor. However, the audit
board reviews the audit plan, monitors the audit process, and receives the audit results. While the audit board may
report periodically to the supervisory board, in some cases the reports are only written. This makes it difficult, if not
impossible, for the supervisory board to be apprised of the control environment and for it to assess the performance
and adequacy of the internal audit function. This also can allow the supervisory board to relegate its responsibility for
the bank’s control environment and control oversight.

                                                           5
8.      The DBFBiH is only partially supervised by the Banking Agency of the FBiH (FBA).
The DBFBiH is incorporated under a separate legislation, the Law on the DBFBiH, which restricts
the FBA’s supervisory reach. As a result, the FBA is not allowed to sanction the bank for violations
of regulations or to vet the fitness and propriety of its supervisory or management board members.
Thus, as seen later in this Technical Note, the DBFBiH’s accountability mechanism is severely
compromised.

Investment and Development Bank of Republic of Srpska (IDBRS)

9.      In addition to its development activities (e.g. housing finance, SME finance), the
IDBRS is charged with oversight responsibility for the state’s investments. The IDBRS
oversees and carries out certain ownership responsibilities in the state’s investments in the real and
financial sectors and manages the portfolio of existing state-owned enterprises. The IDBRS is set
up as a joint stock company under the Law on the IDBRS and manages six funds through which
the activities are conducted. The funds are individual joint stock companies; each formed under its
own law. The IDBRS is not a licensed bank and is not supervised by the Banking Agency of the
RS (BARS).

10.     Specific objectives, business strategies and exit plans for the government’s
participation in and support of the financial sector have not been defined. During the last two
years, the government of the RS, through the IDBRS, has sharply increased its participation in the
domestic financial sector through equity stakes, subordinated debt and deposit placements. In
order to justify the government’s role in the financial sector, to identify and convey to the public
the market gaps it intends to fill, and to assure clear objectives and an exit strategy, each IDBRS
related bank investment should be supported by a specific financial institution mandate or
comprehensive management plan and exit strategy.

11.      Rigorous surveillance of the government’s financial sector exposures by the IDBRS
is warranted. While the IDBRS has a long established investment monitoring process for each of
its historic holdings, specific performance thresholds have not been developed to provide feedback
on the financial and qualitative performance of financial institution investment(s). A rigorous
performance evaluation methodology, including key performance indicators (KPIs) and linked
management performance contracts, should be developed and mutually agreed by the IDBRS, the
relevant bank supervisory board and bank management. Once adopted, these should be regularly
monitored to hold accountable the banks’ supervisory boards and management.

12.     The recommendations below are aimed at helping to strengthen the framework through
which state-owned commercial and development banking institutions are overseen. Whilst much
has been accomplished in terms of improving the regulatory framework of corporate governance
in both entities, the role of the state as the owner of investments in the financial sector has yet to
be defined.



                                                  6
13.     The authorities of both entities should establish its objectives for participating in the
commercial banking sector and define the mandate, policy objectives and ownership and exit
strategy for each bank investment. With a clearer ownership strategy, supervisory boards and the
management of these state banks will be able to deliver better results and the state will be able to
monitor more effectively its investments and justify its presence in the financial sector.


                       Bosnia and Herzegovina: State Bank Corporate Governance Key Recommendations
Recommendations and Authority Responsible for Implementation                                                                 Time3
                          State Banks – Common Recommendations
Strengthen the regulatory framework:                                                                            FBiH: MoF,     I
       Amend the Law on Banks and the Law on Enterprises to make the audit board a subcommittee of              RS: MoF,
                                                                                                                  IDBRS
        the supervisory board instead of distinct corporate body.
       Amend the law on accounting to reflect the most current version of IFRS.
       Treat material transactions with state-owned enterprises and other government entities (including
        municipalities) as related-party transactions and disclose them in compliance with internationally
    recognized accounting standards.
Strengthen the supervisory board member selection process:                                                      FBiH: MoF,     I
       Modify the selection criteria for supervisory board members to include nature of professional            RS: MoF,

        experience, sector specific skills; review remuneration policies to attract talented professionals to
    state bank boards.
Strengthen the composition and role of the supervisory board of state commercial banks:                         FBiH: MoF,     I
       Change the composition of state banks’ supervisory boards to be composed of a majority of                RS: MoF,
                                                                                                                  IDBRS
        independent members with sector specific skills.
       Through the selection process and the mandate given state bank boards, enable the supervisory
        board to hold management accountable in the context of an agreed performance contract.

Strengthen the audit function:                                                                                  FBiH: MoF,     I
       Assign specific responsibility to the supervisory board to strengthen its internal audit function        RS: MoF,
                                                                                                                  IDBRS
        and ensure adequate resources commensurate with the complexity and size of the bank.
       Assign specific accountability to the supervisory board for an adequate external audit and for
     receiving and reviewing audit results directly from the audit firm.
              Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina – Specific Recommendations
Professionalize the ownership function of the MoF:                                                                 MoF         I
       Establish and publicly disclose specific, concrete objectives that justify each government
        investment / intervention in banks. In addition, public policy mandates should be separately
        identified, costed, financed, and disclosed.
       Create an adequately resourced MoF ownership division or entity to oversee financial sector
        holdings.
       Sign performance agreements with supervisory boards and management members of state banks
     and monitor and evaluate performance. .
                        Republic of Srpska - Specific Recommendations
Professionalize the ownership function conducted by the IDBRS:                                                  MoF, IDBRS     I




3   I-Immediate” is within one year; “NT-near-term” is 1–3 years; “MT-medium-term” is 3–5 years.

                                                                     7
   Establish and publicly disclose specific, concrete objectives that justify each government
    investment / intervention in banks.
   Establish a dedicated monitoring unit composed of qualified staff to focus solely on
    monitoring financial sector exposures, to evaluate institutional performance, mitigate risks
    and define an exit strategy for each equity or debt exposure.
   Execute and monitor performance agreements with supervisory boards and managements
    bodies of banks wherein a controlling stake is held.




                                                           8
INTRODUCTION4

14.     This Technical Note evaluates state bank corporate governance practices in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. The analysis was completed during October 27-November 18, 2014. This TN is not
a formal assessment against the Basel Committee’s Principles for Enhancing Governance; rather,
it assesses key issues and provides a set of recommendations to the authorities with the view to
strengthen state bank governance and the State’s ownership structures in Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Objective and Scope of this Bank Governance Review

15.    This review was prepared at the request of the MoF of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and the MoF of the Republic of Srpska as a part of the 2014 FSAP. This review
evaluated the governance structures and practices of state-owned banks in both States: BiH: the
Development Bank and Union Banka; RS: Srpska Banka, Bobar Banka, and Pavlovic Banka. The
review did not evaluate governance in the other private commercial banking institutions. The
governance of the IRBRS was also reviewed given its role as state’s equity investor in the banking
system. The prevailing laws on the institutions were also reviewed, and discussions were held with
the subject institutions as well as with the Banking Agencies, MOF representatives, and audit
firms.

Bank Governance Review Methodology

16.    The Review Methodology was developed in response to requests by World Bank client
countries to evaluate and communicate governance risks potentially affecting the
performance and stability of their banking sectors. As such, the Review Methodology
approaches bank governance from the perspective of a risk based policy framework that is key for
the comprehensive assessment of system vulnerabilities.

17.     The Methodology is based on the Basel Committee’s Principles for Corporate
Governance in banking institutions and OECD Corporate Governance Principles and is also
grounded in best practices emanating from the banking industry as a whole and World Bank
experience. Moreover, since the scope of the review focused on state-owned banks, the Corporate
Governance Guidelines for State-Owned Enterprises of the OECD were also used as a reference
for the completion of the assessment. Using a set of focused questionnaires, a survey of a sample
of banks was conducted. A high level review of the country’s bank supervisory process was also
performed, focusing on the supervisor’s emphasis on board and management oversight and risk
issues.


The importance of corporate governance

4
    This Technical Note was prepared by Laura Ard and Jean Michel Lobet (GFMDR).

                                                       9
18.     Corporate governance is commonly defined as the structures and processes for the
direction and control of corporations, specifying the distribution of rights and
responsibilities among the main participants in the corporation and spelling-out the rules
and procedures for making decisions on corporate affairs.5 Specific to banks, corporate
governance is defined as the manner in which the business and affairs of banks are governed by
their boards and senior management which affects how they: (i) set corporate objectives; (ii)
operate the bank’s business on a day-to-day basis; (iii) meet the obligation of accountability to
their shareholders and take the interests of stakeholders into account; (iv) align corporate activities
and behavior with the expectation that banks will operate in a safe and sound manner and in
compliance with applicable laws and regulations; and (v) protect the interests of depositors.6 In the
case of State-owned banks, the corporate governance structure also captures the role of the State
as owner and the process through which it fulfills its associated responsibilities.

19.     Improving corporate governance can serve a number of important public policy
objectives. Numerous studies have shown that good corporate governance practices lead to
significant increases in economic value-added from higher productivity of firms and lower risk of
systemic financial failures for countries.7 Implementing good bank governance is of particular
significance in creating a robust and stable banking sector in support of sustained financial and
private sector development, and economic growth. Indeed, banks:

       Manage a significant portion of a nation’s wealth through savings and must therefore be
        governed appropriately in order to uphold the public trust; if governed poorly, people’s
        livelihoods could be at stake, potentially turning public opinion against current political
        leadership.
       Provide the preponderance of financing for the great majority of enterprises and
        individuals, particularly in emerging markets; therefore, the strength and capacity of banks
        take on greater importance in terms of funding economic growth.
       May well be expected to make credit and liquidity available in what are likely to be difficult
        market conditions in the years ahead.

20.     With this in mind, it is important to note that banks generally have specific
governance challenges and complexities since they take on significant volumes of risk-
bearing assets. Hence, weak risk management frameworks and internal controls can cause severe
and rapid financial crises. The collapse of a single bank cannot only destroy shareholder value but
also value for its depositors and may require a costly bail-out or liquidation by the authorities (and
ultimately the tax payers). Ensuring that banks are well governed is thus of central concern to not
only banking regulators, but to the Government more broadly and other stakeholders.

5 The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD): OECD Principles of Corporate
Governance; 2004.
6 The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision: Principles for enhancing corporate governance; October 2010.
7 Corporate Governance and Performance Around the World: What We Know and What We Don’t. Inessa Love,
The World Bank Group, June 2008.

                                                     10
21.     These country-specific and more general bank-related risks make well developed
governance frameworks and practices of banks in Bosnia and Herzegovina a key condition
for financial market stability, judicious credit allocation, and growth.




                                         11
KEY TENENTS OF EFFECTIVE CORPORATE GOVERNANCE IN STATE
OWNED BANKS8

Current Setting

22.     Evaluating and restructuring the corporate governance of state banks in Bosnia and
Herzegovina, if accomplished in its entirety, will call for an evaluation of the objective and
the role of the State, and therefore the role of state banks, in the country’s financial market.
Some state banks may possess questionable ability to operate as viable commercial banks with
sufficient customer bases and effective business strategies.

23.     In practice, putting in place sound governance arrangements for state banks requires
a significant investment in people, processes and technology with substantial up-front and
ongoing costs. When considered in the context of the government’s objectives for state banks and
the problems governance arrangements are expected to solve, the costs often may not be justified
or affordable. In such circumstances the answer is not to shortchange corporate governance, but
rather to design alternative, more economical and efficient means for government intervention.

Selected Elements of a State Bank Governance Structure

24.     Some of the key functions of a state bank governance platform include, inter alia,
clarification of policy mandates and operational objectives, the state ownership function, the
role of the board, chairman of the board, and the CEO. The following enumerates certain
aspects to consider when evaluating and building a state bank governance arrangement.

     Objectives of State Owned Financial Institutions (SFI):
         To ensure the institution’s long-run financial sustainability (i.e., ensure that it
            continues as a going concern, without need for extraordinary financial support from
            the state).
         To achieve certain financial performance objectives (which may be defined in terms
            of return on equity and dividend payment targets, for example).
         For SFIs with a mandate to pursue public policy objectives, an additional
            overarching objective is the achievement of those policy objectives. (See below)

     Organizing the State Ownership Function

25.     Establish or review and revise the state bank ownership policy. Such a policy defines
the state’s overall ownership objectives, prescribes the legal forms for the given institutions,
defines the state’s role in governance, and how that role and policy will be implemented. This
includes:

8
 Distilled from the Basel Committee’s Corporate Governance Principles for Banking Organizations and relevant
selected OECD Corporate Governance Guidelines for State-owned Enterprises.

                                                      12
     Considering whether an incorporated financial institution is the most effective means of
      state intervention, as compared to, for example, a more economical institutional
      arrangement such as a specialized government department or unit.
     Explicitly identifying and/or assigning who is responsible for acting as the state’s
      shareholder representative (separate government department, entity) and the method of
      interaction, typically with the Chairperson of the board.
     Defining the shareholder representative’s role and accountabilities.
     Assuring professional support to the shareholder representatives.
     Establishing and requiring separation of ownership from regulation and supervision.
     Assigning the responsibility of board(s) appointments and defining the process:
           ensuring a structured, transparent process that adheres to explicit policies and
               procedures that seek to ensure the ability of the board to exercise its responsibilities
               in an independent manner, including the use of competence and experience
               requirements consistent with the strategy and business of the institution(s).
           considering limiting the number of public servants on the boards and gradually
               introduce and appoint an increasing mix of private, independent individuals.
           specifying the required mix of skills and experience of all individuals, both public
               and private.
           considering whether the CEO should be prohibited from serving as the chairperson
               of the board.
           defining the role and responsibilities of the chairperson, method of performance
               evaluation and remuneration (i.e. specific skills, experience required, ability to
               locate and hire domestically or internationally, etc.)
     Defining, documenting, and monitoring clear objectives and performance measures and
      targets.
     Periodically re-evaluating the state bank’s given mandate, in part to address potential
      “mission creep” and redefine where evolution of markets, client needs and public policy
      objectives may have rendered the existing mandate no longer valid or appropriate.
     Document such policy through the existing and/or prospective mix of laws, regulations,
      and state policy.

 Role of the Supervisory Board
  The principle role of the board of directors should be to:
   Appoint key executives, evaluate management performance, and develop a succession plan
     for key managers (depending on the current quality and composition of the board(s) the
     appointment of the CEO may be introduced over time with at least the board taking the
     lead in the recruitment process before becoming wholly responsible for the formal
     appointment. The board should also establish, approve, and maintain a remuneration policy
     for senior executives and provide information to shareholder(s) and the public on such
     policy. Key committees should also be appointed including, inter alia, audit, nomination /
     remuneration, risk management, and corporate governance.);
   Help formulate, monitor and approve the institution’s strategy (in context of the objectives
     set out in the ownership policy);

                                                 13
     Approve key policies;
     Ensure that internal financial and operational controls are in place;
     Establish performance indicators and benchmarks;
     Monitor disclosure and public communications processes to ensure financial statements
      and other disclosures fairly present the institution’s performance, financial condition,
      business and risks.

 Information, Reporting, and Disclosure Regime
  Ensuring adequate reporting at all levels requires an investment in accounting and information
  systems, in internal controls, and in internal and external auditing. It involves formulating and
  documenting policies and procedures, putting in place hardware and software systems, and
  recruiting and training qualified staff, among other tasks:
   The Audit Committee should have explicit responsibility for oversight of internal and
      external audit functions; ensuring the accuracy of required reporting to the regulatory and
      supervisory authorities; and ensuring management takes appropriate action in response to
      identified deficiencies.
   The internal audit function should be (established and) accountable to the audit committee
      and have unrestricted access to the chairperson of the full board and all board members.
   The external audit should be conducted according to international standards.

 State Development Institutions
  For those state banking institutions that also possess a public policy / development mandate,
  additional organizational and governance challenges exist. Institutionalizing the means by
  which to make tradeoffs between policy and financial objectives and to efficiently fulfill policy
  mandates is a key governance challenge facing the institution. Public policy mandate must be
  well defined as explicitly and narrowly as feasible based on a thorough analysis of the market
  gaps they intend to address. The authorities will have to evaluate how the mandate will be
  financed along with the various pros and cons of funding alternatives. Once decided, the
  shareholder representative will need to agree specific policy, financial and operational
  performance targets with the board and executive management.




                                               14
MAIN FINDINGS
I.      Main Findings in the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina

A.      Market Setting

26.     The Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBiH) owns two banks. One, the
Development Bank of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (DBFBiH). The DBFBiH began
its operations in July 2008 as the legal successor to the FBiH Investment Bank which had been
operating since 1997. The second, Union Bank, is a commercial bank which started its operations
in 1997 and is the successor of Jugobanka. Together, both institutions represent less than 6 percent
of the banking sector of the FBiH.

27.     The DBFBiH has the objective to promote social and economic development in the
FBiH. The institution is owned by the government of the FBiH (Prime Minister’s office and all
the ministries); however, the Ministry of Finance (MoF) has been delegated the ownership rights
over the bank. The DBFBiH has been incorporated under a separate law (Law on the DBFBiH),
and, therefore, is subject to different regulations compared to regular commercial banks. The
Banking Agency of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBA) can only supervise the
DBFBiH based on the Decree of the DBFBiH and not the Law on Banks. As a result, the FBA has
limited powers to supervise the DBFBiH (see Section Legal and Regulatory Framework).
Moreover, the DBFBiH does not take deposits nor provides retail banking services. According to
Article 3 of the Law on the DBFBiH, the DBFBiH has an operating capital of 400,000,000 KM
(approximately 254,000,000 USD). However, in practice, due to the financial limitations of the
government of FBiH, this capital has not been higher than 180,000,000 KM (approximately
114,000,000 USD). This one of the reasons why the DBFBiH has not been able to fulfill its
development mandate.

28.     In practice, the DBFBiH behaves more like a commercial lender than a development
lender. The DBFBiH has not set targeted strategies or policies to support specific sectors of the
economy (e.g. Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) or agriculture). Eighty percent of the
lending is directed to companies which not always have development objectives. The DBFBiH
does not have a specific methodology to calculate interest rates; it decides on an interest rate below
regular commercial rates. It lends directly to borrowers rather than through intermediary banks,
and as a result bears all the risk of its lending operations. The DBFBiH has substantial
concentration risk; NPLs represent 15% of total loans.9

29.     At least fifty percent of the DBFBiH activities are “commissioned activities.”10 Funds
for these lending operations come from different ministries, and the DBFBiH acts as an advisor to
the ministries by performing the risk analysis of the transaction. The final approval of the loans is
9 NPL industry average is fifteen percent.
10 Lending programs with funding provided by specific ministries (e.g. Ministry of Entrepreneurship provide credit
lines to SMEs through the DBBH).

                                                       15
by done by the ministry who provided the funds and the risk is borne by the ministry and not the
bank.

30.    Union Bank operates as a commercial bank with over 90% government ownership.
Union Bank inherited the assets of Jugobanka (including litigation on the pre-war liabilities of
Jugobanka) which have hindered its further development of the bank. Until recently, Union Bank
was not part of the deposit insurance scheme because the law did not allow banks with more than
10 percent state ownership to join the scheme. The law was modified recently and Union Bank is
now part of the deposit insurance scheme. The Union Bank is fully supervised by the FBA.

31.    Union Bank is undergoing an important reform process that includes appointment of
a new management team with strong banking sector experience, the introduction of a more
rigorous risk culture, and important IT upgrades. As a result of these changes, the institution
has generated operational profits for the first time in more than ten years. In the past, profits
primarily emanated from leasing revenues rather traditional banking operations.11

32.      Union Bank faces a competitive environment with little critical mass. The banking
system is dominated by foreign banks, accounting for 90 percent of sector assets. In comparison,
Union Bank represents less than 3 percent of assets with minimal long-term financial resources.
The bank has high concentration risk with its customer base composed of close to 80% corporate
clients. NPLs total 11%, below the industry average of 15 % with a capital adequacy ratio of 36%.

B.       Legal and Regulatory Framework

33.     The corporate governance framework for commercial banks, including those owned
by the state, is set forth by the Law on Banks (LoB) and complemented by the Law on
Enterprises (LoE). The LoE sets forth shareholders’ rights, structure and liability of the
management and members of the supervisory board, structure and responsibilities of the audit
board, and regulation of related-party transactions. The Law on Banks outlines, inter alia, the
requirements to become a shareholder or a supervisory board member of a bank, conflict of interest
regulations, and disclosure requirements. The Law on Banks also charges the banks’ supervisory
board members with a fiduciary obligation to act in the best interest of the bank and its
shareholders. Commercial banks, including state commercial banks, are under the supervision of
the FBA.

34.     State-owned commercial banks have a clear legal form. According to Article 1 of the
Law on Banks12, all commercial banks, including those that are owned by the state, are
incorporated as joint-stock companies. Moreover, commercial banks are also required to list and
register their securities at the Sarajevo Stock Exchange.


11
   Union Bank owns real estate that has been leased to large global organizations. Thus, providing a significant source
of income for the bank.
12
   Official Gazette of the Federation of BiH, number 39/98, 32/00,48/01, 27/02, 41/02, 58/02, 13/03, 19/03 and 28/03.

                                                          16
35.     The DBFBiH is incorporated under separate legislation, the Law on the DBFBiH, and
is partially supervised by the FBA. The Law on the DBFBiH sets forth the corporate governance
framework of the DBFBiH including the ownership, supervisory board and management. The law
outlines the special regime for the DBFBiH, including profit tax and liquidation exemptions; and
unlimited guarantee by the government of the DBFBiH’s liabilities. Moreover, the Law on the
DBFBiH exempts it from regular supervision. The FBA supervises the DBFBiH in accordance
with the Decree on DBFBiH. The Decree has similar provisions as the Law on Banks; nevertheless,
it does not allow the FBA to issue sanctions in case of violations of the regulations or to vet the
fitness and propriety of the supervisory or management board members. The FBA can only issue
recommendations to the government in case of violations of the law, significantly undermining its
regulatory mandate. The DBFBiH must inform the FBA about the appointment of new supervisory
or management board members.

36.     Law and regulation separate the role of the state as an owner of financial institutions
and the role of the state as policy-maker and regulator. In the case of Union Bank, the MoF
has been delegated the ownership rights of the institution. Union Bank is supervised as any private
bank by the FBA. In the case of the DBFBiH, the institution is owned by the government of the
FBiH (all ministries are owners) and is only partially supervised by the FBA. The FBA is an
independent entity separate from the MoF. The FBA is self-funded and its senior management is
elected by the Parliament of the FBiH.

37.      Overall, the legal and regulatory framework provides for a level playing field among
private and state commercial financial institutions. However, the DBFBiH benefits from
both supervision and tax exemptions. Both state and private commercial banks operate under
the same rules and are extensively supervised by the regulator without any limitations. Both private
and state institutions are not exempt of any fiscal obligations. Union Bank is subject to annual
external review by an independent auditor. However, DBFBiH is exempt from profit taxes. Tax
exemptions in the case of development banks are not uncommon globally. These institutions have
to fulfill public policy mandates and the associated costs are usually covered by the tax exemptions
savings.

38.      In the case of the DBFBiH, the accountability structure is lacking. The FBA has only
partial scope of oversight authority, as it cannot sanction the institution, vet candidates or take
other action against board members and management. No other oversight process exists apart from
periodic reviews by the Supreme Audit Authority, however, the bank is subject to an annual
external audit by an independent auditor. As long as the DBFBiH engages in direct lending
activities and competes with other commercial banks by providing below market interest rates, a
robust, regular oversight function should promptly be established. In that context, either the
Supreme Audit Authority should accept clear responsibility for a full-scope annual review, or
alternatively, the FBA should be empowered to use its full supervisory authorities to address and
take actions on the fitness and propriety of new and existing board members, and to issue sanctions
in case of violation of the law.


                                                17
39.      The legal and regulatory framework is silent regarding the government’s objectives
for participating in the banking sector and does not define the mandate, policy objectives
and ownership strategy for each bank. The government has set very broad goals for the DBFBiH
that go from financing infrastructure to issuance of letter of credits to exporters. In the case of the
Union Bank, these mandates and objectives have not been defined. In order for the government to
efficiently manage financial institutions, it must, first, justify the public sector’s presence in the
financial sector. In other words, the government must demonstrate the market gaps or failures that
the private sector has not been able to fill. For example, in the case of the Canadian Development
Bank (CDB), its mandate has been clearly defined by the government, which is to be the prime
financier of SMEs. Small businesses are considered high risk by private banks and access to credit
is very difficult globally. Therefore, the CDB fills a specific gap that the private sector banks have
not been able to fill due to the high associated risk. In the case of state banks of the FBiH, such a
justification has not been articulated in the law or regulation.

40.     The laws and regulations are silent regarding how the costs associated with the
provision of public policy objectives of both institutions are covered. In the event that either
the state commercial or development bank engages in public policy activities, the law is silent
regarding the funding sources to cover the expenses with these tasks. Currently, these are usually
covered by the operational profits of these institutions. However, it is a better practice and more
transparent to clearly identify and cost the activities, ensure separate funding for them from the
government budget and disclose them to the public. For example, in the case of the South African
Development Bank, public policy activities are financed through profit tax exemptions. In the case
of Kiwi Bank in New Zealand (commercial state bank), public policy objectives are financed by
the government’s budget.

C. The State’s Ownership Role

41.     The state fulfills some of its obligations as the owner of banks. The MoF is the
representative shareholder for both Union Bank and DBFBiH. The MoF actively participates in
the annual shareholder meetings and elects and removes supervisory board members. The MoF
also has set up a structured process for the nomination of supervisory board members.

42.     However, the state has not developed a clear ownership policy for either the Union
Bank or DBFBiH. Neither institution has developed clear goals and strategies for their operation.
The State has not identified the market gap and mandate it intends to address by participating in
the commercial banking sector. In the case of Union Bank, a well-defined mandate and objectives
are important to ensure its commercial and competitive focus is preserved. In the case of the
“commissioned activities” of the DBFBiH, it is unclear what government programs are appropriate
to accept and manage, how such programs are assigned to the bank, and what the prioritization
process is. A well-defined mandate which helps measure and manage those programs it accepts,
as well as a structured process through which various ministries approach the bank is necessary.



                                                  18
43.     MOF does not actively monitor the performance of either institution. An evaluation
methodology with key performance indicators has not been developed, making the
supervisory board and the management unaccountable for delivering results. The MoF does
not have a dedicated monitoring unit composed of qualified staff with an understanding of the
banking sector. In addition, specific reporting requirements between the bank and the MOF as
owner do not exist. As shareholder representative, MOF should communicate the specific financial
and non-financial objectives to the board. These objectives should be endorsed annually by the
shareholder, board and the management. Finally, an evaluation methodology and key performance
indicators should be developed to assess the performance of the banks in meeting financial and
non-financial objectives and to hold board and management accountable.

44.     Despite the existence of a structured recruitment process for supervisory board
members, the selection procedures could be further strengthened. The MoF has set up a
structured process to select supervisory board members. The vacancies are publicly advertised by
the MoF in the official gazette and in major newspapers. A recruitment committee composed of
staff from the MoF is in charge of the shortlisting and interview process. After the process is
completed a short-list with a ranking is submitted to the Minister of Finance for final selection.
According to the interviewed banks, the MoF usually follows the advice of the recruitment
committee; however, there have been instances where this has not been the case.

45.     During the selection process, the recruitment committee does not engage with the
existing supervisory board. The LoE and the LoB does not limit the number of civil servants
appointed to the supervisory board. In order to make this process more effective, the recruitment
committee should be composed of professional and experienced supervisory board members from
both private and public sectors (Box 1). For example, Poland introduced an independent
accreditation committee to support the Treasury with the nomination process of board members of
SOEs.13 Moreover, the recruitment committee should engage more effectively with the existing
boards to understand what the specific profiles or skill sets needs are to make the supervisory board
more effective. Finally, to ensure the independence of the supervisory board, the number of
supervisory board members representing the state (civil servants) should be restricted to the strict
minimum by the law (e.g. less than 50 percent).


      Box 1: Board nominations in two state-owned development banks




13
   The Committee consists of 10 members recommended by key ministries such as treasury, economy, public finance,
financial institutions, transport, communications and the President of the Polish Financial Authority and appointed by
the Prime Minister on the basis of their knowledge and experience (OECD 2011, State-Owned Enterprise Reform: An
Inventory of Recent Change).

                                                         19
     The Development Bank of Canada (DBC) and Development Bank of South Africa (DBSA) operate with
     a one board system and have a well-developed framework for the selection of board members. The law
     establishes general fit and proper requirements for selection of board members. In both cases, a board
     committee prepares an assessment of the skill requirements of the board members, recommends skill
     requirements for the selection of new directors and assesses the capacities of the current board members.
     A shortlist is typically prepared by professional headhunters and the list of candidates is presented to the
     shareholder representative (the government).


     Although the government may decide not to select a candidate from the shortlist, and appoint an outsider,
     shareholders have typically accepted candidates from the shortlist. And when selecting outsider
     candidates, the government gets exposed to criticism for lack of transparency. In both cases the Chairman
     and the CEO are different positions. While no government officials participate on the board of BDC, the
     Ministry of Provincial and Local Government is represented on the DBSA board (but this Ministry does
     not have a direct role in the ownership function). In both cases, however, the CEO is not appointed by
     the board, which is an important shortcoming.
   Source: Rudolph 2009


   C. The supervisory board function

46.     The supervisory board is where key responsibilities of a bank converge. Given that
banks are considered special interest entities that play a key role in all economies, bank supervisory
boards are charged with the public’s trust to act responsibly and with integrity. Supervisory boards
have special duties to act in the best interest of all stakeholders, not only the owners. The
supervisory board must set the appropriate “tone at the top” through which it directs the manner
in which the bank conducts its business - through strategic planning, risk parameters, and policies.
It must set clear risk parameters within which management and staff execute the business plan. It
must ensure that key control functions are established and independent so that it can monitor the
bank’s existing and prospective risks, the overall success of its business strategy, and financial
performance and soundness. As a result, the board must be composed of a balanced mix of skills
and experience, must be objective, and must fulfil its fiduciary duty through prudently guiding the
bank. The supervisory boards of the two state banks have yet to fulfil the full scope of these
responsibilities.

47.    The LoE and LoB provides the basic criteria for the proper operations of the
supervisory board. The supervisory board duties are explicitly articulated in the different
commercial and banking regulations. Moreover, there is a clear separation between the roles of
managing director and chairman of the supervisory board. The board is in charge of appointing the
members of the audit board, the managing director and the internal auditor (including its
remuneration). Members representing the state are subject to the same liability regime as directors
from the private sector. Finally, supervisory board members are required to be certified board
members by the chamber of commerce before being appointed board members.



                                                         20
48.     However, supervisory boards are not performing their intended leadership role.
Boards are focused on determining compliance with internal and external policies, conducting
quality control, reviewing bank policies and changes thereto, and monitoring credit activity
reports. Supervisory boards provide little strategic direction (in terms of business approach and
risk appetite) and do not actively monitor the risk and control environment through the critical
functions of internal audit, risk management, and compliance. Given the role the supervisory board
performs in practice, the management board assumes a stronger leadership role in the banks’
strategy and operations, resulting in a blurring of the roles of strategic direction and operational
management.

49.     Supervisory board appointments in the DBFBiH appear to be influenced by the
elections calendar. The term of the previous board expired 2 years ago. However, the government
was only able to appoint the new supervisory board in May/June 2014. A new government has
been recently elected; therefore, there is no guarantee that the current supervisory board will not
be dismissed again by the new government. As a result, the DBFBiH has been operating with
interim arrangements for the last 2 years, and the institution has operated without strategic
oversight and committed management. The recruitment and nomination process of supervisory
board members of state-owned enterprises as a whole including state banks should not be affected
by the elections calendar of the government.

50.     Board committee structures are non-existent and therefore, no mechanism exists to
assist boards in more technical and demanding matters. Board audit committees do not exist;
instead, there is the audit board that is separate from the supervisory board. According to the law,
the audit board is tasked with overseeing the internal and external audit functions. The internal
auditor reports to the audit board and not the supervisory board. However, the supervisory board
is responsible for appointing, evaluating and remunerating the internal auditor. Under the current
structure, the supervisory board is not fully accountable for the integrity of the internal audit
function as it should be. Due to the existence of the audit board, the internal auditor does not
interact with the supervisory board in practice. For that reason, to make the audit board more
effective and the supervisory board fully accountable for the internal audit, the audit board should
become a subcommittee of the board instead of a separate corporate body. Moreover, the audit
subcommittee should be chaired and composed of independent board members only.

   D. Transparency and Disclosure

Financial reporting

51.      Both Union Bank and the DBFBiH prepare financial statements in compliance with
internationally recognized accounting standards, and they are disclosed to the public.
According to the Law on Accounting of 2005, all private and public companies, including financial
institutions, are required to prepare their financial statements in compliance with IFRS standards.
However, since 2005, a few IFRS standards have been updated and the Law on Accounting has
not been amended accordingly. The lack of translation of the updated accounting standards has

                                                21
impaired the ability of enterprises to prepare quality financial statements.14 Moreover, the FBA
has focused more over the years on controlling prudential requirements rather than on the quality
of IFRS-based financial statements. Finally, both banks are using the services of external audit
firms with international foot print to perform the annual external audit of the bank. The external
auditor also provides a management letter.

52.     In practice, the DBFBiH selects external audit firms on an annual basis instead of a
period of at least 3 years. The DBFBiH is bound by public procurement rules. Therefore, public
tenders are organized to appoint the external auditor; in practice, the lowest bid is typically
selected. In the case of the DBFBiH, public tender procedures to select the external auditor are
organized annually to save costs. As a result, the bank is audited by different external auditors
every year. External audit firms’ services should be contracted for terms of at least three years
(with maximum duration of five years) to ensure continuity and consistency in the evaluation
process. Moreover, the selection criteria should not be based solely on cost. As a result of the
changes in management that have taken place over the last two years, Union Bank has appointed
a reputable external auditing firm for the next three years.

53.     The FBA’s powers towards external audits are limited. In practice, the firm in charge
of the external audit of the DBFBiH is not always appointed during the annual shareholders
meeting. For example, as of today, the external auditor of the DBFBiH has not been appointed.
The FBA has no powers to appoint by default an external audit firm at the bank’s expense if the
bank has not appointed one after a certain date. Moreover, state commercial banks are required to
obtain approval from the banking agency on the appointment of the external auditor. However, the
banking agency has not developed clear and transparent criteria for approving audit firms (such as
qualification of the auditors, reputation of the firm, size of the firm).

54.     Transactions with state-owned enterprises are not treated as related party
transactions. According to both banks, transactions with the MoF are treated as related-party
transactions. However, transactions with municipalities or state-owned enterprises are treated as
normal transactions, which in the case of the DBFBiH represent close to 30 percent of the loan
portfolio and close to 10 percent in Union Bank. The management of both institutions explained,
however, that any loan application, including related-parties or any other government entity, go
through the same credit approval process. If the applicant (even if it is the state) does not meet the
credit worthiness and risk criteria, a loan will not be extended. Related party transactions can have
serious implications on the financial stability of the bank if not properly monitored. Therefore,
specific disclosure rules could be applied to all transactions, including with SOEs, depending on
the size or level of materiality of the transaction. For example, material related party transactions
(e.g. transactions representing 10 percent of the assets of the company) should be properly
disclosed in compliance with internationally recognized standards, go through a specific approval
process (i.e. approved by independent directors only).


14
     ROSC Accounting and Auditing 2010.

                                                 22
55.    Non-financial disclosure by both banks requires significant improvement. Banks are
required to produce financial statements in compliance with IFRS; however, non-financial
disclosures are poor. Consistently, disclosures in annual financial reports or on individual websites
do not present supervisory board members and biographical information, individual supervisory
board and senior management remuneration.

   E. Audit Function

56.     While both banks report they have an internal audit function that reports to the
supervisory board, as required by the laws and regulations, in practice, the functions appear
to lack adequate independence. Consistent with the law, both banks indicated that the head
internal auditor is appointed, remunerated and evaluated by the supervisory board. However, the
audit board monitors internal audit operations and external audit results, but does not interact
regularly with the supervisory board. In most cases, the internal auditor does not interact with the
supervisory board.

57.     Virtually all internal audit departments of state banks suffer from understaffing. The
staffing and professional requirements of banks’ audit departments reflect the broader auditing
profession in the FBiH which has been slow to develop. The DBFBiH has only one internal auditor
and Union Bank has three. Given the level of staffing and low level of experience, internal audit
departments are not likely to have the resources necessary to comprehensively cover bank
operations with a high level of quality.

   F. Risk Function

58.     The development of risk strategy, effective risk oversight, and a sound control
framework is one of the most critical roles for which bank boards are responsible.
Independent risk oversight processes (internal audit, risk management, compliance) are an
important instrument of the board to ensure that its strategies, risk thresholds, and policies are
communicated, monitored, and respected. If boards are adequately empowered to set business
strategy and the risk parameters necessary to accomplish that strategy, then the risk management
function becomes an important tool for it to understand the success of its directions and the
soundness of the institution. Having a strong risk management function allows the board, then, to
discharge its duty to oversee the performance of the institution.

59.     Risk management is a very nascent function in state banks and should urgently be
further strengthened. The functions have been formed but currently conduct a credit analysis
role for the lending function along with periodic portfolio monitoring. Banks also indicate that the
function also determines the classification of credit. The process provides an opinion or credit
analysis support rather than performing formalized monitoring and reporting function. The head
of the functions are accountable to senior management and currently are not independent. Sound
credit risk management practices are typically constituted by a secondary surveillance function
with a direct communication link to the board and which continually monitors and periodically

                                                 23
tests portfolio credit quality. There is no legal requirement requiring banks to establish an
independent risk management function that reports directly to the supervisory board. Over time,
supervisory boards should assure an independent risk management function and should regularly
interact with the risk management apart from management.

II.     Main Findings in the Republic of Srpska

A.      Market Setting

60.     During the last two years, the government of the RS has sharply increased its
participation in the domestic banking sector through liquidity and capital support. The
government participates in the sector through a 100% stake in Banka Srpska and through preferred,
convertible shares in two other commercial banks, Pavlovic Banka (21% stake) and Bobar Banka
(8% stake). These shares carry an 8% dividend rate and if not paid, can be converted to common
voting shares. Additionally, the RS also holds subordinated debt in Nova Banka and Srpska Banka.
The institutions represent approximately 10% of the banking sector of the RS.

61.     The RS holdings are owned by the Investment Development Bank of RS (IDBRS)
which has been delegate the ownership rights by the Government. The IDBRS is set up as a
joint stock company under the Law on the IDBRS which provides a broad mandate including
financial sector support. The IDBRS operates as a fund manager and oversees six funds, with a
total asset value of approximately 2.2 bn KM, through which its activities are conducted.15 The
funds are individual joint stock companies, each formed under its own law, and hold the shares
owned by the IDBRS. They have no individual governance structure but are fully managed by the
IDBRS. The institution is not a licensed commercial bank and is not subject to supervision by the
Banking Agency of the RS (BARS).

62.     The Banka Srpska is a commercial banking operation previously owned by foreign
nationals. At the time the government rescued the bank in July, 2013, it represented approximately
4.0% of banking system assets. Mounting losses, insufficient capital and inability or unwillingness
of previous owners to inject additional capital prompted the State to inject fresh capital and take
over the institution. Among the first steps taken by the government was appointment of a new
general manager and management team, closure of foreign branches, and solicitation for a new
audit board.

63.    Banka Srpska operates under the Law on Banks (LoB) and is required to have all the
attendant governance structures. The Supervisory Board, as of October 2014, had met
sporadically. Three members resigned due to the adoption of a recent decree that disallows
supervisory board members in SOEs from holding more than one such board membership. The
government is in the process of finalizing decisions on new members following a public
15
  Development and Employment Fund, Eastern Republic of Srpska Development Fund, Housing Fund, Share Fund,
Restitution Fund, Real Estate and Claims Fund (for more information, please visit:
http://www.irbrs.org/azuro3/a3/?id=88

                                                   24
solicitation. Since the full supervisory board has not been in place, neither the head internal auditor
nor the audit board have been appointed.

64.     Bobar Banka and Pavlovic Banka, where the government has non-voting minority
shares, are commercial banking operations and have close ties with their founders. Bobar
Banka has made important efforts to strengthen its overall corporate governance and internal
processes16. A new chairman of the supervisory board was appointed in March 2014, and three
new members were appointed to the management board. The risk management department was
recently re-organized and is taking a more active role in the credit review process. The bank is
managing its NPLs through work out plans and by rescheduling selected exposures. Pavolvic
Banka indicated that it is focused on agricultural lending and SME. The management team changed
in May/June 2014. Importantly, Bobar Banka received a disclaimer opinion in its 2013 external
audit while Pavlovic received an unqualified auditor opinion for the same date.

B.         Legal and Regulatory Framework

65.     The corporate governance framework for commercial banks, including those owned
by the government, is set forth by the LoB and complemented by the Law on Enterprises
(LoE). The LoE sets forth shareholders’ rights, structure and liability of the management and
members of the supervisory board, structure and responsibilities of the audit board, and regulation
of related-party transactions. The Law on Banks outlines, inter alia, the requirements to become a
shareholder or a supervisory board member of a bank, conflict of interest regulations, and
disclosure requirements. The Law on Banks also charges the banks’ supervisory board members
with a fiduciary obligation to act in the best interest of the bank and its shareholders. Commercial
banks, including state commercial banks, are under the supervision of BARS.

66.     Commercial banks have a clear legal form. According to the LoB, all commercial banks
are incorporated as joint-stock companies. Moreover, commercial banks are also required to list
and register their securities at the Banja Luka Stock Exchange.

67.     The laws and regulations make a clear separation between the role of the state as an
owner of financial institutions and the role of the state as policy-maker and regulator. In the
case of Srpska Banka, government ownership is represented by the government’s owner-agent, the
IDBRS. The government is a minority shareholder in Bobar and Pavlovic banks through nonvoting
shares. All banks are subject to BARS supervision without legal exemptions. BARS is established
as an independent entity separate from the MoF. It is self-funded and its senior management is
elected by the Parliament of the RS.

68.    The legal framework is silent regarding how the costs associated with the provision
of public policy objectives would be covered if a state bank was to engage in such activities.
In the event that a state bank conducts public policy activities, the law is silent regarding the

16
     Nevertheless, Bobar Bank was intervened by the authorities at end-2014, after the FSAP mission.

                                                          25
funding sources to cover the expenses with these tasks. Clear funding sources for these activities
should be identified from the beginning and be disclosed to the public.

C.     Governance of the IDBRS as the government’s ownership entity

69.     The structure of the IDBRS is established to operate at an arm’s length from the
government. The owner of the IDBRS is the Government of the RS. Its supervisory board is
elected by Parliament but the recruitment process follows that for other government-owned
entities. Supervisory board members are mostly from the public sector and are appointed for a term
of four years. Terms can be renewed an unlimited number of times. No formal performance
contract is signed among the supervisory board, management board, and the government.

70.      The supervisory board performs a number of compliance oriented activities. These
include ensuring compliance with internal policies and preparing reports for the shareholders
(financial reports, semiannual reports, business plan). At the end of the year, the MoF presents the
institution’s financial results to the government as well as the annual report of its activities. These
are then approved by Parliament. If the government or Parliament are not satisfied with the results,
they may not sign the annual report, however, disapproval has never occurred.

71.     Both the audit board and management board are appointed by the supervisory board
following a competitive process. The MoF is responsible for interviewing and shortlisting
candidates. Thereafter, a final list is presented to the supervisory board for its approval. The audit
board appoints the internal auditor who is not, however, a full time employee of the institution, but
is contracted by the audit and supervisory boards. The head auditor indicated that she dedicates
approximately 30% of her time to IDBRS audit tasks.

72.    The internal audit department follows an annual plan based on a risk matrix which
is approved by the audit board. It has the scope to audit the six funds and reports its findings to
the MoF and the Supreme Audit Commission.

73.     Related Party Transactions are disclosed in the financial statements without detail.
All borrowers are published on the website, including the amount and date approved. The state
sector can apply for loans through bank intermediaries subject to the same conditions as other
borrowers. However, SOEs are disallowed from borrowing from certain funds due to policy
conditions. Nevertheless, the IDBRS is allowed to invest in municipal bonds.

74.    The IDBRS receives an annual external audit by an international audit firm. Each
fund under its management is also audited by the same firm. Following approval by the
shareholders, the audits are presented on the IDBRS website. An annual report of activity is also
prepared and presented to Parliament for approval. Once approved, it is posted on the website.

75.    The IDBRS is also subject to audit by the Supreme Audit Commission; however, it
has not audited the institution since 2011 as a function of the Commission’s scheduled audit

                                                  26
cycle. Moreover, the Commission does not audit the entire institution, but only two or three funds.
Given the significance and complexity of the IDBRS’ activity, an annual audit cycle is
recommended.

D.     The State’s Ownership Role

76.     While broad mandates are provided for both the IDBRS and each fund through their
respective laws, the specific objectives, strategies, and exit plans for the government’s role in
the financial sector in general and for each financial sector investment have not been
enumerated. The mandate provided by the Law on the IDBRS highlights twelve objectives
including “support to the financial sector”. However, the rationale for such support is not
presented. In the existing cases, the government has provided both liquidity and capital support in
seemingly distressed or weak bank situations. Capital injections are not supported by a “least cost”
resolution analysis. In order to justify the government’s role in the financial sector and prudent
use of public resources, to identify and convey to the public the market gaps it intends to address,
and to assure clear objectives and an exit strategy, each intervention should be directed by a
specific mandate and comprehensive oversight plan.

77.     In addition to its development activities (e.g. housing finance, SME finance), the
IDBRS is charged with certain governance responsibilities for the government’s investments.
The IDBRS conducts certain governance responsibilities for the government’s investments in the
real and financial sectors and manages the portfolio of existing state-owned enterprises. A
dedicated corporate governance department is responsible for, inter alia, participating and voting
in shareholder meetings and monitoring the financial results of the investees. The MOF conducts
the recruitment process for its representatives on the supervisory boards of its investee companies,
approves the voting position of the representatives in the subject companies’ annual meetings, and
approves fund investments over a given threshold.

78.      Rigorous surveillance of the government’s financial sector exposures is particularly
warranted. While the IDBRS has a long established investment monitoring process for each of
its historic holdings, specific performance thresholds have not been developed to provide feedback
on the financial and qualitative performance of its banking interests held. A rigorous performance
evaluation methodology, including key performance indicators (KPIs) and linked management
performance contracts, should be developed and mutually agreed by the IDBRS, the relevant bank
supervisory board(s) and bank management. Once adopted, these should be regularly monitored
to hold accountable the banks’ supervisory boards and management.

79.    Active monitoring of the banks in which the government holds a passive stake is still
necessary. Given the condition of the banks and the difficult market conditions they face, the
government could become a strategic owner if the conversion feature is triggered. Important and
rapid decisions will need to be made about the institution(s) at that point and in collaboration with
BARS.


                                                 27
80.     The IDBRS, as the government’s owner agent, assumes important responsibilities for
financial sector investments. Particularly in cases of majority ownership (such as the case of
Srpska Banka) it must ensure that the government’s stake is protected by acting quickly to position
the skills necessary to assess the existing condition of the bank and to provide critical decisions
on the continued viability of the given institution(s). Sprska Banka’s supervisory board as well as
its audit board met sporadically in 2014. The first supervisory board following the government’s
intervention in July 2013 was appointed during a shareholders’ meeting as in any commercial
bank, but was never fully constituted due to the resignation of three members. The search for and
appointment of board members follows the process prescribed by the Civil Service Law. The final
decision on a new supervisory board is believed imminent. However, the length of time taken to
position a new supervisory board has prolonged important decisions on Srpska Banka, including
appointment of the audit board, a permanent head auditor, a workout strategy and new business
plan. In insolvency situations such as this, the government’s ability to act swiftly to stem any
additional loss and preserve value is critical.

81.     Despite the existence of a structured recruitment process for supervisory board
members of both the IDBRS and government investments, the selection process does not
result in boards with a mix of public, private, and independent members and with relevant
financial skills and experience. The government has a structured process to select supervisory
board members wherein vacancies are publicly advertised in the official gazette and in major
newspapers. A recruitment committee composed of staff from the MoF is in charge of the
shortlisting and interview process. After the process is completed, a list with a ranking is submitted
to the MoF for final selection. In the case of the IDBRS, Parliament makes the final selection.
During the recruitment process, the recruitment committee does not engage with the existing
supervisory board to determine needed skills and experience. The IDBRS makes an annual report
to parliament after the report’s acceptance by the Minister of Finance.

82.     The law does not limit the number of supervisory board members representing the
government nor does it limit the number of terms members can serve. In order to make this
process more effective, the recruitment committee should be composed of professional and
experienced supervisory board members from both private and public sectors. Moreover, the
recruitment committee should engage with the existing boards to understand what the specific
profiles or skill sets needs are to make the supervisory board more effective. Particularly, the
supervisory board of the IDBRS would benefit from a broader mix of financial sector skills and
independent members. Finally, to ensure the independence of the supervisory board, the number
of supervisory board members representing the state should be restricted to the strict minimum by
the law (e.g. less than 50 percent). The number of term renewals should be limited to two.

E.     Governance Practices in RS State Commercial Banks

The supervisory board function



                                                 28
83.     The supervisory board is the function where key responsibilities of a bank converge.
Given that banks are considered special interest entities that play a key role in all economies, bank
supervisory boards are charged with the public’s trust to act responsibly and with integrity.
Supervisory boards have special duties to act in the best interest of all stakeholders, not only the
owners. The supervisory board must set the appropriate “tone at the top” through which it directs
the manner in which the bank conducts its business - through strategic planning, risk parameters,
and policies. It must set clear risk parameters within which management and staff execute the
business plan. It must ensure that key control functions are established and independent so that it
can monitor the bank’s existing and prospective risks, the overall success of its business strategy,
and financial performance and soundness. As a result, the board must be composed of a balanced
mix of skills and experience, must be objective, and must fulfil its fiduciary duty through prudently
guiding the bank. The supervisory boards of the two state banks have yet to fulfil the full scope of
their responsibilities.

84.     Commercial and banking regulation provides the basic criteria for the proper
operations of the supervisory board. Supervisory board duties are articulated in the different
commercial and banking regulation, and there is clear separation between the roles of managing
director and chairman of the supervisory board. The supervisory board is in charge of appointing
the members of the audit board, the managing director and the internal auditor (including its
remuneration).

85.     In all three cases, supervisory boards are not performing their intended leadership
role. Boards are focused on determining compliance with internal and external policies,
conducting quality control, reviewing bank policies and changes thereto, and monitoring credit
activity reports. Supervisory boards provide little strategic direction (in terms of business approach
and risk appetite) and do not actively monitor the risk and control environment through the critical
functions of internal audit, risk management, and compliance. Given the role the supervisory board
performs in practice, the management board assumes a stronger leadership role in the bank’s
strategy and operations, resulting in a blurring of the roles of strategic direction and operational
management.

86.    As well, Bobar and Pavlovic Banks have strong controlling shareholders who, when
combined with a board that is not performing its leadership role, exerts significant influence
on the daily operations of the bank, resulting in further overlap of roles. In both of these cases,
the volume related party transactions is inordinately high, and many are classified as
nonperforming loans. Boards require a greater mix of relevant financial sector skills and
experience and should have a minimum number of independent members. Board member terms
should be limited to two.

87.     Board committee structures are non-existent and therefore, no mechanism exists to
assist the respective banks’ boards in more technical and/or demanding matters. Board audit
committees do not exist; instead, there is the audit board that is separate from the supervisory
board. According to the law, the audit board is tasked with overseeing the internal and external

                                                 29
audit functions. The internal auditor reports to the audit board rather than to the supervisory board.
However, the supervisory board is responsible for appointing, evaluating and remunerating the
internal auditor.

88.     Under the current structure, the supervisory board is not fully accountable for the
integrity of the internal audit function as it should be. Due to the existence of the audit board,
the internal auditor does not interact with the supervisory board in practice. For that reason, to
make the audit board more effective and the supervisory board fully accountable for the internal
audit, the audit board should become a subcommittee of the board instead of a separate corporate
body. Moreover, the audit subcommittee should be chaired and composed of independent board
members only.

       F. Transparency and Disclosure

89.      The three state commercial banks prepare their financial statements in compliance
with internationally recognized accounting standards, and they are disclosed to the public.
According to the Law on Accounting, all public interest companies, including financial
institutions, are required to prepare their financial statements in compliance with IFRS standards.
However, 2009 IFRS is the most recent translation; subsequent amendments have not been
translated. The lack of translated amendments has impaired the ability of enterprises to prepare
quality financial statements.17 The external auditor also provides a management letter, though it is
not clear how the Supervisory Boards evaluate or act upon its findings.

90.      In practice, the state commercial banks select external audit firms late in the year and
on an annual basis, instead of for a period of at least 3 years. Banks request bids every year
and typically base their selection decisions on the lowest cost. However, two of the three banks
are using the services of international external audit firms: one, to better determine necessary
reform steps, and two, at the prompting of external parties. Banks do not appoint the external
auditor during the shareholders’ meeting, but in the third or fourth quarter. This causes important
audit work to be rushed and bypasses any periodic work that might be performed during the
financial year. As a matter of practice, external audit firms’ services should be contracted for terms
of at least three years (with maximum duration of five years) to ensure continuity and consistency
in the evaluation process. Moreover, the selection criteria should not be based solely on cost and
selection should be made during the first or early second quarter of the year.

91.     Supervisory boards in the state commercial banks, as a matter of practice, do not
meet with the external auditors in order to receive audit results and to discuss audit concerns.
Interaction with the audit board is also limited or not at all. The point of contact for the external
auditors is most often bank management. This indicates a lack of recognition by these bodies of
the importance of this function to the prudent operation of the bank as well as to their ability to
conduct their business responsibly. It also compromises the independence of the function. BARS

17   ROSC Accounting and Auditing 2010.

                                                 30
should require such meetings, if the bodies do not initiate it themselves. Record of such meetings
could be disclosed in banks’ annual report.

92.     BARS has no power to appoint an external audit firm at the bank’s expense if the
bank has not selected its auditor by a certain date. However, banks are required to obtain
approval from BARS for the appointment of their external auditor. Moreover, BARS has not
developed clear and transparent criteria for approving audit firms (such as qualification of the
auditors, reputation of the firm, size of the firm). The “Decision on the scope, form and content
of the audit report” enumerates required details for the external audit report. However, BARS
needs to further develop staff specialized in IFRS and relevant international audit standards in
order to assess quality of banks’ external audit reports.

93.      Transactions with state-owned enterprises are not treated as related party
transactions. According to the banks, transactions with the MoF are treated as related-party
transactions. However, transactions with municipalities or state-owned enterprises are treated as
normal transactions. The management of the institutions explained, however, that all loan
applications, including related-parties and government entities, go through the same credit
approval process. If the applicant (even if it is the state) does not meet the credit worthiness and
risk criteria, a loan will not be extended. Definitions of related parties for state banks’ should be
expanded to include all governmental entities. Related party transactions should be disclosed in
compliance with internationally recognized standards, go through a specific approval process (i.e.
approved by independent directors only).

94.    Non-financial disclosure by the three banks requires significant improvement. Banks
are required to produce financial statements in compliance with IFRS; however, non-financial
disclosures are poor. Consistently, disclosures in annual financial reports or on individual websites
do not present supervisory board members and biographical information, individual supervisory
board and senior management remuneration.



   G. Audit Function

95.    While the three banks report they have an internal audit function that reports to the
supervisory board, as required by law and regulation, in practice, the function appears to
lack adequate independence. Consistent with the law, all banks indicated that the head internal
auditor is appointed, remunerated and evaluated by the supervisory board. However, the audit
board monitors internal audit operations and external audit results, but does not interact regularly
with the supervisory board. In most cases, the internal auditor does not interact with the
supervisory board.

96.     Virtually all internal audit departments of state banks suffer from understaffing. The
staffing and professional requirements of banks’ audit departments reflect the broader auditing

                                                 31
profession in the RS which has been slow to develop. Audit department staff range from one to
three. Given the level of staffing and low level of experience as well as the condition of some of
the institutions, internal audit departments are not likely to have the resources necessary to
comprehensively cover bank operations with a high level of quality.

   H. Risk Function

97.     The development of risk strategy, effective risk oversight, and a sound control
framework is one of the most critical roles for which bank boards are responsible.
Independent risk oversight processes (internal audit, risk management, compliance) are an
important instrument of the board to ensure that its strategies, risk thresholds, and policies are
communicated, monitored, and respected. If boards are adequately empowered to set business
strategy and the risk parameters necessary to accomplish that strategy, then the risk management
function becomes an important tool for it to understand the success of its directions and the
soundness of the institution. Having a strong risk management function allows the board, then, to
discharge its duty to oversee the performance of the institution.

98.     Risk management is a very nascent function in state banks and should be further
strengthened. The risk management function in the state domestic sector is a relatively new
concept; the functions have been formed but currently conduct a credit analysis role for the lending
function along with periodic portfolio monitoring. Banks also indicate that the function also
determines the classification of credit. The process provides an opinion or credit analysis support
rather than performing formalized monitoring and reporting function. The head of the function is
accountable to senior management and currently are not independent. Sound credit risk
management practices are typically constituted by a secondary surveillance function with a direct
communication link to the board and which continually monitors and periodically tests portfolio
credit quality. There is no legal requirement requiring banks to establish an independent risk
management function that reports directly to the supervisory board. Over time, supervisory boards
should assure an independent risk management function and should regularly interact with the risk
management apart from management.




                                                32
DETAILED RECOMMENDED ACTIONS

           Table 1. Bosnia and Herzegovina: FSAP Key Recommendations – Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
     Recommendations and Authority Responsible for Implementation                                                      Time18
                       Legal, Regulatory and Supervisory Recommendations
     Regulatory and Supervisory Powers:                                                                         FBA,      I
         Either amend the Law on DBFBiH and the Decree on DBFBiH to allow the FBA full                         MoF

          supervisory responsibilities or oblige the Supreme Audit Authority to annually undertake a
          full-scope review of DBFBiH accounts.
         Amend the Law on Banks and its implementing regulations to require the FBA to issue clear,
          objective and transparent criteria for the approval process of external auditing firms and for
          what constitutes an adequate external audit.
         Amend the Law on Banks and its implementing regulation to allow the FBA to appoint an
          external audit firm by default in case banks have not appointed an external audit firm 30 days
         after the annual shareholders meeting.
     Bank Ownership – Professionalization of investment management:                                             MoF       I
     Ownership Entity
        Create a centralized ownership entity in charge of overseeing all the state’s enterprises including
        those in the financial sector.
     Monitoring Performance:
        In order to efficiently monitor the performance of state banks and SOEs in general, the state
         should create a monitoring unit within the ownership entity. Taking into consideration that the
         monitoring unit will be analyzing data that comes from financial and non-financial indicators,
         particularly in the case of state banks, it is paramount that it is properly staffed and is composed
         of professionals with the right skills and qualifications to effectively perform its mandate.
        For each investment or intervention, develop specific mandates, strategies and goals to clarify
         accountability, identify the scope of public policy objectives or other special obligations, and
         provide a basis for discussing more specific targets for the bank’s operations.
        Sign performance agreements between the ownership unit and the supervisory board with key
         performance indicators to formalize the commitment of the enterprise to meet the goals and
         objectives set by the ownership unit.

     Selection Criteria of supervisory board members – policy measures:
        Strengthen the supervisory board member selection process of state banks and development
         banks by changing the composition of the recruitment committee to include competent and
         independent individuals from both private and public sectors and consult existing board
         members to target needed skills.
        Reduce the number of civil servants serving as directors to a strict minimum and appoint more
         independent directors from the private sector (both national and foreigners).
        In case the pool of candidates from the private sector is limited and directors must be civil
         servants, they should be appointed on the basis of skills relevance, and should not serve as




18
     I-Immediate” is within one year; “NT -near-term” is 1–3 years; “MT-medium-term” is 3–5 years.

                                                                    33
          chairman of the board or CEO of the company. Moreover, they must go through similar
          performance evaluation procedures.
         Limit the number of terms to a maximum of two terms of three years each and ensure that terms
          are staggered.

     Selection Criteria of supervisory board members – implementation measures:
         As a first step, an independent selection panel could be set up, composed of independent board
          members from the private and public sectors.
         Where qualified individuals are not available due to the size and development of the private
          sector, non-conflicted civil servants from other parts of the government that are not otherwise
          connected to the state bank could be allowed as an “independent” director on the board to bring
          a different perspective.
         Independent directors can be phased-in, starting with the most important state banks, and, over
          time, be gradually increased to a significant number of such directors and eventually to a
          majority of directors.
         Build databases of potential directors. Such databases can be one of the ownership unit’s most
         valuable tools for professionalizing state bank and SOE boards in general.
     Strengthening the Law on Banks, the Law on Enterprises, Law on DBFBiH and Law on                          MoF,
     Accounting:                                                                                               FBA
         The laws on banks, enterprises and DBFBiH should be modified to make the audit board a
          subcommittee of the supervisory board instead of distinct corporate body.
         The laws on banks, enterprises and DBFBiH should be amended to require the appointment of
          at least two independent supervisory board members in bank boards.
         The laws on banks, enterprises and DBFBiH should limit to 40 percent the number of
          supervisory members representing the state in state-owned banks.
         The Law on Banks should be modified to require banks to appoint the external audit firm for a
          term of at least three years (and no more than five years).
         The Law on Accounting should be updated to reflect the latest amendments to IFRS standards
          since 2005. Moreover, the updated IFRS standards should be properly translated into local
          language to ensure its proper compliance and implementation.
     Corporate Governance Code/Regulation for Banks: 19                                                        FBA    NT
     The FBA should lead a collaborative effort (among banks and market participants) to develop a
     corporate governance regulation for the banking system. The regulation should leverage existing
     legislation but address the gaps that exist. It should holistically convey the nature and objectives of
     sound governance and enumerate key requirements for sound governance.
         Training for bankers and the FBA should be conducted, in part to explain the benefits and
          repercussions of implementing or not implementing the regulation.
         The FBA should require banks to evaluate the status of their own corporate governance against
          the new regulation and prepare reform plans that are forwarded to the FBA. The FBA should
          convey to the banks its process of monitoring and follow up.
         The regulation should address, inter alia:




19
  The FBA has issued a number of corporate governance-related Decisions (Conscientious Behavior of Members of
Bank's Bodies, Assessment of Members of Bank's Bodies, Remuneration Policy and Practices for Bank Employees).
Banks are expected to implement the abover mentioned Decisions at the beginning of 2014.

                                                                    34
             Expectations for a strong governance environment and risk culture, i.e. the need for
              the bank’s key parties (owners, board members, management) to act with integrity
              and in the best interest of all stakeholders, not only owners.
             The proper, distinct roles of ownership, supervisory board oversight, and management
              to establish the responsibilities and accountabilities of each function. The separation
              of ownership and control should be clearly set out.
             Board professionalism, objectivity, and independence. The code should encourage
              banks to identify ways to enhance board professionalism including identifying ways
              to attract the necessary talent to boards, particularly independent board members –
              possibly from abroad. Over the medium term, the proportion of independent, qualified
              members should be increased.
             The role and importance of a strong strategic planning process at the board level. The
              process should explicitly address the risk considerations of business plans and
              projected growth areas, the adequacy of existing risk and internal control functions,
              and the need to correlate risk management and internal audit capacity with growth.
              Success and performance indicators should be established.
             The requirement for independent control functions that are adequately staffed and
              resourced and which can serve as a tool for the board to monitor the management,
              condition, and performance of the bank.
             Improved transparency and disclosure of financial and nonfinancial information –
              throughout the year as well as annually.
             The requirement to rotate audit firms – or lead audit partners assigned to the subject
              bank - to help preserve the independence of the external audit function.
             The requirement for boards to conduct a self-assessment of the board function and its
              effectiveness at least annually. Outside parties might be considered for this as well.
             The requirement for boards to evaluate the overall corporate governance structure and
             function periodically. Outside parties might be considered for this as well.
                           State Bank-Specific Recommendations
Board Induction Training:                                                                               MoF,   NT
    Although all supervisory board members of state banks go through a complex certification           FBA

     process at the chamber of commerce, both state banks should organize at the bank level
     induction trainings for newly recruited supervisory board members. This way, new supervisory
     board members will better understand the institutions and be up to speed rapidly to fulfill
    effectively their mandate.
Supervisory Board Composition                                                                           MoF,   I
    Modify the role of the supervisory board to evolve into a leadership role away from a              FBA

     compliance oriented function.
    Change the composition of state banks’ supervisory boards to be composed of a majority of
     independent members with sector specific skills.
Risk Management:                                                                                        MoF,   I
   Commensurate with the size and complexity of the bank, credit accountability systems should         FBA

    be implemented which require relationship managers to flag borrower issues early in the life of
    the credit. Risk management functions should serve as “second lines of defense” and evaluate,
    monitor, and report risk issues.

                                                              35
   Risk management should not be directly involved in the approval of credit. This compromises
    the unit’s ability to independently flag risk concerns.
   Operational and market risks should be addressed (measured and monitored) by an independent
    risk management function.
   Risk control and management reporting lines to the board should be established; commensurate
    with the size and complexity of the bank, a chief risk officer should be appointed and his/her
    independence from the business line should be assured by the board.
   All control functions (risk management, internal audit, and compliance) should meet
     periodically with the board without executive directors or management present.
Internal Audit:                                                                                        MoF,   I
Internal audit functions require substantial upgrade:                                                  FBA
   Independent reporting lines directly to the supervisory board should be emphasized.
   The chief internal auditor should periodically, at least twice a year, report directly to the
    supervisory board without the presence of the managing director, other executive board
    members, or management.
   The stature and authority of the chief internal auditor and audit department should be elevated
    and assured, including:
             filling vacant chief internal auditor positions in banks;
             board (or audit committee) appointment and board involvement if the chief internal
              auditor is dismissed;
             Supervisory board-conducted performance evaluation for the chief internal auditor ;
             sufficient remuneration of the chief internal auditor and audit staff;
             adequate resources including staffing and systems;
             appropriate organizational positioning of the audit department;
             auditing access to all areas of the bank; and
             auditing risk management and compliance functions as well as subsidiary operations
   Audit planning should also consider the business activity planned in the strategic plan.
   Audit staff should receive periodic and ongoing training.
Related Party Transactions (including transactions with state-owned enterprises and other              MoF,   I
government entities):                                                                                  FBA
   Transactions with state-owned enterprises and other government entities (including
    municipalities) should be treated as related-party transactions and disclosed in compliance with
    internationally recognized accounting standards.
   Banks should likewise be responsible for implementing a methodical system through which
    related parties are identified, flagged in the course of banking business, evaluated, and
    monitored.
    The FBA should monitor these transactions and take appropriate action in case of violations.
Disclosure and Transparency:                                                                           FBA,   I
Disclosure standards should be upgraded. Nonfinancial disclosures are insufficient and should be       MoF
expanded to address, inter alia:
        Related party transactions, transactions with state-owned enterprises and other government
         entities (including municipalities)
        Board member and management biographical information
        Director and senior management remuneration (direct and indirect)



                                                              36
                 Table 2. Bosnia and Herzegovina: FSAP Key Recommendations – Republic of Srpska
Recommendations and Authority Responsible for Implementation                                                ¶     Time1
                  Legal, Regulatory and Supervisory Recommendations
Regulatory and Supervisory Powers:                                                                        BARS,      I
    Amend regulations to include clear, objective and transparent criteria for the approval process       MoF

     of external auditing firms; BARS should continue its efforts to monitor external audit quality
     by building staff specialized in IFRS and relevant international standards that govern banks’
     audit reports. Amend the Law on Banks and its implementing regulations to allow the BARS
     to appoint an external audit firm by default in case banks have not appointed an external audit
     firm 30 days after the annual shareholders meeting.
Strengthening the Law on Banks, the Law on Enterprises, Law on IDBRS and Law on                           MoF,
Accounting:                                                                                               BARS
    The laws on banks, enterprises and IDBRS should be modified to make the audit board a
     subcommittee of the supervisory board instead of distinct corporate body.
    The laws on banks, enterprises and IDBRS should be amended to require the appointment of at
     least two independent supervisory board members in bank boards.
    The laws on banks, enterprises and IDBRS should limit, to 40 percent, civil servants serving as
     supervisory board members.
    The Law on Banks should be modified to require banks to appoint the external audit firm for a
     term of at least three years (and no more than five years).
    The Law on Accounting should be updated to reflect the latest amendments to IFRS standards
     since 2009. Moreover, the updated IFRS standards should be properly translated into local
     language to ensure its proper compliance and implementation.
Corporate Governance Code/Regulation for Banks:                                                           BARS      NT
The BARS should lead a collaborative effort (among banks and market participants) to develop a
corporate governance regulation for the banking system. The regulation should leverage existing
legislation but address the gaps that exist. It should holistically convey the nature and objectives of
sound governance and enumerate key requirements for sound governance.
    Training for bankers and the BARS should be conducted, in part to explain the benefits and
     repercussions of implementing or not implementing the regulation.
    The BARS should require banks to evaluate the status of their own corporate governance against
     the new regulation and prepare reform plans that are forwarded to the BARS. The BARS should
     convey to the banks its process of monitoring and follow up.
    The regulation should address, inter alia:
              Expectations for a strong governance environment and risk culture, i.e. the need for
               the bank’s key parties (owners, board members, management) to act with integrity
               and in the best interest of all stakeholders, not only owners.
              The proper, distinct roles of ownership, supervisory board oversight, and management
               to establish the responsibilities and accountabilities of each function. The separation
               of ownership and control should be clearly set out.
              Board professionalism, objectivity, and independence. The code should encourage
               banks to identify ways to enhance board professionalism including identifying ways
               to attract the necessary talent to boards, particularly independent board members –
               possibly from abroad. Over the medium term, the proportion of independent, qualified
               members should be increased.

                                                               37
             The role and importance of a strong strategic planning process at the board level. The
              process should explicitly address the risk considerations of business plans and
              projected growth areas, the adequacy of existing risk and internal control functions,
              and the need to correlate risk management and internal audit capacity with growth.
              Success and performance indicators should be established.
             The requirement for independent control functions that are adequately staffed and
              resourced and which can serve as a tool for the board to monitor the management,
              condition, and performance of the bank.
             Improved transparency and disclosure of financial and nonfinancial information –
              throughout the year as well as annually.
             The requirement to rotate audit firms – or lead audit partners assigned to the subject
              bank - to help preserve the independence of the external audit function.
             The requirement for boards to conduct a self-assessment of the board function and its
              effectiveness at least annually. Outside parties might be considered for this as well.
             The requirement for boards to evaluate the overall corporate governance structure and
            function periodically. Outside parties might be considered for this as well.
                           IDBRS – Specific Recommendations
Bank Ownership – Professionalization of the Management of State’s Investments - IDBRS
Ownership entity
IDBRS Monitoring of Investee Banks :
    Expand the role of the monitoring unit, using staff with relevant and current skills, to monitor
     the government’s financial sector exposures, to evaluate financial institution performance, and
     to define an exit strategy for each equity and/or debt exposure.
    Develop or refine the banks’ mandates, strategies and goals to clarify executive management
     accountability, identify the banks’ public policy objectives or other special obligations, and
     provide a basis for discussing more specific performance and business targets for the bank’s
     operations.
    Sign agreements between the IDBRS ownership unit and the banks’ boards with key
     performance indicators to formalize the commitment of the subject bank (represented by the
     board) to meet the goals and objectives set by the ownership unit.

Selection Criteria of Supervisory Board Members – Policy Measures:
    Strengthen the supervisory board member selection process of state banks and the IDBRS by
     changing the composition of the recruitment committee to include competent and independent
     individuals from both private and public sectors and consult existing board members to target
     needed skills.
    Reduce the number of civil servants serving as board members to a strict minimum and appoint
     more independent directors from the private sector (both national and foreigners).
    In case the pool of candidates from the private sector is limited and directors must be civil
     servants, they should be appointed on the basis of skills relevance, and should not serve as
     chairman of the board or CEO of the company. Moreover, they must go through similar
     performance evaluation procedures.
    Limit the number of terms to a maximum of two terms of four years each and ensure that terms
     are staggered.


                                                             38
Selection Criteria of supervisory Board members – Implementation Measures:
    As a first step, an independent selection panel could be set up, composed of independent board
     members from the private and public sectors.
    Build databases of potential directors. Such databases can be one of the ownership unit’s most
     valuable tools for professionalizing state bank and SOE boards in general.

Disclosure and Transparency:
    In the case of the IDBRS, the annual report and funds’ laws should also be presented in
     English consistent with the rest of the website and international best practice.

Internal and External Audit
    The IDBRS, including all the funds, should be subject to annual reviews by the supreme audit
    agency.
    The position of Chief Internal Auditor at the IDBRS should become a full time position.
                    State Commercial Bank-Specific Recommendations
Board Induction Training:                                                                                 MoF,    NT
    State banks should organize induction training for newly recruited supervisory board                IDBRS

     members. This way, new supervisory board members will better understand the institutions
    and be up to speed rapidly to fulfill effectively their mandate.
Board Member Training:
    As a part of boards’ ongoing efforts to remain abreast of current developments and issues
     within the financial sector as well as to gain additional insights into more technical aspects of
     the sector and their banks, members and senior executives should identify and attend (or host)
    periodic workshops and relevant knowledge updates on a regular basis.
Supervisory Board Composition                                                                             MoF,    I
    Modify the role of the supervisory board to evolve into a leadership role away from a compliance    IDBRS

     oriented function.
    Change the composition of state banks’ supervisory boards to be composed of a majority of
    independent members with sector specific skills.
Risk Management:                                                                                         IDBRS,   I
    Commensurate with the size and complexity of the bank, credit accountability systems should          BARS

     be implemented which require relationship managers to flag borrower issues early in the life of
     the credit. Risk management functions should serve as “second lines of defense” and evaluate,
     monitor, and report risk issues.
    Risk management should not be directly involved in the approval of credit. This compromises
     the unit’s ability to independently flag risk concerns.
    Operational and market risks should be addressed (measured and monitored) by an independent
     risk management function.
    Risk control and management reporting lines to the board should be established; commensurate
     with the size and complexity of the bank, a chief risk officer should be appointed and his/her
     independence from the business line should be assured by the board.
    All control functions (risk management, internal audit, and compliance) should meet
     periodically with the board without executive directors or management present.
Internal Audit:                                                                                          IDBRS,   I
Internal audit functions require substantial upgrade:                                                     BARS
    Supervisory boards should fully implement the Decision on Internal Audit.
    Independent reporting lines directly to the supervisory board should be emphasized.

                                                               39
   The chief internal auditor should periodically, at least twice a year, report directly to the
    supervisory board without the presence of the managing director, other executive board
    members, or management.
   The stature and authority of the chief internal auditor and audit department should be elevated
    and assured, including:
             filling vacant chief internal auditor positions in banks;
             board (or audit committee) appointment and board involvement if the chief internal
              auditor is dismissed;
             Supervisory board-conducted performance evaluation for the chief internal auditor ;
             sufficient remuneration of the chief internal auditor and audit staff;
             adequate resources including staffing and systems;
             appropriate organizational positioning of the audit department;
             auditing access to all areas of the bank; and
             auditing risk management and compliance functions as well as subsidiary operations
   Audit planning should also consider the business activity planned in the strategic plan.
Related Party Transactions (including transactions with state-owned enterprises and other              MoF,   I
government entities):                                                                                  BARS
   Transactions with state-owned enterprises and other government entities (including
    municipalities) should be treated as related-party transactions and disclosed in compliance with
    internationally recognized accounting standards.
   Banks should likewise be responsible for implementing a methodical system through which
    related parties are identified, flagged in the course of banking business, evaluated, and
    monitored.
    The BARS should monitor these transactions and take appropriate action in case of violations.
Disclosure and Transparency:                                                                           MoF    I
    Disclosure standards should be upgraded. Nonfinancial disclosures are insufficient and should
     be expanded to address, inter alia:
               Related party transactions, transactions with state-owned enterprises and other
                 government entities (including municipalities)
               Board member and management biographical information
               Director and senior management remuneration (direct and indirect)




                                                              40
Annex 1: Basel Committee Principles for Enhancing Corporate20
Governance in banking organizations, October 2010

Principle 1
The board has overall responsibility for the bank, including approving and overseeing the implementation of the
bank’s strategic objectives, risk strategy, corporate governance and corporate values. The board is also
responsible for providing oversight of senior management.

Principle 2
Board members should be and remain qualified, including through training, for their positions. They should have
a clear understanding of their role in corporate governance and be able to exercise sound and objective judgment
about the affairs of the bank.

Principle 3
The board should define appropriate governance practices for its own work and have in place the means to ensure
that such practices are followed and periodically reviewed for ongoing improvement.

Principle 4
In a group structure, the board of the parent company has the overall responsibility for adequate corporate
governance across the group and ensuring that there are governance policies and mechanisms appropriate to the
structure, business and risks of the group and its entities.

Principle 5
Under the direction of the board, senior management should ensure that the bank’s activities are consistent with
the business strategy, risk tolerance/appetite and policies approved by the board.

Principle 6
Banks should have an effective internal controls system and a risk management function (including a chief risk
officer or equivalent) with sufficient authority, stature, independence, resources and access to the board.

Principle 7
Risks should be identified and monitored on an ongoing firm-wide and individual entity basis, and the
sophistication of the bank’s risk management and internal control infrastructures should keep pace with any
changes to the bank’s risk profile (including its growth), and to the external risk landscape.

Principle 8
Effective risk management requires robust internal communication within the bank about risk, both across the
organization and through reporting to the board and senior management.

Principle 9



20
     For more information, please visit: http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs176.htm

                                                          41
The board and senior management should effectively utilize the work conducted by internal audit functions,
external auditors and internal control functions.

Principle 10
The board should actively oversee the compensation system’s design and operation, and should monitor and
review the compensation system to ensure that it operates as intended.

Principle 11
An employee’s compensation should be effectively aligned with prudent risk taking: compensation should be
adjusted for all types of risk; compensation outcomes should be symmetric with risk outcomes; compensation
payout schedules should be sensitive to the time horizon of risks; and the mix of cash, equity and other forms of
compensation should be consistent with risk alignment.

Principle 12
The board and senior management should know and understand the bank’s operational structure and the risks
that it poses (ie “know-your-structure”).

Principle 13
Where a bank operates through special-purpose or related structures or in jurisdictions that impede transparency
or do not meet international banking standards, its board and senior management should understand the purpose,
structure and unique risks of these operations. They should also seek to mitigate the risks identified (ie
“understand-your-structure”).

Principle 14
The governance of the bank should be adequately transparent to its shareholders, depositors, other relevant
stakeholders and market participants.




                                                       42
Annex 2: OECD Guidelines on Corporate governance for State-Owned Enterprises21

Guideline 1: The legal and regulatory framework for state-owned enterprises should ensure a level-playing
field in markets where state-owned enterprises and private sector companies compete in order to avoid market
distortions. The framework should build on, and be fully compatible with, the OECD Principles of Corporate
Governance.

Guideline 2: The state should act as an informed and active owner and establish a clear and consistent
ownership policy, ensuring that the governance of state-owned enterprises is carried out in a transparent and
accountable manner, with the necessary degree of professionalism and effectiveness.

Guideline 3: The state ownership policy should fully recognize the state-owned enterprises’ responsibilities
towards stakeholders and request that they report on their relations with stakeholders.

Guideline 4: The boards of state-owned enterprises should have the necessary authority, competencies and
objectivity to carry out their function of strategic guidance and monitoring of management. They should act
with integrity and be held accountable for their actions.




21
 For more information, please visit: http://www.oecd.org/corporate/ca/corporategovernanceofstate-
ownedenterprises/34803211.pdf


                                                       43
