                                                                                    98306




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING

TECHNICAL NOTE
JUNE 2015

This Technical Note was prepared in the context of a joint World Bank-IMF Financial Sector
Assessment Program mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina during October-November 2014 led
by Michael Edwards, World Bank, and Sonia Munoz, IMF, and overseen by the Finance and
Markets Global Practice, World Bank and the Monetary and Capital Markets Department,
IMF. The note contains technical analysis and detailed information underpinning the FSAP
assessment’s findings and recommendations. Further information on the FSAP program can
be found at www.worldbank.org/fsap.



                       THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                       FINANCIAL AND MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE
Contents

Executive Summary .............................................................................................................. 1
I.         Introduction ............................................................................................................... 1
II.        The Institutional Framework for Accounting and Auditing ...................................... 1
      A.      The Statutory Framework....................................................................................... 1
      B.      The accounting and auditing profession, professional education and training ...... 4
      C.      Setting Accounting and Auditing Standards .......................................................... 6
      D.      Enforcing Accounting and Auditing Standards ..................................................... 7
III.          Accounting Standards as Developed and As Practiced .......................................... 9
IV.        Auditing Standards as Designed and as Practiced ................................................... 10
V.         Perception of the importance of Financial Reporting .............................................. 10


Tables

Table 1: Reporting and filing obligations for companies                                                                       4

Boxes

Box 1: Implementation of IFAC SMOs by the SRRF-FBiH                                                                           5

Box 2: Implementation of IFAC SMOs by the RS-AAA                                                                              6

Annexes

Annex 1: 2010 ROSC Recommendations and Implementation Status




                                                                    i
                             GLOSSARY



A&A             Accounting and Auditing
BiH             Bosnia and Herzegovina
EU              European Union
FBiH            Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
IAASB           International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board
IAS             International Accounting Standards (now IFRS)
IASB            International Accounting Standards Board
IFAC            International Federation of Accountants
IFRS            International Financial Reporting Standards
IFRS for SMEs   International Financial Reporting Standard for Small and
                Medium-Sized Entities
IMF             International Monetary Fund
ISA             International Standards on Auditing
MoF             Ministry of Finance
ROSC            Report on the Observance of Standards and Codes
RS              Republika Srpska
RS-AAA          Republika Srpska Association of Accountants and Auditors
SMEs            Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises
SRRF-FBIH       Association of Accountants, Auditors, and Financial Workers
                of FBIH
SAA             Stabilization and Association Agreement with the European
                Union




                                  ii
                                   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


1.      The Second Accounting and Auditing Report on the Observance of Standards
and Codes (ROSC) for Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH) was published in July 2011. The
supporting Technical Note (TN) should be read in conjunction with the ROSC as it reviews
the implementation of its recommendations1 and provides the reader with information on
current developments in BiH.

2.      BIH has substantially aligned its accounting and auditing laws with the EU
acquis communautaire and will need to implement the new Directives on Accounting
and Auditing in 2016. BiH has agreed to implement the European Union (EU) corpus of
laws (also known as the acquis communautaire) after signing a Stabilization and Association
Agreement with the European Union (SAA) in 2008. The 2014 EU progress report for BiH,
published in October, found that corporate accounting and auditing laws were substantially
aligned with the acquis communautaire and harmonized between the two entities. FBiH and
RS will need to further align their laws with the new provisions of the EU acquis. New
Directives on Accounting (2013) and Auditing (2014) will become effective in 2016.

3.      Since the 2010 ROSC was agreed, secondary laws were issued by the MoFs in
FBiH and in RS to implement IFRS for SMEs and to address some of the
recommendations of the ROSC. In FBiH, the MoF issued secondary legislation in 2013
for the implementation of IFRS for SMEs, allowing the standard to be used for the
preparation of non-public interest SMEs’ financial statements from 2013. In RS secondary
legislation was issued in 2011 giving the option of using IFRS for SMEs when preparing
financial statements of non-public interest entities from 2011 and limiting statutory audit to
Public Interest Entities (PIEs - listed companies, banks, insurances companies, pensions
funds, etc). Other dispositions in RS included further harmonization to meet the same
deadlines as in FBiH for the preparation and submission of consolidated financial
statements, and publication of transparency reports for audit firms that audit PIEs.

4.     The implementation of IFRS for SMEs has proven successful in the RS. More
than 50 percent of companies file their financial statements prepared using this standard.
This represents a great reduction in the burden on companies when preparing financial
statements, as it requires far fewer disclosures than full IFRS. IFRS for SMEs is, however,
still a robust framework for reporting and a challenging standard to meet, particularly for
smaller companies with unsophisticated accounting functions. Implementation of the
standard in FBiH is currently very low, as the corresponding secondary legislation was
issued only in 2013. The requirement for IFRS for SMEs should be expanded to all SMEs
in both Entities.

5.    BiH will need further efforts to implement the lowering of requirements for
small companies envisaged in the EU accounting framework. The new Accounting
Directive opens an option for a micro regime. This process could be informed by the

1
 http://imagebank.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2012/06/22/000333038_2012062202
4152/Rendered/PDF/703650ROSC0P110osniaherzegovina0eng.pdf

                                               1
guidance published by the IFRS Foundation2 on implementing IFRS for SMEs in micro-
entities.

6.    The RS Association of Accountants and Auditors and the FBiH Association of
Accountants, Auditors and Financial Workers are respectively full member and
associate member of IFAC. Both professional bodies have made substantial efforts to
comply with the statements of membership obligations of IFAC. More recently the RS
association initiated preliminary work on audit quality assurance with the assistance of the
French profession. The FBiH Association of Accountants, Auditors and Financial Workers
has strengthened its initial and continuing education processes, and published a translation
of IFRS for SMEs in local language using the Latin alphabet. The RS Association of
Accountants and Auditors has published a version of IFRS for SMEs using the Cyrillic
alphabet. The two versions are otherwise substantially alike.

7.    Both professional bodies, however, fail to provide a continuous mechanism for
the translation of International Financial Reporting Standards and International
Standard on Auditing. Even if this is not currently causing substantial departure from the
English version of the standards, a continuous mechanism for translation is to be put in place
in cooperation with Entities governments. The respective Ministries of Finance should
monitor that the translation processes are continuous.

8.     Current monitoring and enforcement arrangements do not ensure that the
quality of financial statements meet the standard of IFRS. The audit public oversight
systems are not yet fully established and operational, and audit quality assurance systems
have only performed preliminary work. It will take at least three to five years of constant
effort to implement these systems effectively. In addition, provisions of the new EU audit
regulation relating to the monitoring of audits of PIEs will necessitate that the institutions
responsible for audit public oversight directly monitor audit firms responsible for PIEs
statutory audits and are completely independent from the audit profession. These
requirements will imply additional constraints on the capacity of the Entities to implement
these systems. Financial sector regulatory agencies have increased their monitoring of
financial statements compliance with IFRS and need to continue these efforts by hiring
specialized staff or training existing staff in IFRS and at a minimum ISA 700, the standard
that governs the audit report.


Preliminary results in implementing statutory audit quality assurance systems in both
Entities point to a decrease in audit quality and numerous instances of non-compliance
with ISA and IFRS. Some of the roots for low audit quality are the constant downward
pressure on audit fees, rapid rotation, and late appointment of statutory auditors, with some
audit contracts concluded after the closing date of the financial statements.




2
    http://www.ifrs.org/IFRS-for-SMEs/Pages/Guidancemicrosizedentities.aspx
                                                    2
Recommendations and Authority Responsible for                                              Responsibility         Time4
Implementation3
Continue implementation of simplified accounting frameworks                                FBiH: MoF,                 I
using the IFRS for SMEs standard to reduce the burden on SMEs                              RS: MoF,
and improve the quality of SMEs financial statements.
Develop capacity and skills by hiring skilled staff, developing                            Public                     I
inspection strategies focusing on statutory audits, operating                              Oversight and
manuals, and staff training programs.                                                      External
                                                                                           Quality
                                                                                           Assurance
                                                                                           Systems
Change regulation on external auditors appointment; auditors                               FBiH: MoF,                 I
should be appointed for a multi-year period of at least three years,                       RS:MoF,
unless cause is documented for their dismissal. MoFs should adopt
and enforce provisions to sanction companies that does not appoint
their auditors before the closing date for financial statements,
Enhance capacity of securities market supervisor to monitor          Securities                                     I/NT
financial information and commence enforcement on the use of         Commissions
IFRS.                                                                in RS and
                                                                     FBiH
Ensure disclosure and, where relevant, public correction of detected Financial                                       NT
material misstatements in published financial information.           Supervisors
Ensure that the accounting and auditing professional bodies make Entity                                              NT
available translations of IFRS and ISA and the Code of Ethics, in Governments
continuous manner, to accountants, auditors, students and preparers.




  3
   The current note reiterates recommendations of the 2010 ROSC for Bosnia already agreed with the State and Entity level
  Authorities for further implementation. The ROSC recommendations and their implementation status are in Annex.

  4
      I-Immediate” is within one year; “NT-near-term” is 1–3 years; “MT-medium-term” is 3–5 years.
                                                             3
                                       I.       INTRODUCTION 5

    10.    This technical note should be read in conjunction with the Report on the
    Observance of Standards and Codes – Accounting and Auditing (ROSC), dated
    December 2010, and cleared for publication by the Ministry of Finance and Treasury of
    Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), the Government of Republika Srpska (RS), and the
    Ministry of Finance of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (FBIH) during April and
    May 2011.

    11.     The objective of this technical note is not to replace or update the ROSC, but
    to review the implementation of its recommendations and to provide the reader of the
    ROSC with information on current developments in BiH. This note has not made a
    review of current practices by analyzing financial statements and related audit reports; such
    a review was carried out in the ROSC. It has based its analysis on documentation provided
    by counterparts and interviews.

    12.     This note considers the European Union (EU) corpus of laws (also known as
    the acquis communautaire) as BiH signed a Stabilization and Association Agreement
    with the European Union in 2008. The ROSC and the note evaluates the BiH regulatory
    framework and institutional capacity against the First, Second, Fourth, Seventh, and Eight
    companies law directives which are in force in the EU at the present time. The notes takes
    into account the prospect of implementation of the new accounting directive and the new
    statutory audit directive and the audit regulation that were adopted by the EU Parliament
    respectively in 2013 and 2014, as these directives will need to be implemented in Bosnia
    and Herzegovina.


       II.       THE INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR ACCOUNTING AND AUDITING

                                  A.        The Statutory Framework

    13.     The accounting and auditing framework consist of a State level Framework
    law, and implementation laws at Entity-level - the former ensuring consistency
    between the two Entities accounting and auditing practices. The accounting and
    auditing laws at Entity level need to be consistent with the Framework law. The Framework
    law was issued in 2004; it mandates, inter-alia, the use of International Financial Reporting
    Standards to prepare financial statements and International Auditing Standards for the audit
    of financial statements, and defines other requirements dealing with education and
    licensing of accounting and auditing professionals.

    14.    The Framework law has some limitations but needs to be maintained. The
    Framework law does not address directly the breadth and the depth of the provisions
    included in the acquis communautaire as it relates to accounting and auditing. The acquis
    contains more details on the financial reporting and statutory audit obligations of small,
    medium, large companies, and Public Interest Entities defined as listed companies on a


5
     This Technical Note has been prepared by Pascal Frerejacque, WB.
                                                      1
regulated market. Nevertheless the Framework law is an important mechanism that informs
consistency between the laws at Entity level.

15.     Very few changes were made to the accounting and auditing legal framework
since the publication of the 2010 ROSC. The laws were not changed and only secondary
laws were issued by the MoFs in FBiH and in RS:

     -   In FBiH, the MoF issued secondary legislation in 2013 for the implementation of
         IFRS for SMEs, allowing the use of this standard for the preparation of SMEs
         financial statements. The first year of application is 2013;

     -   In RS secondary legislation was issued in 2011 to open an option for the
         implementation of IFRS for SMEs when preparing financial statements of SMEs
         from January 1, 2012. Other dispositions included further harmonization of
         deadlines for preparation and submission of consolidated financial statements to
         meet the same deadlines as in FbiH. Finally, RS mandates the publication of
         transparency reports for audit firms that audit PIEs. These reports include
         descriptions of the structure of the firm and its quality assurance processes, as well
         as identifying ownership and clients.

16.     Each Entity Company Law defines similar forms of legal entities for the
corporate sector: (i) partnerships, (ii) joint-stock companies, and (iii) limited-liability
companies. Further, in its new company law, the RS has defined two sorts of joint-stock
companies: open joint-stock companies and closed joint-stock companies having fewer
than 100 stockholders. Open joint-stock companies must be registered on the Banja Luka
Stock Exchange. FBIH’s company law reflects the same distinction between open and
closed joint-stock companies.

17.     The 2009 Entities’ A&A Laws have further harmonized the accounting and
auditing obligations of enterprises in both Entities, enhancing the single economic
space. Both sets of laws use the same definitions of small, medium-sized and large
enterprises and set out their obligations in a similar way to the Fourth EU Company Law
Directive:

     -   Small legal entities are entities that meet at least two out of three of the following
         thresholds: less than 50 employees, an average of total assets less than KM1
         million and annual revenues less than KM2 million.

     -    Medium-sized entities are entities that meet at least two out of three of the
         following thresholds: between 50 and 250 employees, total asset value between
         KM1 and KM4 million and a total annual income between KM2 and KM8 million.

     -   Large entities are entities that exceed at least two out of three of the following
         thresholds: total employees of 250 employees, total assets of KM4 million and
         total revenue of KM8 million.



                                              2
18.     According to both Entities’ A&A Laws, all enterprises need to fi le their
financial statements and, when applicable, the related audit report with the Entity
registry of financial statements. In addition to financial statements, enterprises need to
file an annual report describing their activities, objectives, forecasts and risks. Bosnia and
Herzegovina has three financial statements registries, two in FBiH, in Sarajevo and Mostar,
and one in RS, in Banja Luka.

19.      Entities’ A&A Laws list entities that are subject to an annual audit regardless
of the size of their operations. Entities’ A&A Laws require that banks, microcredit
institutions, savings and loans cooperatives, insurance companies, leasing companies,
investment funds, investment funds, managers, voluntary pension funds’ managers or
brokers, stock exchanges, brokers and dealers of financial instruments and other financial
companies be classified as large companies, subjecting them to extensive accounting and
auditing obligations.

20.      Both stock exchanges, the SASE and the BLSE, publish the financial statements
of all listed entities in all segments of the market on their websites. The information comes
both from the registry of financial statements and from direct filings by listed companies
with the stock exchanges (including statutory audit reports).


21.  The following table summarizes the reporting and filing obligations for
companies:




                                             3
Table 1: Reporting and filing obligations for companies
                           Legal-entity          Consolidated        Audit requirements                Filing
                            financial              financial
                           statements             statements


    Entities as in
    the A&A Laws
                         IFRS or IFRS for        Not unless the      No audit required for      Legal-entity financial
    Small entities
                        SMEs except for the    group is above the    legal-entity financial           statement
                            absence of a         threshold for a          statements              by end of February
                          requirement for       small entity (see                               Consolidated financial
                         the statements of          Para. 24)       ISA Audit required for           statements:
                         changes in equity                             all consolidated           RS: End of March.
                           and cash-flow.                            financial statements        FBIH: End of April.

    Medium-sized        IFRS (both entities)         IFRS                ISA (FBiH)                Filing as above.
    entities            or IFRS for SMEs 6
                                                                    No audit required   (RS)7
    Large entities      IFRS (both entities)         IFRS                ISA (FBiH)                Filing as above.
                         or IFRS for SMEs
                                                                    No audit required   (RS)7
    Listed                     IFRS                  IFRS                    ISA                   Filing as above.
    companies,
    Banks,
    Insurance
    companies,
    Private pension
    funds, and
    other public-
    interest entities



B.        The accounting and auditing profession, professional education and training

22.     The organization of the accounting and auditing profession reflects the
constitutional setup of BiH. The accounting and auditing profession is represented at the
State level by the BiH A&A Commission; its members are the Association of Accountants,
Auditors and Financial Workers of FBiH (SRRF-FBiH) that represents the profession in
FBiH, and the Republika Srpska Association of Accountants and Auditors (RS-AAA) that
represents the same in RS. The BiH A&A Commission provides a coordination mechanism
between the two entities’ professional bodies to which it has delegated most of its powers.
The president of the commission changes every year, and is alternatively from the RS or
FBiH.

23.   Both professional accountancy organizations are members of the International
Federation of Accountants (IFAC) and need to follow its Statements of Membership
Obligations (SMOs). Professional bodies must use their best endeavors to implement the
SMOs. SRRF-FBiH was admitted in 2010 as an associate member, and RS-AAA as a full
6 IFRS for SMEs has been adopted through the 2009 accounting and auditing law by FBIH and , RS allows the
application of IFRS for non-public interest entities’ financial statements established since starting 2012.
7 In RS only Public Interest Entities are required to undergo an annual audit since 2011

                                                            4
  member. Both bodies are cooperating to join the Federation des Expert-Comptables
  Europeens (FEE) in 2015, which only offers one membership per country.

  24.     SRRF-FBiH, has made strides in enhancing its operations, notably on
  continuous professional education. It has created a system to identify the technical needs
  of its members through questionnaires, and operates a quality assurance system to monitor
  the quality of training. It also has expanded the number of trainings topics. In addition, half
  of the initial professional education courses are provided by practicing professionals. The
  box below provides a snapshot view on the activities of SRRF-FBiH against IFAC SMO’s.

  Box 1: Compliance with IFAC SMOs of SRRF-FBiH
SMO 1 – Quality Assurance: SRRF-FBiH does not operate the audit quality assurance system in
FBiH, which is under the mandate of the Audit Chamber, the body named after the 2009 law to ensure
control over audits and auditors. In 2012, the Union published the internal control standard ICQC 1 in
local language.
SMO 2 International Education Standards (IESs): SRRF-FBiH monitors that auditors follow
education requirements in line with the IESs and the Framework Law of Accounting and Audit of
BiH.
SMO 3 – International Standards on Auditing (ISA): ISA are mandated by the 2005 framework
laws and the 2009 law on accounting and auditing.
SMO 4 –Code of Ethics: SRRF-FBiH has adopted and published the Code of Ethics; it supports its
implementation through seminars.
SMO 5 – International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS): SRRF-FBiH is currently in
the process of translating IPSASs, which are to be used by the public sector under FBiH law.
SMO 6 – Investigation & Discipline: In 2013, the Union has established a Disciplinary Review
Committee and a Council of Appeal; members of those bodies are appointed. These committees are
under the supervision of the Audit Public Oversight.
 SMO 7 – International Financial Reporting Standards: IFRS are mandated by law in FBiH.
SRRF-FBiH supports that effort in translating IFRS and IFRS for SMEs. The translation process is
not continuous; the translation of IFRS is dated 2010, and includes IASB pronouncements until 2010.
The translation of IFRS for SMEs is up to date.


   25.     RS-AAA is a more mature professional body that initiated work on quality
   assurance and operates its own education system, including continuing professional
   education. The following box provides a snapshot view on the activities of the RS-AAA
   against IFAC SMO’s.




  Box 2: Compliance with IFAC SMOs of RS-AAA
                                                   5
SMO 1 – Quality Assurance: RS – AAA are developing their quality assurance system, with the
assistance of the French professional body, through the Commission for monitoring, implementation
and control. The system started operating in 2012. Auditors are required to apply International
Standard on Quality Control (ISQC 1).
SMO – 2 International Education Standards (IESs): Statutory auditors follow education
requirements in line with IESs (2009 edition) and the Framework Law of Accounting and Audit of
BiH. Auditors must have at least a bachelor degree, pass selected exams, meet a three year minimum
requirement for professional experience, and are required to participate in a 40 hour CPD program
each year.
SMO 3 – International Auditing and Assurance Standards (IAASB) pronouncements: the use
of ISA is mandated by law, the last translation was performed in 2010 by RS-AAA which supports
its implementation by training auditors and publishing audit manuals.
SMO 4 –International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants (IESBA) Code of Ethics: The
use of the code of ethics is required by law. The last version was translated in 2012 in cooperation
with the Serbian and Montenegrin Professional Accountancy bodies. Ethics is supported by seminars
organized by the RS-AAA.
SMO 5 – International Public Sector Accounting Standards (IPSAS): IPSASs are translated by
the RS-AAA.
SMO 6 – Investigation & Discipline: The RS-AAA system of investigation and discipline was
adopted in 2002 and further amended in 2005. It is implemented through an in-house committee,
which cooperates with the committee monitoring the application of auditing standards.
SMO 7 – International Financial Reporting Standards: IFRS are mandated by law in BiH and
RS. RS-AAA participates in the translation of IFRS and IFRS for SMEs. The translation process is
not continuous; the translation of IFRS is dated 2010, and include IASB pronouncement until 2009.
The translation of IFRS for SMEs is up to date. The RS-AAA provides support to their members in
providing, inter-alia, training and publishing the standards and implementation guidance.


                     C.    Setting Accounting and Auditing Standards

26.     The BIH A&A Framework Law mandates IFRS as the accounting standards
to be used by all reporting entities, and ISA as the standards to be used in auditing
throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina. IFRS is still mandatory for PIEs but is now optional
for other companies. IFRS for SMEs was introduced in both Entities for preparing the
financial statements of non-public interest entities; this alleviates the administrative burden
for non-PIEs and will enhance the quality of their financial reporting measured in terms of
compliance with the provision of the standard.

27.     The continuous availability of the most recent IFRS and ISA remains an issue.
The Entities have languages that share similarities but are written in a different alphabet.
The latest translations were performed in 2010, and updated translations are expected in
2015. The current translation mechanisms do not ensure the continuing and timely
availability of translations. Neither Entity’s Government plays a role in ensuring the
continuous availability of translations. Governments and professional accountancy
organizations sharing the same language in the region need to further cooperate on technical
and financial fronts. A stable and well-resourced translation process is essential to the
correct application of the standards in a country in which foreign language skills are
generally too low for using standards written in English.

                                                 6
                 D.    Enforcing Accounting and Auditing Standards

28.     The enforcement of accounting and auditing standards is different in each
Entity. As discussed below, both FBiH and RS need to improve their regulatory capacity
to monitor and enforce compliance with accounting and auditing standards. This will
present a challenge, but it will be critical for both to add staff with appropriate education,
training, and experience to ensure a productive monitoring and oversight of the
accounting and auditing functions.

              D1. Enforcing Accounting and Auditing Standards in FBiH

29.     The Audit Public Oversight Council was set up in 2013 and is not yet funded.
The Council consists of 5 members representing various supervisory agencies,
academics, and the profession. The Council has met several times but lacks funding to
effectively start its operations. The members of the Council are accounting and auditing
experts.

30.     The Audit Public Oversight is supported by an Audit Chamber that will need
to hire more staff to fulfill its mandate. The chamber is responsible for audit quality
assurance. The Audit Chamber was first established in 2011, but commenced its
operations only in 2013. It has started preliminary work to review the characteristics of
the audit market and better understand quality in financial statements, by reviewing
publicly available audit opinions and financial statements and analyzing the responses of
audit firms to questionnaire on audit quality. The Chamber of Auditors has only two staff,
and will need to hire more staff to fulfill its mandate.

31.    The preliminary work performed by the Audit Chamber points to a lack of
audit quality. The conjunction of the pressure on audit fees, lack of knowledge and
experience with international standards of accounting and auditing, and the lack of
supervision of the audit market has resulted in poor audit practices that are not compliant
with ISA.

32.    The extent of financial regulators monitoring of financial statements in FBiH
was reviewed. The review is based on the interviews of representatives of the staff of the
agencies by the team and on information provided by other members of the FSAP team.

     -     The FBiH Securities Commission has not made the necessary investments
         in resources and skills to monitor the quality of financial statements of listed
         entities. Periodical information is not reviewed and financial statements are
         scrutinized only on the occasion of a public filing, i.e. when the number of shares
         is increased or decreased based on the report of an independent auditor.

     -   The FBiH Banking Supervisory Agency (FBA) has enhanced its monitoring
         of financial statements to comply with the requirements of the new Basel
         Core Principles that gives more responsibility to banking supervisors to ensure
         quality in financial reporting of banks. Financial statements are now to be
         prepared based on IFRS. The agency has accompanied the transition of IFRS of
         the banking sector in 2012-2013, and trained its staff accordingly. Banks are
                                              7
         mostly audited by audit firms that are member of international networks. The
         agency holds discussions with auditors on a bilateral basis once a year before the
         audit

     -   The FBIH Insurance Supervisory Agency has improved its monitoring
         practices vis-à-vis the audited financial statements. It now reviews financial
         statements and audit opinions, and has expanded its staff and its training program.
         In 2013, only one Insurance company was audited by a local auditor; this auditor
         had issued a modified opinion on the financial statements of that company.


              D.2 Enforcing Accounting and Auditing Standards in RS


33.    The RS A&A Law allocates the responsibility for quality assurance and public
oversight systems to the MoF, which lacks the necessary resources to fulfill them. The
MoF mostly undertakes compliance oriented controls but is not in a position to review the
work performed by audit firms. The control unit has only one staff member, and therefore
does not have the capacity to discharge all tasks for the quality assurance and the oversight
systems. .

34.     The RS A&A Law established the RS A&A Council which was initially viewed
as leverage for the MoF to operate audit quality assurance and the public oversight
system. The A&A council comprises representatives of the MoF, professional bodies and
university professors. The council advises the MoF on possible reform but does not play a
meaningful role in supervising the quality assurance of audits and auditors. Membership
can be extended to others who may contribute to the work of the Council based on their
theoretical and practical experience. In reality little work has been done in the area of audit
quality assurance and public oversight by the Council to help the MoF discharge its
responsibilities to oversee audit firms.

35.     The RS-AAA has initiated the implementation of an audit quality assurance
system with the assistance of French Professional Accountancy Organizations. Initials
steps in 2014 comprised analyzing questionnaires and interviewing audit firms.
Preliminary results point to a lack of application of ISAs by a number of audit firms. The
RS-AAA hosts a Commission for quality assuranceconstituted by the five members,
representing the association, regulatory bodies and other interested parties. Representatives
of the MoF,, the RS-AAA and representatives of financial supervisors.

36.    Preliminary work performed by the RS-AAA points to a lack of audit quality.
Pressure on audit fees, lack of knowledge and experience in the profession, and a lack of
supervision of the audit market has contributed to poor audit practices that are not
compliant with ISA.

37.    The extent of financial regulators’ monitoring of financial statements in RS
was reviewed. The review is based on the interviews of representatives of the staff of the
agencies by the team and on information provided by other members of the FSAP team.

                                              8
     -      The RS Securities Exchange Commission faces constraints in reviewing
            periodical financial information provide by listed entities. It has only two staff
            to review the financial statements of issuers. Therefore, reviews of the financial
            statements of companies listed on the RS stock exchange are mostly undertaken
            when capital has been modified, much like in FBIH. The SEC’s human and
            financial resources should be enhanced as discussed in the ROSC document;

     -      The RS Banking Supervisory Agency is responsible for enforcing the use of
            IFRS. It is legally responsible for supervision of the application of IFRS in the
            financial sector and under the new Basel Core Principles for Banking Supervision.
            Although its staff has some knowledge of IFRS, the capacity of the off-site and
            on-site supervision teams will need to be strengthened in this area. Financial
            statements of banks comply prima facie with IFRS, but some do not contain
            enough information to understand the underlying operations of the banks. Banking
            supervisors need to ensure that financial statements provide all the relevant
            information necessary to understand underlying operations;

     -      The Insurance Supervisory Agency lacks resources and skills to review
            financial information. It has not improved its staffing since 2011 and at least one
            skilled resource left; it devotes no resources to participating in international
            training on IFRS.


         III.     ACCOUNTING STANDARDS AS DEVELOPED AND AS PRACTICED


38.     Both Entities in BiH have initiated a change from a full IFRS regime to a
regime less burdensome for SMEs. Both Entities have added an option to use the IFRS
for SMEs standard, a less burdensome but still rigorous standard to be used by SMEs when
preparing their financial statements. IFRS for SMEs is translated in both Entities, in Latin
alphabet for use in FBiH and Cyrillic in RS. The BiH Framework Law establishes IFRS,
as issued by the IASB, to be the only accounting standards applied in BiH.

     -      In FBiH the option to use IFRS for SMEs for the preparation of SMEs financial
            statements is only recent and the level of adoption seems very low. The register
            of financial statements could not provide information on the number of companies
            using the standard. SRRF-FBiH representatives have a view that the level of
            adoption is low.

     -      The level of adoption of IFRS for SMEs in RS is very high with more than fifty
            per cent of all companies filing financial statements prepared under IFRS for
            SMEs. Only non-Public Interest Entities can use this standard to prepare their
            financial statements; the standard requires fewer disclosures than full IFRS, but
            still requires modern and quite rigorous accrual accounting.




                                               9
         IV.       AUDITING STANDARDS AS DESIGNED AND AS PRACTICED

39.   This technical note does not include a review of statutory audit on financial
statements but builds on interviews with persons participating in the nascent quality
assurance systems in FBiH and RS.

40.     The quality of statutory audit seems to have declined in an environment where
there is a rapid rotation in auditors, an increased pressure on audit fees by companies,
and in which quality assurance were only recently established and public oversight
system are not yet fully implemented. The annual appointment of auditors seems to be
to blame, as it is the occasion to discuss a decrease in audit fees in both Entities. In some
instances, companies change their auditors annually, and appoint them late. These practices
are not favoring quality audits.

41.    Initial quality assurance work performed in the FBiH and RS show low
compliance with ISA for a number of audit firms. This confirms the findings of the 2010
ROSC on lack of compliance with ISA. These findings should be seen in the context of
very small firms that do not always have the resources to perform auditing and the large
portion of audit revenue (more than 50 per cent) taken by member firms of international
networks.

       V.       PERCEPTION OF THE IMPORTANCE OF FINANCIAL REPORTING

42.     The length of the relationship of a bank with its customer is more important
than the financial information that is provided. Banks request high-levels of collateral
for loans to SMEs, between 1 and 3 times the nominal amount of the loan, with an average
above 2.3. The high-level of collateral required reflects the lack of trust in numbers,
whether these are from financial statements or realizable amounts of collateral values. Over
time, as trust is built between a bank and a company, the level can go as low as 100 per
cent of the nominal amount of the loans.

43.     Banks indicated limited trust in the cash-flows figures of companies requesting
a loan. SMEs often have two sets of books, one of which does not take into account parts
of the business of a company, and which scope would vary. The black book can represent
a substantial part of the operations of some small companies and in others it is very
marginal.

44.     As noted above there is a perception that the quality of financial reporting and
especially of auditing is declining. Audit quality assurance and public oversight systems,
and enhanced supervision by the financial supervisors are critical to reestablish trust in
financial information across BiH




                                            10
                                    .   Annex I: 2010 ROSC Recommendations and Implementation Status



       RECOMMENDATIONS                                            FBiH                                                          RS
Statutory Framework
IFRS for SMEs to be adopted             Partially Implemented. Decision published in 2013 for       Partially Implemented. Guidance on application of IFRS for
                                        the implementation of IFRS for SMEs but only as an          SMEs (number 93/11) published in 2011. More than 52 per
                                        option. There is no record of implementation of this        cent of all companies chose IFRS for SMEs for preparing
                                        standard in the FBiH and the use of IFRS for SMEs should    their FS. The use of IFRS for SMEs should be expanded to
                                        be expanded.                                                all SMEs.
IFRS to apply only to PIEs              Partially Implemented. Secondary law for implementing       Partially implemented. IFRS for SMEs was introduced as an
                                        IFRS for SMEs was published only in 2013. There is no       option for SMEs. More than 52 per cent of all companies
                                        record of implementation of this standard in the FBiH       chose IFRS for SMEs for preparing their FS. The use of IFRS
                                        and the use of IFRS for SMEs should be expanded.            for SMEs should be expanded.
                                        PIEs mandated to apply full IFRS for the preparation of      PIEs mandated apply full IFRS for the preparation of their
                                        their financial statements.                                 financial statements. The use of IFRS for SMEs should be
                                                                                                    expanded.
Quality assurance to focus on the       Not implemented. The Audit Chamber has yet to design        Not implemented. The RS-AAA has yet to finalize its
statutory audit of PIEs                 its audit quality assurance methodology. It performed       quality assurance methodology. It performed preliminary
                                        preliminary desk work through the review of publicly        work with the technical assistance of the French
                                        available reports and questionnaires sent to audit firms.   Professional Accountancy Organizations, consisting of
                                        No specific focus on PIEs’ statutory audit.                 questionnaires sent to audit firms and short meetings with
                                                                                                    audit firms.
Design Operational policies for         Not Implemented. The Public Oversight Council was           Not implemented. The MoF does not perform the
external quality assurance and          only established in late 2013, and was not to date          oversight function over statutory audits and auditors as
public oversight systems                awarded any funding. It has yet to design its operational   defined under the EU Statutory Directive. Preliminary work
                                        policies, and begin its operations.                         for audit quality assurance is performed by the RS-AAA
                                        The Chamber of Audit Control has established its            with the assistance of the French Professional Accountancy
                                        operations and commenced preliminary work. The Audit        Organizations.
                                        Chamber still needs to design a methodology for quality
                                        assurance.




                                                                                11
       RECOMMENDATIONS                                           FBiH                                                          RS

Raise awareness about the benefit       Not implemented. Transparency reports are not              Partially implemented. Transparency reports are required
of implementing the requirement         required.                                                  since 2011.
of an audit committee
Require publication of
transparency reports for audit
firms auditing PIEs
Publication
Harmonize deadlines for the filing      Implemented. Consolidated financial statements are to      Implemented. Consolidated financial statements are to be
of consolidated financial               be filed by the end of May.                                filed by the end of April.
statements; and
Require electronic publication for      Partially implemented. Financial statements available at   Partially implemented. Financial statements available at
all financial statements                the registers against a standard fee. No complete          the register against a standard fee. The register continues
                                        electronic filing yet possible at PIF and APIF             to require paper filing because of the identification
                                                                                                   provided by the physical stamp; the notes to the financial
                                                                                                   statements are not published. Electronic signature not yet
                                                                                                   implemented.
Ensure availability of PIEs financial   Implemented. Financial statements available on the         Implemented. Financial statements available on the stock
statements                              stock exchange. No complete electronic filing yet          exchange. No complete electronic filing yet possible.
                                        possible at FIP and AFIP.


Accounting
Government to ensure that               Partially implemented. IFRS for SMEs is translated, but    Partially implemented. IFRS for SMEs is translated.
institutions in charge of translation   IFRS are not available on a continuous basis (last         (lasttranslation 2010 handbook). Government is not
make available updated translation      translation 2010 handbook). Government is not involved     involved in the financing or making sure that the
of IFRS                                 in the financing or making sure that translations are      translations are performed continuously.
                                        performed continuously.
Harmonize formats for financial         Partially implemented. The formats are mostly aligned      Partially implemented. The formats are mostly aligned
reporting with the Fourth and           with IFRS requirements and not with the requirements       with IFRS requirements and not with the requirements of
Seventh Company Law Directive.          of the acquis.                                             the acquis.




                                                                               12
       RECOMMENDATIONS                                            FBiH                                                         RS


Auditing
Government to ensure that               Not implemented. Some efforts made to publish              Not implemented. AARS have published translations of ISA
institutions in charge of translation   accounting and auditing standards are made by the          in 2010. There is, however no continuous system for
make available updated translation      SRRF-FBiH but there is no continuous system for            translating ISA and the code of Ethics.
of ISA and Code of Ethics               translating ISA andthe code of Ethics.
Monitoring and Enforcement
Securities Commission to be             Not implemented. The Securities Commission has not         Partially implemented. The Securities Commission has
provided with additional resources      enough resources to supervise the financial statements     initiated some review of financial statements of issuers but
to step up monitoring and               of issuers.                                                was not allocated the necessary resources to broaden and
enforcement                                                                                        deepen that effort.
Financial Supervisors to take action    Not implemented.                                           Not implemented.
in case of material misstatement of     No public record of financial statements modified at the   No public record of financial statements modified at the
financial information and when          request of a financial supervisor.                         request of a financial supervisor.
relevant, require public correction
Education and training
BiH A&A Commission to conduct a         Partially implemented. The BiH A&A Commission reviews regularly the list of books that supports the curricula. The
review of the accounting curricula,     curricula are not updated.
reading lists and examination
strategies for updating them with
current needs




                                                                               13
