                                                                                 98305




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
CAPITAL MARKETS
TECHNICAL NOTE
JUNE 2015

This Technical Note was prepared in the context of a joint World Bank-IMF Financial Sector
Assessment Program mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina during October-November 2014 led
by Michael Edwards, World Bank and Sonia Munoz, IMF, and overseen by Finance and
Markets Global Practice, World Bank and the Monetary and Capital Markets Department,
IMF. The note contains technical analysis and detailed information underpinning the FSAP
assessment’s findings and recommendations. Further information on the FSAP program can
be found at www.worldbank.org/fsap.



                       THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                       FINANCE AND MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE
                                     i




                      Table of Contents                                 Page

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                      1
II. COUNTRY CONTEXT                                                       1
III. CAPITAL MARKETS OVERVIEW                                             2
IV. LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK                                        5
V. MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE                                                  8
VI. GOVERNMENT DEBT MARKETS                                              10
VII. NON GOVERNMENT BOND MARKETS                                         12
VIII. EQUITY MARKETS                                                     13
IX. INVESTMENT FUNDS                                                     17
X. OTHER INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS                                         23
XI. RECOMMENDATIONS BY ENTITY                                             1


TABLES
TABLE 1: KEY RECOMMENDATIONS                                               2
TABLE 2: KEY CAPITAL MARKET INDICATORS, US$ MILLIONS                       3
TABLE 3: OVERVIEW GOVERNMENT SECURITIES MARKETS                           10
TABLE 4: T-BILL AUCTION RESULTS – FEDERATION & RS                         11
TABLE 5: OVERVIEW: EQUITY MARKETS                                         13
TABLE 6: SASE/BLSE TOP 15 LISTED STOCKS – BY MARKET CAPITALIZATION        14
TABLE 7: OVERVIEW INVESTMENT FUNDS SECTOR                                 17
TABLE 8: SASE/BLSE CLOSED-END INVESTMENT FUNDS                            19

BOXES
BOX 1: THE CANADIAN SECURITIES ADMINISTRATORS (CSA)                        8
BOX 2: PIFS - EXPERIENCE OF OTHER TRANSITION COUNTRIES                    21



GRAPHS
GRAPH 1: BOSNIA AND REGIONAL MARKETS INDEX COMPARISONS (2006-Q3 2014)     4
GRAPH 2: TRADED VOLUMES AT SASE, BLSE, AND REGIONAL SES                  16
                                                ii




GLOSSARY


AUM        Assets Under Management
BiH        Bosnia and Herzegovina
BLSE       Banja Luka Stock Exchange
CBBH       Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina
CRS        Central Registry of Securities of the Republika Srpska
CSA        Canadian Securities Administrators
CSDs       Clearing, Settlement and Depository Institutions
DeMPA      Debt Management Performance Assessment Program
DVP        Delivery versus Payment
EC         European Commission
ECA        Europe and Central Asia Region
EU         European Union
FedMoF     Ministry of Finance of the Federation of BiH
FedSC      Securities Commission of the Federation of BiH
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
KM         Convertible Mark
NAV        Net Asset Value
OTC        Other the Counter
PIFs       Privatization Investment Funds
PREF       Pension Reserve Fund of the Republika Srpska
REPO       Repurchase Transaction
RSMoF      Ministry of Finance of the Republika Srpska
RSSC       Securities Commission of the Republika Srpska
SASE       Sarajevo Stock Exchange
UCITS      Undertakings for Collective Investments in Transferable Securities
WTO        World Trade Organization
                                                   1


     I.      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY1


1.     Bosnia’s capital markets are currently small, but they have the potential to play a more
important role in the country’s future. At present, the capital market in Bosnia represents a
small part of the financial system. And while many companies appear to be listed on the two
entity-level stock exchanges resulting from the mass privatization program undertaken in the late-
90s, in reality very few companies or institutions have actually used the securities markets to raise
capital to finance growth and expansion. However, the two entity-level governments have just
recently begun to issue treasury bonds and T-bills to finance their own budgetary needs. Going
forward, the government debt market will hopefully continue to expand and deepen so that it can
become a more meaningful source of funding for the governments’ own needs in both entities.

2.     The capital market played a key early role in BiH’s transition through facilitating
voucher privatization and enhancing transparency. However, the subsequent losses caused by
failed privatization investment funds (PIFs) have damaged investor trust and market development.
Having established the two entity-level stock exchanges in the late-90s to support the first stage of
the mass privatization program, the governments of both entities seem committed to using their
respective exchanges to create more transparency within the economy, a feature which
distinguishes Bosnia from other, less-transparent emerging markets. However, another key
element in the governments’ privatization strategy has proven less successful, namely, the decision
to establish so-called privatization funds as a means of providing investors with another way of
investing their vouchers, while encouraging the post-privatization restructuring of numerous
formerly public sector enterprises.

3.     Although a number of other transition countries also used privatization funds as part
of their voucher programs, in Bosnia’s case, most of these funds have failed to achieve any
meaningful restructurings of the firms in their portfolios. As these PIFs were set-up as closed-
end vehicles, investors today are unable to realize the little value that still remains in these funds.
This negative experience has been suffered by a very large number of PIF investors and has caused
severe damage to investor trust and confidence in the capital market generally and the fund
management sector in particular. Considerable thought has already been given to this issue in both
Entities, but so far no substantive progress has been made.

4.     Importantly, the legal and regulatory framework for the capital market is basically
sound, but the regulators lack the resources necessary for effective implementation. The two
capital markets in Bosnia are regulated at the Entity-level by two separate securities commissions,
one in Sarajevo and the other in Banja Luka, each with its own set of broadly similar laws and
regulations. The respective regulators have begun the process of adopting various EU directives
and protocols into their own legislation, with the result being a fairly sound and improving legal
framework, though a lot of further work still lies ahead. Both regulators have only a small number
of staff and thus lack the resources necessary to supervise the very large number of firms whose
shares are presently listed on the two exchanges or to effectively implement many of the rules and
regulations that are already in place. Currently there are no formal organizations in place for this
kind of cooperation, but going forward, it will be important for the regulators to work more closely
together to share the burden of developing new legislation and new instruments, etc.

5.    Although the government could use the stock market to privatize and recapitalize some
remaining large public sector companies, the privatization process in both entities is
currently stalled. In many advanced and emerging countries around the world, governments have

1
    This Technical Note was prepared by Timothy Brennan (World Bank, GFMDR).
                                                      2

used the domestic capital markets to facilitate the privatization of large public sector firms and to
raise substantial amounts of capital so these firms can continue to expand and prosper. It would be
advisable for both entity governments to consider engaging qualified financial and legal advisors
to develop a strategy for privatizing and recapitalizing some of these large, strategic SOEs using
either the domestic and/or global capital markets.

6.     For the capital market to develop in the medium term, much closer cooperation
between the entity-level regulators and the two stock exchanges will be essential. Given
Bosnia’s small population and the rather small size of its capital markets, there is a compelling case
for combining the two markets into a single, unified marketplace, but Bosnia’s current
constitutional framework would not allow this. As an alternative, Bosnia could follow a model
similar to what has been done in the EU - and is currently working well. In the EU, efforts were
made to link-up national exchanges and harmonize legislation and regulation across the entire
region, but without requiring any country to give up their national stock exchanges or their rights
to regulate their home markets. Instead, a so-called ‘passporting’ framework has been put in place
that allows for issuers, investors and market intermediaries to operate in ea ch other’s national
market, thereby creating a vastly larger ‘common’ market, without sacrificing any institutions or
independence.

7.      As the two entities already share the same currency and are adopting the same EU
Directives, it should be fairly straightforward to create an electronic link between the two
entity-level exchanges. However, for more complex regulatory matters that affect both entities, it
would be advisable to consider forming an association, similar to what Canada has done in
establishing the Canadian Securities Administrators, which brings together the provincial and
territorial securities regulators from all 14 of Canada’s provinces and territories.


Table 1: Key Recommendations
 Recommendations                                                              Responsibility        Time2
 Enhancing coordination and cooperation among key stakeholders
 Co-sponsor formation of a Canadian-style ‘Bosnia Securities                  FedSC, RSSC             I
 Regulatory Association’ to enhance coordination on regulatory
 matters.
 Co-sponsor formation of a ‘Capital Market Development Task Force’            FBiH: FedSC,            I
 to spearhead market development matters.                                     FedMoF,
                                                                              SASE,
                                                                              RS: RSSC,
                                                                              RSMoF, BLSE
    Supporting development of government debt markets
    Working through above groups to develop frameworks to enable              FBiH: FedSC,            I
    REPOs and OTC trading in the government securities market.                FedMoF,
                                                                              SASE,
                                                                              RS: RSSC,
                                                                              RSMoF, BLSE,
                                                                              and banks
    Develop framework (jointly with Banking Agency and Insurance              FedSC, RSSC,           NT
    Commission in FBiH and Banking Agency in RS) to allow for limited         FedMoF,
    holding of T-Bills as liquid reserve assets as this market continues to   RSMoF, banks,
    expand and deepen.                                                        Banking and



2
    I-Immediate” is within one year; “NT -near-term” is 1–3 years; “MT-medium-term” is 3–5 years.
                                                   3

                                                                            Insurance
                                                                            regulators
Improving transparency and the integrity of capital market data
Publish all capital market related laws, regulations and rulebooks, etc.    FBiH: FedSC,    NT
in both local and English languages.                                        SASE,
                                                                            RS: RSSC,
                                                                            BLSE
Create a separate category for all firms and institutions who are           FBiH: FedSC,    I
required to report share capital transactions to the exchange but who       SASE,
are not part of the capital market and clarify or amend rules related to    RS: RSSC,
this requirement.                                                           BLSE

Restoring investor trust and fostering growth of the institutional
investor base
Develop legislation for reform of the closed-end investment funds           FBiH: FedSC,
sector (in parallel with similar efforts in the RS) and implement           RS: RSSC
transformation of legacy PIFs to open-ended funds.                                          I


Expanding the size of the equity market and attracting more
investors
Government to consider engaging qualified advisors to develop a             FBiH:
strategy for privatizing and recapitalizing selected large and profitable   Federation
public sector enterprises via the capital market.                           Government,
                                                                            Privatization
                                                                                            I
                                                                            Agency, FedSC
                                                                            RS: RS
                                                                            Government,
                                                                            IDBRS, RSSC
Working through the joint groups above, link the two entity stock
exchanges and CSDs electronically and create an EU-style                    FBiH: FedSC,
‘passporting’ regime covering issuers, investors and market                 SASE,
                                                                                            NT
intermediaries.                                                             RS: RSSC,
                                                                            BLSE
                                                  1




    II.     COUNTRY CONTEXT


8.     Bosnia is a relatively small post-conflict transition country with a highly fragmented
and decentralized political structure. The 1995 Dayton Peace Agreement succeeded in ending
the Bosnian war, but resulted in a unique constitutional and governance structure that continues to
impede progress in a wide variety of areas, including the development of the domestic capital
market. Governance in Bosnia and Herzegovina is highly decentralized with each of the two main
constituent entities, the Federation of Bosnia Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska, having their
own National Assemblies, their own ministries of finance, their own securities commissions, stock
exchanges and a plethora of other separate entity-level institutions. In fact, only a small number of
institutions currently exist and operate at the state level, namely the Central Bank of Bosnia and
Herzegovina (‘CBBH’), the Deposit Insurance Agency, and certain other non-financial sector
related institutions.

9.     Bosnia has been compelled to undertake many of the same initial reforms which other
transition countries undertook. Although the break-up of the former Yugoslovia resulted in
several neighboring and more communally homogenous countries being established, including
Slovenia and Croatia, Bosnia’s transition was initially delayed by the onset of the Bosnian War
(1992-95) and it was only after the resolution of the conflict and the installation of a provisional
administration under United Nations auspices that the transition process could commence in
earnest. Important transition reforms undertaken in these early years included, inter alia, the
implementation of a mass voucher privatization scheme similar to that carried out in most other
transition economies which were part of the former Soviet Union.

10. While the first wave of privatizations was successful in several important respects,
many follow-on transition reforms have been impeded or delayed. In addition to transferring
a very substantial number of state-owned enterprises into full or partial private sector ownership,
the governments in both entities used the first stage of the privatization process as a basis for
creating the foundations for a modern, commercially-oriented capital market. In fact, the original
establishment of the Sarajevo Stock Exchange (‘SASE’) and Banja Luka Stock Exchange
(‘BLSE’), and various other capital market-related institutions was driven primarily by the desire
to provide individual citizens with a venue and mechanism through which they could channel the
vouchers distributed via the mass privatization program either into individual enterprises or into
specialized collective investment schemes or funds.

11. In addition to creating the respective entity-level stock exchanges, both governments
also fostered the creation of a series of so-called Privatization Investment Funds (‘PIFs’).
These PIFs which were set up specifically for the purpose of helping individuals to manage their
investments gained through the voucher program. Unfortunately, while the first stage of
privatization succeeded in creating several key capital market institutions and proved widely
popular, the process of implementing many other follow-on reforms has suffered from the
complexities associated with Bosnia’s fragmented politics and governance structure.

12. The impact of Bosnia’s stalled transition has been further magnified by a s eries of
subsequent macroeconomic and other events, many of which are beyond its control. Bosnia’s
unique political and governance structure and its delayed transition to a more efficient market-
based economy has precluded it from responding effectively to a wide range of major developments
over the past two decades. Examples include the EU expansion and integration process, the
reduction of trade and tariff barriers (and the drive for enhanced private sector competiveness)
                                                        2

resulting from successive WTO initiatives, the global financial crisis or more recent Euro-zone
crises and the growing acceptance of frontier and emerging market investments as a major asset
class. In short, instead of being well-positioned to respond to such events, Bosnia has been unable
to pursue bold reforms or even simpler initiatives which could contribute to its future growth and
prosperity. Against this backdrop, capital market development can only play a small part within a
much broader set of much-needed reforms.

13. Finally, as a small country with a still relatively small private sector, Bosnia faces
several significant structural obstacles which are likely to impede economic growth generally
and the development of its capital markets. Despite its recovery from a significant downturn in
2012, which saw GDP fall by 1.1%, Bosnia’s economic performance continues to lag behind many
neighboring countries in the region and remains well below expected growth among developing
countries as a whole. Some of the explanation for this below-average growth is due to a variety of
structural factors which include, among other things, a preponderance of small-scale enterprises
(roughly 75% of all firms have fewer than 10 employees)3, significant rigidities within the domestic
labor market, reduced competitiveness owing to high levels of youth unemployment, a ‘brain drain’
of talented people abroad, and a now much-weakened set of public sector firms due to Bosnia’s
delayed transition and its slow progress of implementing large-scale privatizations in some key
sectors like hydropower (in both entities) and telecommunications (in the Federation). Other
structural constraints include a still unreformed pensions system and the absence of other
institutional investors such as private sector pension schemes or life insurance companies.


       III.     CAPITAL MARKETS OVERVIEW


14. Bosnia’s capital markets are relatively small and still at a very nascent development
stage. The government securities market in both entities has recently begun to grow but it is still
relatively small in both absolute and relative terms and also highly illiquid. Although the RS and
Federation Governments have, for some time, been issuing long-dated treasury bonds in limited
denominations for the purpose of satisfying claims of individuals with blocked or frozen savings
accounts held before the breakup of the former Yugoslavia and likewise in exchange for ‘war
damage-related’ claims arising from the Bosnian War in 1992-95, the entity-level Ministries of
Finance only began issuing domestic treasury bonds and treasury bills for local budget financing
purposes in 2011.

15. Although the State is empowered to borrow domestically, to date it has not done so and
only the two entity governments have issued debt in the domestic market. At year-end 2013,
the level of outstanding domestic government debt/GDP stood at 3.65% of GDP for Bosnia as a
whole, which is not surprising given that the entities have only recently begun issuing for their own
requirements. By comparison, the ratio of domestic government debt/GDP in neighboring countries
such as Croatia or others in the ECA region like Hungary stood at 24.9 % and 45.7% respectively4.
Although both entities are still determining how best to conduct auctions and issuance generally,
the somewhat faster increase in total domestic debt outstanding in the RS may reflect a difference
in strategy in that the RS-MoF has been more willing than its counterparts in the Federation MoF
to satisfy excess demand at some of these initial auctions.

16. The non-government bond markets in both entities are of negligible size and the equity
markets in both entities are also small and under-developed. With only a handful of quoted

3
    Source: State Statistical Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The figures for both entities are very similar.
4
    World Bank, FinStat figures for 2012.
                                                                       3

stocks of meaningful size and a combined market capitalization of US$ 5.0 billion, Bosnia’s
reported equity market capitalization stands at 28% of GDP, which would place it below that of
some larger emerging market peers such as Croatia (38%) or Poland (36%) , but above others in
the region such as Serbia (20%), Slovenia (14%) of the Czech Republic (20%).5 Secondary market
turnover in all segments is also very low, and with the exception of the government debt market,
there have been virtually no new capital raisings undertaken within the past 2-3 years. The
following table highlights the slow growth and size of the capital markets in both entities:

Table 2: Key Capital Market Indicators, US$ millions
Table 1: Key Capital Market Indicators (US$ millions)
                                       2009                    2010        2011     2012             2013

Local Government Securities O/S
  RS                                       144                 161         174      246              434
  Fed B&H                                   28                 207         286      285              311

Non-Government Bonds O/S
 RS                                         17                  22         19       20                16
 Fed B&H                                   102                 102         102      102              n.a.

Equity Market Capitalization
  RS                                      2,814                2,489       2,404   2,382            2,462
  Fed B&H                                 4,552                4,408       2,511   2,598            2,717

Source: RS and Feb B&H Securities Commissions, BLSE and SASE


17. Like most other markets in the region, Bosnia’s two stock exchanges experienced a
major selloff around the time of the global financial crisis and have remained depressed since.
The period leading up to 2007/8 saw a substantial rise in both share prices and turnover volumes
on the Sarajevo and Banja Luka stock exchanges, as the charts below indicate. Since this period,
however, trading volumes and share prices have generally remained depressed. While the reasons
for this are varied, and undoubtedly reflect a general loss of interest in emerging markets on the
part of many foreign investors in the region, some of whom were more active in the Bosnian market
prior to the 2007/8 period, a range of other factors also lie behind the more recent subdued activity
of both the SASE and BLSE markets. Clearly, many local investors in the stock market suffered
huge losses as a result of the post-crisis selloff and virtually all market intermediaries consulted
attribute the currently depressed state of the markets to a loss of trust and confidence, especially on
the part of retail investors.

18. In addition, the downturn in economic growth and the continuing sense of political
uncertainty have also played a role in suppressing investor interest in the stock market. That
said, the currently depressed state of the markets in both entities also provides the authorities with
an opportunity to consider implementing selected reforms which would help to restore investors’
trust in the country’s capital markets. In the RS, the securities commission and the government
have already started work on a strategy for encouraging restructuring of the PIF sector, and in the
Federation, measures were introduced starting in 2011 to tighten the financial disclosure
requirements, particularly for listed companies not quoted on SASE’s official market. These

5
  The correct market capitalization figures for Bosnia are actually lower than the figures that are regularly
reported by the two entity-level exchanges. This is because certain joint stock companies, including some
that are not part of the capital market such as subsidiaries of foreign banks and insurance companies, are
required by law to list their share capital to the respective exchanges. Although the data reported by such
firms, in connection with increases in their capital for example, is merely notional, the exchanges still show
these firms as ‘listed companies’ along with a corresponding figure that reflects their ‘market
capitalization’. This practice is misleading and results in a n inflated value for the stock market as a whole.
                                                   4

measures have resulted in a significant number of de-listings on the Sarajevo exchange, which
partly explains the decline the number of listed companies noted in the table above. The following
graph highlights the extent of the selloff and subsequent lull in Bosnia and other neighboring
markets since 2006.




19. The legal and regulatory framework is relatively sound, but gaps exist in
implementation and cooperation between the two entity-level regulators could be improved.
The overall quality of securities market laws and regulations is fairly strong in both entities, largely
as a result of Bosnia’s gradual adoption of various EU market protocols and directives. However,
regulation and supervision is still primarily compliance rather than principle or ‘risk-based, and the
effective application of many rules and regulations is constrained by the low level of staffing and
other resources available to the regulators in both entities. In the Federation, the effectiveness and
independence of the securities regulator has been further compromised by the failure, since 2009,
to confirm the appointments of new commissioners due to a political deadlock between the main
parties.

20. Despite both entities sharing many common objectives, there has been surprisingly
little cooperation to date between key capital market stakeholders in the RS and Federation.
Moreover, no visible forums or venues have been created to foster more progress towards such
common goals. Without sacrificing any independence or institutions at entity-level, the RS and
Federation governments would be well-advised to create several informal associations or task
forces with the aim of advancing certain critical capital market reforms, including the further
harmonization of legal and regulatory frameworks, the forging of more effective linkages between
the securities markets in both entities and the restoration of investor trust in both entities’ stock
markets.

21. The capital market infrastructure in both entities is strong and the exchanges continue
to play an important role in enhancing transparency. Because of the RS and Federation
governments’ foresight in creating modern well-equipped stock exchanges and using these for the
                                                      5

mass privatization programs that ensued, the resulting transparency and requirements for ongoing
disclosure which exist today in Bosnia are quite exceptional, and compare favorably to other larger
transition markets such as Georgia or Vietnam, for example.6 Since the prolonged and currently
weak economic scenario and other structural impediments to growth represent a serious threat to
the sustainability of this valuable infrastructure, care should be taken to enhance its viability and
preserve it for the future.

22. To address the absence of an institutional investor base, and encourage the
development of the investment funds sector, the legacy problem of failed PIFs needs to be
resolved as a priority. Although the use of PIFs to help garner popular support for the initial
privatization program may be judged a success, the overwhelming consensus today is that most of
these vehicles have failed to deliver the returns or results that were envisioned at the time they were
established. As a result, overall investor trust and confidence in the capital market has been
seriously damaged, making the task of stimulating growth of the fund management sector that much
harder.

23. Finally, given gaps in the regulatory framework and the resource constraints which
both regulators face, the existing PIFs also present opportunities for market abuse and
manipulation which could harm a large number of small-scale investors. On both investor
protection and market development grounds, steps should be taken promptly to resolve these
institutions and/or convert them to open-ended vehicles. Subject to further analysis, one possible
way to do this might be to encourage the restructuring of existing closed-end PIFs into two separate
vehicles, one open-end fund which would hold the most liquid securities within the fund’s portfolio
and a corresponding joint stock company (with the same shareholders as the existing PIF) which
would hold any remaining and less liquid or immediately realizable investments. Such an approach
would allow existing PIF shareholders to realize at least part of the value of their investment should
they elect to do so.

    IV.       LEGAL AND REGULATORY FRAMEWORK


24. The legal regulatory framework for capital markets operates mainly at the entity level.
Each of the two main entities has its own laws and other enabling legislation governing the
establishment and day to day operations of its respective securities regulator. In the Federation,
the securities market is regulated by The Securities Commission of the Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina ( ‘FedSC’) which was established in 1998 pursuant to the Federation BiH Securities
Market Act. In the Republika Srpska, the market is regulated by The Republic of Srpska Securities
Commission (‘RSSC’) which was established in 1999 pursuant to The Law on Securities of the
Republika Srpska. The two entity-level Securities Market Acts provide the respective securities
commissions with broad authority to regulate all core aspects of the capital market, however,
virtually all of the more detailed provisions pertaining to capital market activities and regulation
are contained in the respective by-laws, rulebooks or regulations issued by each of the regulators.

25. The respective entity-level laws call for commissioners to be confirmed by the
respective entity parliaments, thereby subjecting the process to potential political delays. In

6
   In Georgia, for example, the requirements for joint stock companies to report their results and file
financial statements with a centralized agency were weakened significantly with the repeal of certain laws
in 2007 and today, it is virtually impossible to obtain financial information on private sector firms in the
country. In Vietnam, there were no requirements for companies privatized during Vietnam’s mass
privatization to file financial statements or list on the country’s two stock exchanges and today there are
more shares traded outside the official securities markets than on the exchanges.
                                                 6

both the Federation and the RS, commissioners serve for a 5 year term and are appointed by the
respective entity-level parliamentary bodies, acting upon the recommendation of the entity
governments concerned. In the Federation, there is a provision requiring that, in making new
appointments, at least two commissioners from the previous government appointment cycle must
remain in office, presumably with the aim of protecting, to an extent, the commission’s
independence from overt political influence. In practice, however, this does not always work as
envisioned, as is evident in the case of the Federation today, where there are only three
commissioners in office at present, two having stepped-down earlier. All three of the remaining
commissioners are, in fact, appointees from the 2004 cycle of government appointments. The new
commissioners that should have been confirmed in 2009 by the Parliament of the Federation have
still not been confirmed owing to an apparent deadlock between rival political parties.

26. As a consequence, the commission’s overall effectiveness as a regulator is compromised
and to ensure its ability to continue operating, the Federation SC has had to seek a court
ruling empowering the existing members to continue acting pro tem, until the expected new
appointments have been confirmed. To guard against this happening again, it appears that a
provision along this line has subsequently been inserted into the Federation’s Securities Law.
Interestingly, recent revisions to Article 246 of the Securities Law in the RS also provide for this
kind of a possibility by empowering the existing members of the commission to continue acting
until such time as new members have been confirmed.

27. The overall quality of the laws and regulations in both entities is fairly sound and has
been gradually improving partly as a result of the EU integration process. Since both entities
are essentially compelled by the EU integration process to gradually adopt a wide-ranging series
of EU directives and similar legislation, extensive work on this lengthy agenda has already
commenced and the results are clearly apparent today throughout the legal and regulatory
framework in both entities. In both the Federation and the RS, for example, recent revisions to the
Securities Act and other related regulations have sought to enshrine various key elements of the
EU Prospectus Directive, thereby facilitating private placement transactions to qualified
institutional investors and likewise, a series of revisions to the respective entities’ Laws on
Investment Funds have sought to incorporate key elements of the UCITS framework, which
governs collective investment schemes and fund management activities within the EU.

28. Only a portion of the laws and regulations which govern the capital market are
available in both English and local language versions. While some of these laws and regulations
pertaining to the capital market are currently available on the Federation SC’s and RSSC’s
websites, neither regulator has yet published all relevant documents on their respective websites in
both the local and English languages. This is something which both regulators should do as soon
as practicable, particularly if they wish to advance progress on EU integration and attract more
foreign portfolio investment flows in the future.

29. Despite having a fairly comprehensive regulatory framework, the securities
commissions in both entities lack the staff and resources necessary for truly effective
implementation. At present, the RSSC employs a total of only 14 staff, while the Federation
Securities Commission is staffed by just 19 persons. In both cases, these figures also include the
President and commissioners of the respective regulators, which in practice, means that only a small
handful of senior professionals are available on a day-to-day basis to undertake ongoing
monitoring, supervision and enforcement activities. The commissions are financed strictly through
fees levied on market participants and not by their respective governments. As a consequence,
oversight and supervision today in both entities is relatively limited and appears to be primarily
compliance-based rather than principal or risk-based in nature. This is potentially a source of
concern given the relatively large number of firms whose securities are listed on the respective
                                                      7

entities’ stock exchanges. Even though the prevailing legal frameworks in each of the entities do
not explicitly confer any self-regulatory obligations on institutions such as the BLSE and SASE, in
practice, both securities commissions seem to rely on the two entity-level stock exchanges to share
some the burden of ongoing monitoring and supervision of listed companies, a role which the two
exchanges seem well-equipped to play, though they too are thinly staffed and have limited budgets.

30. The current level of coordination between the two entity-level regulators appears to be
limited and should be strengthened. This is particularly important in the context of advancing
the EU integration process7, since a fundamental premise of this process is that the two entities will
ultimately need to adopt very similar legislation and protocols as a condition of joining the union.
While the legal and regulatory frameworks that currently exist have already been harmonized to a
reasonable degree, there are still gaps in the prevailing configuration. One of these concerns the
current absence of a so-called ‘passporting’ framework or ‘home-host’ recognition scheme that
would enable a market intermediary licensed by the securities market regulator in his/her ‘home’
market to be automatically granted recognition within the other regulator’s jurisdiction.

31. ‘Passporting’ is by now a well-established concept that has been operating quite
effectively throughout the EU. Its introduction has enabled brokers, fund managers, corporate
finance advisors and other licensed intermediaries to seek out business opportunities and operate
in a much bigger and deeper market than would be the case if they were forced to obtain separate
licenses from each of the countries within the EU block. In Bosnia’s case, there are a number of
large foreign-owned banks who could play a very significant role in helping to deepen the capital
market (and especially the government securities markets) in both entities particularly given the
overall small size of the respective capital markets in each entity. This is just one example of an
area where greater coordination between the two entity-level regulators would contribute to market
development. Other key topics such as the regular sharing of information on suspected fraud or
money laundering activities or the parallel adoption of similar directives and other EU legislation
are further examples of topics that would clearly benefit from closer coordination, but unfortunately
there does not appear to be a permanent forum or venue where this kind of collaboration can take
place today.

32. While Bosnia’s constitutional set-up limits the range of feasible options, there is nothing
to preclude the two securities regulators from jointly creating an informal association for the
purpose of enhancing coordination between their respective organizations. One possible
model for how this might work in practice is the Canadian case, which is described in greater detail
in Box 1 below. Interestingly, with respect to securities market regulation, Canada has a
configuration that is quite similar to the prevailing set-up in Bosnia, with capital market regulation
taking place at the provincial and territorial level rather than at the state-level. Given that
precondition, the Canadian Securities Administrators (‘CSA’) was established as an informal body
jointly sponsored by the respective regulators in each of Canada’s provinces and territories. Given
the challenges of market development which Bosnia currently faces, a similar approach aimed at
enhancing cooperation between the RSSC and Federation SC is worthy of serious consideration.



7
  In its 2014 Progress Review, the European Commission made it clear that Bosnia’s accession would
continue to be delayed (or the process would remain suspended as is currently the case) unless significant
tangible progress is made on strengthening cooperation between government agencies in the two entities
and demonstrating progress towards the creation of what the EC refers to as a ‘single economic space’
within the country as a whole. Creating a joint regulatory association for the capital markets and linking the
two entity stock exchanges together would certainly represent a step in this direction. For further
background, see: European Commission, ‘Bosnia and Herzegovina: 2014 Progress Report, Commission
Staff Working Document’, EC Brussels, October 2014..
                                                  8

Box 1: The Canadian Securities Administrators (CSA)
 The 10 provinces and 3 territories in Canada are responsible for securities regulations. Securities
 regulators from each province and territory have teamed up to form the Canadian Securities
 Administrators, or CSA for short. The CSA is primarily responsible for developing a harmonized
 approach to securities regulation across the country.

 The CSA brings provincial and territorial securities regulators together to share ideas and work
 at designing policies and regulations that are consistent across the country and ensure the smooth
 operation of Canada's securities industry. By collaborating on rules, regulations and other
 programs, the CSA helps avoid duplication of work and streamlines the regulatory process for
 companies seeking to raise investment capital and others working in the investment industry. In
 recent years, the CSA has developed the “passport system" through which a market participant
 has access to markets in all passport jurisdictions by dealing only with its principal regulator and
 complying with one set of harmonized laws. It is a major step forward in improving Canada’s
 securities regulatory system by providing market participants with streamlined access to
 Canada’s capital markets. The CSA's impact on most Canadians comes through its efforts to
 help educate Canadians about the securities industry, the stock markets and how to protect
 investors from investment fraud and market abuse generally.

 As an informal body, the CSA functions through meetings, conference calls and day to day
 cooperation among the securities regulatory authorities. The CSA Chairs meet quarterly in
 person and by-weekly by conference call through meetings of the Policy Coordination
 Committee.

 Source: CSA website (www.securities-administrators.ca)


    V.      MARKET INFRASTRUCTURE


33. The stock exchange platforms and supporting infrastructure in both entities are well-
established and appear to be working efficiently and effectively. Compared to many other small
frontier and emerging markets, the range, quality and timeliness of the information that is available
on the websites of both the Banja Luka Stock Exchange (‘BLSE’) and the Sarajevo Stock Exchange
(‘SASE’) is remarkably good and both organizations appear committed to making continuous
improvements as and when needed.

34. The central registries in both entities are also well-established and appear to be
working efficiently, though there are certain areas where improvements could be made.
Clearing and settlement of all transactions in securities traded through the BLSE is undertaken by
the Central Registry of Securities (‘CRS’) in the Republika Srpska. In the Federation, all securities
traded on SASE are cleared and settled through The Securities Registry of the Federation of BiH
(‘SRFed’). Both CSDs were established as joint stock companies under the auspices of the
Federation and RS Securities Market Laws and have diversified ownership structures sufficient to
ensure that they are able to operate independently from the exchanges in the respective entities.
Since all categories of securities, both government and non-government debt instruments as well
as equities, are required to be traded on the stock exchanges in the respective entities, the clearing
and settlement of all securities trading is consequently done in a single venue which is more
efficient than having multiple CSDs in a country of Bosnia’s size. In both entities, settlement takes
place on a T+3 basis, however, there is a requirement for broker prefunding on T+2, which
effectively means true DVP (delivery versus payment) is not available today for trading through
                                                     9

the SASE or BLSE. This is a shortcoming which has reportedly been brought to the exchanges’
attention by some global custodians and it would thus be advisable to address this with the aim of
ensuring DVP, especially if Bosnia wishes to attract more foreign investment flows in the future.

35. While the practice of encouraging all types of securities to be traded on the exchange
may seem efficient, this approach can sometimes impede market development and
innovation. Although it may appear to be more efficient, especially in a small market like
Bosnia’s, to encourage all types of securities to be traded through the stock exchange, in some
cases, this approach can also impede the growth of the market.8 Since government debt securities
are traded in most advanced and emerging markets on an OTC basis and not through a stock
exchange, the idea of encouraging OTC trading of bonds in both entities would make sense to
consider, provided there are stringent requirements for post-trade transparency, similar to those
which already exist for certain types of large block trades. The argument for facilitating more OTC
trading of government debt instruments is that large banks would be very reluctant to enter the
secondary market in any meaningful way if their trades have to be routed through local brokers and
signaled immediately to the market as a whole, instead of being reported on an ex-post basis as is
common in most jurisdictions where OTC trading is permitted.

36. The authorities should encourage BLSE and SASE to explore solutions to electronically
link with each other and then extend this to include linkages with other stock exchanges
throughout the region. Given the relatively small size of each Entity’s capital market today, there
is a compelling argument for creating a seamless link between the two Entity-level stock exchanges
and a similar framework for enabling inter-depositary transfers so that investors from each of the
Entities can more easily trade on the other’s market. Interestingly, the BLSE already appears to be
exploring solutions which would establish an electronic order routing connection between the
exchange and brokers in Banja Luka and their counterparts at the Montenegro Stock Exchange,
thereby facilitating trading in each other’s market, and likewise, SASE is currently working on an
order routing project with the Istanbul Stock Exchange (who have an approximately 15%
shareholding in SASE) that would enable investors in both markets to use their local brokers to
access the other’s market. SASE is also working on a separate project which would create a futures
instrument based on SASE’s main index that can be traded on the Istanbul Stock Exchange, subject
to approval from the Turkish Capital Markets Board. While these regional initiatives are laudable,
it would arguably make more sense for the two Entity exchanges to start by linking up with one
another, if only to demonstrate some tangible progress towards the EU requirement for creation of
a ‘single economic space’.

37. Instead of ‘ad hoc’ initiatives like those above, it may be advisable to establish a special
joint task force that would focus specifically on capital market development. Given the desire
of all stakeholders to encourage the development of the capital market it would be worthwhile to
consider jointly the establishment of a standing or more permanent Capital Market Development
Task Force that would bring together all key parties in both Entities who are keen to see the capital
market develop. Ideally, such a group would include the two entity-level stock exchanges, the
ministries of finance and privatization agencies in both Entities, both securities commissions, as
well as leading banks and other key private sector players who would benefit from a bigger and
more vibrant securities market. If an organization like this were to be formed and its mandate and
priorities clearly articulated, it is possible that funding and technical assistance to help strengthen
the domestic capital market could be available from donors or IFIs.

8
   . According to market participants, an effort to enable OTC trading was undertaken last year in the
Federation but unfortunately, this worthwhile initiative which might have helped to stimulate some trading
in the Federation’s still nascent T -bill market, seems to have been abandoned owing to the exchange and
the regulator’s insistence on a role for local brokers.
                                                   10




    VI.      GOVERNMENT DEBT MARKETS


38. The government securities market in BiH is still relatively small but it is gradually
beginning to grow and deepen. The State Debt Law 2004 gives the State the power to borrow in
the domestic market to meet its own budgetary needs and those of both entities, however, to date it
has not done so and instead, all borrowings within the domestic market have been carried out by
the respective entity-level ministries of finance. Although the governments in both entities have
been issuing treasury bonds in small denominations and limited amounts for a number of years in
exchange for claims of citizens whose savings accounts were ‘frozen’ at the time of the breakup of
the former Yugoslavia and to satisfy war damage claims associated with the conflict in 1992-95, it
is only more recently that the entity-level governments have turned to the domestic debt market in
order to finance their own requirements. These new borrowing programs began in 2011 and since
this period the volume of outstanding government paper in the Federation and the RS has gradually
begun to expand. As of 2013, the ratio of total domestic government debt to GDP (taking into
consideration the outstanding debt of both entities) stood at 3.65 % which is relatively low by
comparison to most of Bosnia’s peers. The recent growth in Bosnia’s government securities market
is highlighted in the following table.

Table 3: Overview Government Securities Markets
Overview: Government Securities Markets
(All figures in US$ millions)                      2008        2009        2010        2012        2013

Treasury Bonds O/S
  Federation BiH                                     28         207         286         285         311
  RS                                                144         161         139         200         350

Treasury Bills O/S
  Federation BiH                                                             90           0          80
  RS                                                                         35          46          85

Source: SASE, BLSE, Federation MoF, and RS MoF



39. Both entity-level governments have been receiving extensive support from the World
Bank’s Debt Management Performance Assessment (‘DeMPA’) program in order to help
strengthen their debt management capabilities.9 This technical assistance has been delivered
separately to the respective entities’ public debt management units which are located with the
Federation and RS Ministries of Finance and, among other things, has included a detailed
assessment of areas where existing debt management policies and procedures can be further
improved. Given that both entities have only recently started to issue debt instruments in the
domestic market, this support has been particularly helpful and both of the entity-level debt
management units seem committed to implementing the initial recommendations that were made



9
  For additional background, see separate reports published for each entity: Subnational Debt Management
Performance Assessment (SN-DeMPA)for Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, March 2013 and
Subnational Debt Management Performance Assessment (SN-DeMPA), April 2014; (both World Bank)
(http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/debt/brief/dempa)
                                                                        11

earlier this year. This includes the development of a comprehensive Medium Term Debt Strategy,
although work on this has not yet begun in either Entity.

40. A reliable yield curve has not yet emerged, and it is possible that the yield curves for
the two entities may differ slightly given investors’ risk perceptions. Efforts to develop a yield
curve and a set of reliable benchmarks have been complicated by disparities between the yields that
the Federation has so far achieved in the auctions it has conducted and those conducted by the RS
Ministry of Finance. Since there is virtually no secondary market trading of T -bills, the only data
that is available for the purpose of constructing a yield curve are the yields obtained in the auctions
conducted to date. One of the challenges highlighted by several banks who have been active
bidders at auctions in both Entities is the disparity in the yields at which the two entities have been
issuing. The other factor that may be contributing to the disparity between yields in the two entities
concerns the different approach to satisfying any excess demand. In the Federation, while every
auction of T-bills has been heavily over-subscribed, the Federation treasury has never satisfied any
of this excess demand by issuing more paper, whereas in the RS, the ministry’s approach has been
different: some but not all auctions have been oversubscribed and the RS MoF has occasionally
increased the total volume it issues to meet demand. The table below sets out the experience of
both entities in their initial auctions of T-Bills.



Table 4: T-Bill Auction Results – Federation & RS
 Security                              Maturity        Amount        Amount      Average                Max.       Bid
  Type      Maturity   Issue   date     Date           Planned      collected     Yield    Min. Yield   Yield    amount       Coverage
                                                   Federation of B&H
  T-bills     6M        9/28/2011     3/28/2012       65,000,000    64,255,541    2.32%      1.01%      2.51%   104,510,000     1.61
  T-bills     6M        09.11.2011.    5/9/2012       25,000,000    24,714,959    2.31%      1.79%      2.90%    35,750,000     1.43
  T-bills     6M         2/28/2012     8/29/2012      20,000,000    19,758,710    2.45%      2.30%      2.70%   36,690,000      1.83
  T-bills     6M         3/27/2012     9/26/2012      25,000,000    24,718,996    2.28%      2.00%      2.40%   32,210,000      1.29
  T-bills     6M         4/24/2012    10/24/2012      15,000,000    14,836,858    2.21%      2.10%      2.30%   43,200,000      2.88
  T-bills     6M        11/27/2012     5/29/2013      30,000,000    29,696,600    2.05%      1.98%      2.13%   79,720,000      2.66
  T-bills     6M        12/11/2012     6/12/2012      30,000,000    29,702,723    2.01%      1.85%      2.05%   61,930,000      2.06
  T-bills     6M        3/19/2013     9/18/2013       30,000,000    29,720,305    1.89%      1.80%      1.95%    79,980,000     2.67
  T-bills     6M         9/3/2013      3/5/2014       30,000,000    29,740,351    1.75%      1.65%      1.80%   132,270,000     4.41
  T-bills     9M        9/17/2013     6/18/2014       20,000,000    19,792,562    1.40%      1.29%      1.49%    84,210,000     4.21

                                                   Republic of Srpska
  T-bills     6M         5/11/2011    11/11/2011       30,000,000   35,558,640    2.48%      2.20%      4.99%    83,918,686     2.80
  T-bills     9M         6/20/2011     3/20/2012       29,000,000   27,638,686    3.20%      2.00%      5.00%    65,113,114     2.25
  Bond         7Y       11/15/2011    11/15/2018      120,000,000   61,791,010    6.84%      5.06%      7.87%   107,540,854     0.90
  T-bills     8M        11/29/2011     7/30/2012       36,500,000   15,289,195    4.10%      4.01%      4.66%    24,989,195     0.68
  T-bills     6M        12/15/2011     6/15/2012       21,000,000    9,835,080    3.36%      3.36%      5.50%    12,950,801     0.62
  T-bills     6M        3/27/2012     9/27/2012       35,000,000    26,699,959    3.51%      3.02%      4.90%   40,409,363      1.15
  Bond        7Y        4/26/2012     4/26/2019       30,000,000    23,500,000    6.00%      6.00%      7.00%   43,101,700      1.44
  Bond        7Y        6/27/2012     6/27/2019        6,500,000     6,500,000    6.00%      6.00%      6.00%   10,500,000      1.62
  T-bills     6M        7/18/2012     1/18/2013       25,000,000    24,605,000    3.20%      3.51%      2.91%   31,011,633      1.24
  T-bills     9M        8/22/2012     5/22/2013       17,500,000    17,062,500    3.44%      3.51%      3.41%   29,736,015      1.70
  T-bills     6M        10/1/2012      4/2/2013       27,000,000    26,622,000    2.85%      2.50%      3.30%   35,525,571      1.32
  T-bills     12M       1/21/2013     1/21/2014       25,000,000    24,080,000    3.83%      2.50%      3.91%   36,933,933      1.48
  T-bills     6M        3/28/2013     9/27/2013       27,000,000    52,194,197    3.98%      2.70%      4.08%   62,164,140      2.30
  T-bills     6M         4/15/2013    10/15/2013      27,000,000    20,103,325    3.96%      3.70%      4.10%   29,919,620      1.11
  T-bills     12M        5/23/2013     5/23/2014      24,500,000    21,557,108    4.20%      2.51%      4.20%   21,607,772      0.88
  T-bills     6M         9/26/2013     3/27/2014      53,000,000    52,167,900    3.22%      2.95%      5.00%   116,347,450     2.20
  T-bills     6M        12/23/2013     6/24/2014      21,000,000    20,784,288    2.08%      1.88%      3.68%    51,913,093     2.47

Source: RBB Treasury

41. While the first few auctions saw the respective governments issuing at yields that were
relatively high, this has gradually come down and is now much closer to prevailing bank
deposit rates. As the above table indicates, the yields initially offered on T-bill issuances in both
entities were fairly high, particularly when compared to the corresponding rates available on bank
deposits of similar maturities at the major, mostly foreign-owned commercial banks located in both
                                                     12

entities. In the case of the Federation, this certainly appears to have elicited substantial demand for
T-bills on the part of many bidders, the vast majority of whom were local banks who are otherwise
highly liquid at present, but over time, the yields on successive T-bill auctions appear to be coming
down steadily. This is a favorable sign and suggests the T-bill market, while still in its infancy, is
already beginning to develop.

42. Efforts to enable REPO transactions and OTC market trading of bonds in both entities
have recently stalled, partly due to lack of familiarity with such instruments. Although the
regulators and leading market intermediaries in both entities have reportedly discussed the
development of these and other new instruments and/or markets, it appears that the RS may be
slightly further ahead in considering a framework for REPO transactions. As mentioned
previously, it also appears that some consideration has already been given to allowing OTC trading
of government bonds in the Federation, however, efforts by a group of leading banks to promote
this idea with the Federation SC were eventually abandoned when it became apparent that the
rational and premise for creating an OTC market was not well understood by some of the key
stakeholders concerned. Since innovations like these could make a significant contribution to
developing the government debt market in particular, it will be important to continue pursuing
such efforts while at the same time working to educate all of the parties involved. A good place to
do this would be through the proposed joint Capital Market Development Task Force also
mentioned above.


      VII.    NON GOVERNMENT BOND MARKETS


43. The non-government bond market in Bosnia is negligible in size and the few issues that
have been reported appear to be negotiated transactions involving only one or two lenders.
In Banja Luka, for example, the only bond issues which appear in the RSSC’s list of transactions
for 2013 are a KM 10 million public offering of bonds by a local bank, which was fully subscribed,
and a KM 6 million private placement of bonds for a corporate issuer which was 75% subscribed.
Anecdotal evidence and discussions with market participants suggest that these issues should
probably not be classified as capital market transactions per se, but instead are bi-laterally
negotiated loans that have been routed through the stock exchange solely for disclosure or statutory
reporting purposes. The situation appears to be similar in the Federation where in recent years
there have been a number of corporate issuers who have issued debt securities in relatively small
amounts with the paper being subscribed solely by one or two domestic banks.

44. The future growth potential of the corporate bond market in Bosnia faces a variety of
constraints, many of which are structural and thus difficult to change. The most significant of
these constraints concerns the predominance of SMEs within the domestic economy, which is
evident from the fact that close to 75% of all firms in both entities employ fewer than 10 people10.
In practice, corporate bond markets tend to be accessible mainly by much larger firms who need to
look beyond the commercial banking sector for long-term funding. But there are very few such
larger firms in Bosnia today. Other impediments to developing the local corporate bond market in
Bosnia include a highly liquid domestic banking sector, the large presence of foreign-owned banks
in both entities, the lack of any major capital expenditure plans among most government-owned
companies and the absence of a meaningful institutional investor base (save for a still nascent
insurance industry). These constraints are apparent in both entities. In the Federation, it also
appears that commercial banks are effectively precluded from participating in corporate bond issues


10
     State Statistical Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
                                                     13

due to restrictions imposed by the Banking Agency which limits the total unsecured exposure to
any single borrower or group of companies to not more than 5.0% of a bank’s core capital.

45. The uncertain financial condition of most municipal or sub-national issuers represents
a further constraint on growth of the non-government debt market. While a handful of
municipalities or other sub-national agencies and organizations have recently issued debt securities
in both the Federation and RS markets,11 it is unlikely that significant growth in the non-government
bond market will come from such issuers.


     VIII. EQUITY MARKETS


46. Bosnia’s equity market is currently fragmented and comprises two separate stock
exchanges located in each of the entities. As a consequence of Bosnia’s unique constitutional
set-up which devolved the responsibility for creating securities markets legislation and institutions
to the entity-level governments, Bosnia currently has two separate stock exchanges , namely The
Sarajevo Stock Exchange (‘SASE’) and The Banja Luka Stock Exchange (‘BLSE’). Both
exchanges were originally set-up in 2001 as joint stock companies, but until approximately 2008,
only trading members were allowed to be shareholders of the respective exchanges. Subsequently,
non-members were also allowed to become shareholders, so in effect both exchanges have been
demutualized since 2008. ). Shareholders of the exchanges include a reasonably diverse mixture
of commercial banks and local brokerage firms and, in the case of the Sarajevo Stock Exchange, a
minority stake of approximately 15% is also held by the Istanbul Stock Exchange and related
parties.

47. The stock markets in both entities are fairly small in terms of market capitalization but
they include a very large number of listed companies. The BLSE and SASE, were actually
established in 2001 as a key element in the government’s mass privatization program with the
primary aim of providing a mechanism through which citizens could invest directly or indirectly in
the large number of state-owned enterprises that the respective entity governments had earmarked
for privatization. As a result, the number of companies whose shares are currently listed on the
BLSE and SASE is quite large for an economy of Bosnia’s size, though the vast majority of these
firms are very small enterprises that one would not typically expect to find quoted on the stock
market. Although the total number of listed companies on both exchanges was originally much
higher, this figure has been declining gradually as many of these smaller, formerly public sector
firms have either been liquidated or sold off to interested buyers. Current and historical figures for
both stock exchanges are highlighted below




Table 5: Overview: Equity Markets




11
    To date, most of these issues have been quite small and it is generally presumed that the municipalities
in both the Federation and the RS are in a weak financial condition
                                                                               14
Overview: Equity Markets
                                                                               2008                2009               2010               2012          2013

Stock Market Capitalalization (US$ millions)
  Federation BiH                                                               4423                4301               2403               2485          2607
  RS                                                                           2714                2408               2316               2290          2362

Number of Listed Companies
  Federation BiH                                                                 516                518                 139               166          250
  RS                                                                             825                821                 791               743          681

Source: SASE and BLSE




48. Except for a few large companies, there is very little or no trading today in the vast
majority of shares that are quoted on both stock exchanges. At present, there are only 5 firms
listed on SASE that have a market capitalizations in excess of US$ 100 million, which would be
considered quite small by the standards of most foreign portfolio investors, and only 3 companies
of similar size that are quoted today on the BLSE. As the tables below indicate, both markets are
also quite illiquid to the extent that the average daily turnover, even in the shares of these very
large-cap firms, is minimal. In the Federation and the RS, this is partly attributable to the fact that
both governments have been reluctant to reduce its holdings in these so-called ‘strategic’ or major
firms to any meaningful extent, meaning the free-float in such is negligible or possibly limited to
those shares which were distributed earlier in the voucher privatization program, It is also worth
noting that none of the 5 largest firms listed on SASE are included in the exchange’s top tier
segment or so-called ‘Official Market’, which naturally has more stringent reporting and disclosure
requirements, despite the fact that some of these predominantly government-owned companies are
widely regarded as the Federation’s leading and most important strategic enterprises.

Table 6: SASE/BLSE Top 15 Listed Stocks – by market capitalization
Sarajevo Stock Exchange (SASE)
Top 15 Listed Stocks - by Market Capitalization
(All figures in US$)                                                      Annual                Avg
                                              Market Cap                 Turnover         Daily Turnover                                Sector

BH Telecom d.d. Sarajevo                            $803,257,696            $3,848,529              $15,581         Telecommunication
JP Elektroprivreda BIH dd Sarajevo                  $384,232,519            $1,061,841               $4,299         Electricity production
JP Elektroprivreda HZHB Mostar                      $144,856,968            $1,780,408               $7,208         Electricity production
JP HT dd Mostar                                     $129,943,742              $307,303               $1,244         Telecommunication
Tvornica cementa Kakanj dd Kakanj                   $129,732,633              $164,758                 $667         Production of concrete
Bosnalijek d.d. Sarajevo                             $47,981,414           $11,141,225              $45,106         Pharmaceutical industry
Energopetrol dd Sarajevo                             $34,765,329               $64,920                 $263         Oil retail
Fabrika duhana Sarajevo dd Sarajevo                  $34,070,825            $1,659,779               $6,720         Tobacco production and sale
Energoinvest d.d. Sarajevo                           $23,469,071              $204,290                 $827         Ingeneering and projects
BNT-TMiH d.d. Novi Travnik                           $19,601,965                  $239                   $1         Machine production
Klas d.d. Sarajevo                                   $19,374,125                  $435                   $2         Food production
Ozon d.d. Travnik                                    $18,443,038                    $0                   $0         Winter tourism
PBS dd Sarajevo                                      $17,457,342              $826,685               $3,347         Banking
Sarajevo osiguranje dd Sarajevo                      $17,013,210              $129,487                 $524         Insurance dealing
Elektro grupa d.d. Jajce                             $15,177,671            $1,919,364               $7,771         Electricity production

Notes: Shares of foreign banks (ie. Unicredit, Intessa SanPaolo and Sparkasse removed from list as should not be included as part of capital market)
Source: SASE
                                                                  15

Banja Luka Stock Exchange
Top 15 Listed Stocks - by Market Capitalization
(All figures in US$)                                          Annual              Avg
                                              Market Cap     Turnover       Daily Turnover                         Sector

TELEKOM SRPSKE AD BANJA LUKA                  $567,907,168     $7,720,083          $31,255   Telecommunications
HIDROELEKTRANE NA DRINI AD VIŠEGRAD           $124,580,783       $112,141             $454   Production of electricity
HIDROELEKTRANE NA TREBIŠNJICI AD TREBINJE     $114,543,663       $244,185             $989   Production of electricity
NOVA BANKA AD BANJA LUKA                       $39,174,082       $423,242           $1,714   Banking
R I TE UGLJEVIK AD UGLJEVIK                    $37,887,356       $145,133             $588   Production of electricity
R I TE GACKO AD GACKO                          $33,738,129        $75,928             $307   Production of electricity
HIDROELEKTRANE NA VRBASU AD MRKONJIĆ GRAD      $29,934,202       $112,163             $454   Production of electricity
RAFINERIJA ULJA AD MODRIČA                     $25,812,029        $30,829             $125   Manufacture refined petroleum products
ELEKTROKRAJINA AD BANJA LUKA                   $14,306,292        $89,645             $363   Distribution and trade of electricity
ELEKTRO DOBOJ AD DOBOJ                         $13,157,552        $99,048             $401   Distribution and trade of electricity
KRAJINA GP AD BANJA LUKA                       $12,729,049        $20,402              $83   General construction/civil engineering
BANJALUČKA PIVARA AD BANJA LUKA                $12,503,038        $13,104              $53   Manufacture of beer
VODOVOD AD BANJA LUKA                          $12,485,469            $38               $0   Purification and distribution of water
ZTC BANJA VRUĆICA AD TESLIĆ                    $11,365,682        $41,668             $169   Hospital activities
SHP CELEX AD BANJA LUKA                        $11,263,245             $0               $0   Manufacture of paper and paperboard


Source: BLSE




49. Turnover on both exchanges has fallen very significantly compared to the period prior
to 2007, and like other neighboring markets in the region, trading volumes remain subdued.
Although at current turnover levels, it would be extremely difficult, or would certainly take a very
long time for an institutional investor to accumulate or dispose of a position of any meaningful size
in even the largest companies on both exchanges, the markets have not always been so illiquid.
Volumes on both the SASE and BLSE were substantially higher prior to the huge selloff that
occurred in 2007, as the graphs below indicate. Also notable below, is the fact that trading volumes
on other neighboring exchanges in Belgrade and Zagreb have been similarly depressed.
                                                    16

Graph 2: Traded volumes at SASE, BLSE, Zagreb and Belgrade Stock Exchange




50. There have been virtually no new issues in the primary market for several years and in
practice the exchanges do not really serve as platforms for companies to raise new capital.
Although there are a large number of firms that are listed on both stock exchanges, including a
handful of big companies, and the overall market capitalization figures reported on the exchanges’
websites convey the impression that Bosnia has an equity market of considerable size, in reality,
this is quite misleading. Virtually all of the firms that are quoted on the two stock exchanges today
represent companies that were either required to: (i) have their shares listed as part of the
government’s mass privatization program but have never used the capital market to raise any
money, or (ii) closely held companies or foreign financial institutions that were required to list their
shares on the stock market simply because they had undertaken an increase in their paid-in capital12.
While the listing of many large and small firms as part of a mass privatization exercise certainly
has precedents in other transition countries, the requirement that anyone doing a capital increase
also needs to have their shares ‘listed’ on the stock exchange is a practice that is misleading and
should be corrected so as not to give investors a distorted picture of the market’s overall size.


51. The most effective way to foster development of Bosnia’s equity market would be for
one or both of the entity governments to pursue a large-scale privatization transaction
through the local stock exchange. In many countries around the world, the partial privatization
and listing of leading public sector firms on the local stock exchange has played a huge and often

12
    This explains why many of the largest foreign-owned banks operating in Bosnia appear to be ‘listed’ on
the local stock market, when in fact, they have never raised any money on the stock market or sought a
listing on the stock exchange, but as a consequence of receiving a capital infusion from their parents’
abroad have been forced to register these capital increases and have their shares listed on the exchange.
                                                  17

critical role in fostering development of the local capital market. . If the government is really
serious about developing Bosnia’s capital market, it should consider developing a strategy for using
the domestic stock markets to recapitalize and partly privatize more large and strategic public sector
firms, including some of those whose shares have already been listed on the stock exchanges.

52. In this regard, it may be worth considering the experience of other countries that have
actively used the capital market to raise capital for key public sector enterprises. In India, for
example, the government’s inability to provide continuous budgetary support to many very large
and strategic state-owned companies prompted the decision, starting in the early-90s, to partially
privatize more than 18 large firms through the domestic stock market, in most cases offering only
up to 5-10% of the company’s shares, since it is widely understood that the government has no
intention of reducing its holdings below 51% in any of these large, strategic enterprises. While
India’s capital market was already well-developed, the government’s decision to use the stock
market as a source of much-needed, long-term capital for these large public sector firms has had a
substantial impact on deepening the equity market and attracting more foreign portfolio investment
into the country. Even in relatively small frontier markets with less than 50 listed companies such
as Kenya, for example, the government’s decision to raise capital and list several large state- and
formerly state-owned companies on the local stock market has transformed Kenya into a market
that some foreign portfolio investors and research analysts now take seriously, mainly because it is
possible to obtain meaningful exposure today to the country’s telecoms, power and transportation
sectors by investing in these larger-capitalization stocks.


    IX.      INVESTMENT FUNDS

53. The Investment Fund sector in both the Federation and the RS is fairly significant and
currently includes both closed and open-ended investment funds. In the Federation, there are
11 closed-end funds whose shares are listed on the Sarajevo Stock Exchange and a further 6 open-
end funds which are also registered and listed on the exchange, even though they issue units not
shares. Similarly, in the RS, the investment funds segment is comprised of 14 closed-end funds and
a further 2 open-end funds. The following tables provide an overview of the Investment Funds
segment in both entities (using Assets Under Management (‘AUM’) for comparative purposes, as
open-ended funds do not issue shares per se).

Table 7: Overview investment Funds Sector
  FedBH – Investment Funds Sector
  (All figures in US$)                              2009          2010          2011           2012         2013
  Asset management companies
  Number of companies                                14            12            12             12            12
  Total value of assets under management (AUM)                 511.192.829   459.176.376   450.328.969   432.703.649

  Mutual funds
  Number of mutual funds
   Closed-end funds                                  11            11            11             11           11
   Open-end funds                                    3             4              5             6            6

  Total value of AUM                             587.491.802   511.192.829   459.176.376   450.328.969   432.703.649
   Closed-end funds                              577.757.075   503.171.714   450.876.596   430.417.826   398.281.586
   Open-end funds                                  9.734.727     8.021.115     8.299.780    19.911.143    34.422.063

Source: Federation BiH Securities Commission
                                                    18

     RS Investment Funds Sector
     (All figures in US$)                                2009           2010          2011           2012          2013
     Asset management companies
     Number of companies                                   17            17             17             16            16
     Total value of assets under management (AUM)      186.037.751   254.318.828    242.363.725    236.580.514   220.825.886

     Mutual funds
     Number of mutual funds
      Closed-end funds                                     14            14             14             14            14
      Open-end funds                                       3             3              3              2             2
     Total value of AUM
      Closed-end funds                                 182.627.145   250.716.553    239.901.196    233.894.363   217.743.777
      Open-end funds                                    3.410.606     3.602.275      2.462.529      2.686.151     3.082.109


Source: RS Securities Commission



54. Although the emergence of open-end funds is a more recent development, the closed-
end funds were originally set-up during the first wave of mass privatizations in the late-90s.
Like several other countries that conducted mass privatization programs, the closed-end funds
referred to in the above tables were originally established as specialized investment vehicles (so-
called, Privatization Investment Funds or PIFs) during the first phase of the government’s voucher
privatization program, which was carried out during the period 1999-200113. The idea behind
using PIFs was to provide individual voucher holders with a way of exchanging their vouchers for
shares in a closed-end investment vehicle, the shares of which could be readily traded on the stock
exchange.

55. Compared to the alternative of investing in individual companies that were being
privatized, the PIFs were meant to give investors the combined benefits of portfolio
diversification and professional investment management. At the same time, they also played
a role in helping the government to garner popular support for the privatization process generally.
By structuring the PIFs as closed-end vehicles, the expectation was that the investment managers
involved would be able to play an active role in restructuring portfolio companies where necessary
and also realizing value from the disposal of relatively illiquid investments in the shares of certain
enterprises, without being subject to the pressure of having to meet periodic redemptions, since it
is the shares of the fund that would trade on the stock market not units or certificates in the fund.
As part of the government’s original privatization program, it was envisioned that the PIFs would
eventually covert to open-ended funds, though only after an initial period of 5 years had elapsed.


56. However, contrary to expectations, none of the closed end PIFs have been converted to
open end funds and, without exception, all of the investment funds in both entities trade at
very large discounts to Net Asset Value (NAV). There appears to be widespread agreement
amongst government authorities and market participants in both entities that the fund managers
entrusted with the role of managing the original group of PIFs have largely failed to achieve the
desired result in terms of actively restructuring the companies in their portfolios or delivering
satisfactory returns to their investors, though as noted in a World Bank study undertaken in 2009,


13
    Although the term ‘Privatization Investment Funds’ is no longer in use and these funds are now referred
to as ‘Investment Funds’, albeit of the closed -end type, in this note, we continue to use the term PIFs to
distinguish such legacy PIFs from open-end Investment Funds.
                                                   19

their ability to do so was seriously constrained from the start.14 Indeed, despite the large overall
stakes which some funds held in selected enterprises, the managers of these funds were generally
not in a controlling position or able to exert any meaningful influence over these investee
companies, and in the end, most of the PIFs wound up with shares in far too many companies,
leaving them little option but to dispose of these smaller shareholdings over time, while retaining
only a handful of larger, more liquid stocks in their portfolios. As the following tables illustrate,
all of the PIFs in both entities are quoted today at massive discounts to NAV.

Table 8: SASE/BLSE closed-end investment funds
SASE - Closed-end Investment Funds
(All figures in KM)                    NAV/Share     Share Price Discount (%)
ZIF BIG INVESTICIONA GRUPA DD SARAJEVO          9.21           3.18        65%
ZIF BONUS DD SARAJEVO                           6.57            2.5        62%
ZIF "BOSFIN" d.d.Sarajevo                       8.54           2.89        66%
ZIF CROBIH FOND d.d. Mostar                     9.88            6.1        38%
ZIF EUROFOND-1 dd Tuzla                         5.62           1.76        69%
ZIF FORTUNA FOND dd                             9.20            4.6        50%
ZIF HERBOS FOND d.d. Mostar                   11.67            4.85        58%
ZIF MI GROUP DD SARAJEVO                        8.40            4.5        46%
ZIF NAPRIJED D.D. SARAJEVO                    10.85             1.6        85%
ZIF "Prevent INVEST" d.d. Sarajevo            13.89             4.4        68%
ZIF PROF-PLUS d.d. Sarajevo                     8.98           4.07        55%
Source: Sarajevo Stock Exchange

BLSE - Closed-end Investment Funds
(All figures in KM)                        NAV/Share     Share Price Discount (%)
ZIF Zeptor Fond a.f. Banja Luka                   17.86            7.70        57%
ZIF BLB Profit a.d. Banja Luka                      9.41           3.15        67%
ZIF Balkan Investment Fund a.d. Banja Luka          5.71           1.00        82%
ZIF Bors invest Fund a.d. Banja Luka                6.73           1.94        71%
ZIF Euroinvestment Fond a.d. Banja Luka           19.49          15.00         23%
ZIF Activa Invest Fond a.d. Banja Luka              9.93           2.45        75%
ZIF Invest Nova Fond a.d. Bjelina                   0.16           0.04        75%
ZIF Jahorina Koin a.d. Pale                         4.23           2.36        44%
ZIF Kristal Invest Fond a.d. Banja Luka           10.32            4.76        54%
ZIF Polara Invest Fond a.d. Banja Luka            13.88            4.80        65%
ZIF Privednik Invest a.d. Banja Luka                4.23           1.06        75%
ZIF Unioinvest a.d. Bjeljina                        0.61           0.48        21%
ZIF VB Fond a.d. Banja Luka                         5.38           1.45        73%
ZIF VIB Fond a.d. Banja Luka                        6.66           2.36        65%
Source: Banja Luka Stock Exchange


14
    See ‘Report: Analysis of the benefits and mechanisms of concentrating ownership of investment funds
in privatized companies in Bosnia-Herzegovina, A Project financed by the FIRST Initiative’ (The World
Bank), 30 April, 2009. (Available at: http://documents.worldbank.org)
                                                      20

57. The losses suffered through PIFs has caused severe damage to investors’ trust in both
the stock market generally and in the fund management sector. While the use of PIFs (as part
of the government’s voucher program) likely played a positive role in helping to generate broad
popular support for the overall privatization process, the strategy of using PIFs to drive the post-
privatization restructuring of individual firms and to encourage the development of the domestic
fund management industry has clearly not been successful. The fact that all of the listed closed-end
funds on both the BLSE and SASE trade a significant discounts to NAV, means that investors in
these funds are effectively ‘trapped’; they can see the actual value of the assets in the fund (as
NAVs are published regularly) but they are unable to realize this value because the quoted share
price is far lower than the prevailing NAV15. As a result, the damage that the PIFs have caused to
investor trust and confidence in the capital markets generally and especially in the fund
management sector has been substantial. More importantly, failure to resolve the problem of the
PIFs is impeding the growth of the open-end funds segment, since most local investors today are
very reluctant to invest in any type of funds, which partly explains why this sub-segment of the
market is still very small.

58. Another cause for concern relates to the qualifications of the parties managing the
closed-end funds and the potential that exists for fraud and other kinds of market abuse. This
is particularly worrisome given the small staffs and limited resources available today within the
securities commissions in both entities. Although the fund managers that were originally appointed
to manage the PIFs are required to hold asset management licenses issued by the Federation and
RS securities commissions, and both entities have subsequently strengthened the requirements for
obtaining new fund management licenses, it is unclear how the original vetting of fund management
candidates was done at the time that the PIFs were established.

59. With a view to resolving the PIF problem and enabling a viable funds sector to develop,
the RS Government took steps in 2013 which would have encouraged the PIFs to convert into
open-end funds. Following extensive discussions with individual PIFs and other key stakeholders,
the RS government took steps to prepare a Draft Law on Changes to the Investment Law which,
inter alia, sets out a detailed framework for enabling the transformation of all 14 of the existing
PIFs into open ended funds over a stipulated period of time in what was intended to be an orderly
and carefully controlled process. To mitigate against the possibility of large scale selling
depressing the shares of certain quoted companies, for example, the anticipated amendments to the
RS Investment Funds Law would have enabled fund managers who were undertaking such a
reorganization to an open-end structure to stagger redemptions, make distributions of stock ‘in-
specie’ rather than simply selling on the exchange and also merge with another fund should this be
necessary. The proposed changes also provided a reasonable amount of preparation time to allow
for staggered and more orderly disposals ahead of the target date for final opening. As a practical
matter, the RS government seems determined to put the negative PIF experience behind it and
clear the way for development of a more sustainable asset management sector. However, following

15
   As is the case with ordinary equity shares in a company, closed-end funds often trade at a discount (or a
premium) to NAV depending on prevailing investor sentiment and a wide range of other factors. However,
most funds of this type that are also listed on a stock exchange tend to invest primarily or exclusively in
more liquid or ‘marketable’ securities (either shares or bonds) hence any such premiums or discounts tend
not to be very large. In contrast, many of Bosnia’s listed PIFs have portfolios which include holdings in
highly illiquid smaller companies, which are hard to value and to which investors may ascribe little or no
value at all. In other transition countries that used privatization ‘funds’ as part of their mass privatization
programs, these were typically organized as joint stock companies not ‘funds’ per se. Even though many of
these companies subsequently traded at steep discounts to their reported book value (and many failed to
survive), the value of their holdings was probably less apparent to the shareholders concerned because
companies are not generally required to value their assets or report NAVs as frequently as funds are
required to do this.
                                                     21

formal approval by the RS government in June 2013, the draft law was withdrawn before it reached
the National Assembly for a final vote. Although the precise reason for the bills withdrawal last
year is not clear, the RSSC and the RS Ministry of Finance seem willing to consider re-introducing
this proposed legislation at a future date. The Federation SC also seems determined to address the
problem of legacy PIFs and claims it has already taken strong action in this regard against one or
two players in this sector.

60. The situation in both Entities appears to be similar, at least to the extent that many of
the PIFs in both entities have performed poorly and are rather opaque. With the exception of
a few funds in each Entity, the majority of the closed-end funds that are listed on the SASE and
BLSE do not appear to provide much, if any, information, to their shareholders describing their
investment management strategies or their investment operations in general, including
explanations for how they calculate NAVs, why they hold certain companies in portfolio or buy
and dispose of others and what measures are being undertaken to restructure specific companies
in order to enhance returns for their shareholders. Although the prevailing regulations in both
entities require the regular publication of NAVs and impose other timely financial reporting
requirements, in practice, market participants say it is generally difficult to obtain much relevant
or detailed information on the investment strategy or operations of most of these funds save for the
limited summary financial information that may be available through the exchanges or on an
individual fund’s website. Even in terms of basic financial summary information, there appears to
be a difference between the amount of basic information that can be obtained on the BLSE versus
the SASE. On the BLSE website, for example, it is at least possible to obtain the latest NAVs for
all listed funds, as well as a reasonable amount of information on individual portfolio holdings for
each fund together with the latest set of summary financial statements. In contrast, even this
minimal level of summary information is not accessible via the SASE website, but has to be
obtained directly from the funds concerned or from a fund’s website.

61. It also appears that a number of closed-end funds have frequently been sanctioned or
fined for various kinds of violations or abusive market behavior16. The Federation SC indicated
that it withdrew the license of one broker last year based on suspect dealings involving one of the
investment funds so they seem well aware of the problem. Ideally, the process of resolving the PIF
problem should proceed in parallel in the two entities, an initiative that could be placed on the
agenda of the proposed new Bosnia Securities Regulators Association, and then pursued in both
entities at the same time. As the information in Box 2 below suggests, the two entity regulators
would benefit from jointly considering how other transition countries have tackled this problem.

Box 2: Privatization Investment Funds - Experience of Other Transition Countries
 Background

 Many other transition countries also used Privatization Investment Funds during the initial stages
 of their mass privatization programs, though unlike Bosnia, many of these were organized as
 specialized ‘investment companies’ from the outset rather than as closed-end funds per se. One
 of the main reasons for this was that, at the time, most transition countries had little or no
 legislation in place to govern either funds or the fund management sector but also because it was

16
    As an illustration of the type of abuse which many market participants say is common, local news
reports broadcast during the FSAP mission revealed that two Slovenian businessmen had been placed under
investigation in Slovenia on allegations that they had used two of the largest Bosnian Investment Funds for
money laundering purposes. Although at the time of writing, no convictions have yet been delivered, it
highlights the potential for fraudulent or abusive behavior particularly given that there is limited
transparency on most funds’ operations is limited, the qualifications of the existing managers is unclear and
the supervisory capacity of the regulators is severely constrained.
                                                   22

 acknowledged that a very large majority of firms being privatized would also need to be
 restructured and strengthened substantially before they could be sold or their shares listed in
 order to realize any value for investors. For this reason the use of companies rather than funds
 per se, made sense, but the expectation was that the PIFs would eventually become significant
 institutions on the capital market, either transforming themselves into diversified industrial
 conglomerates or becoming successful collective investment schemes thereby helping to
 promote the development of the fund management industry and the capital market.

 The Russian and Czech Cases

 Although the literature on this topic is substantial, some of the evidence from Russia and the
 Czech Republic is particularly interesting. At the end of 1993, there were 636 PIFs registered in
 Russia but within 4-5 years, only 350 PIFs were still active. Over this time, 69 PIFs were
 transformed into a different organizational form, the majority becoming ordinary joint stock
 companies and 67 mergers also occurred. At the time, analysts concluded that only 25-30 of the
 remaining PIFs had active portfolios and any long-term prospects for survival. The vast majority
 of the original Russian PIFs had simply gone out of business. The crisis surrounding PIFs in
 Russia prompted the government to enact legislation creating a new class of funds, so-called
 ‘unit funds’, which are now the main type of collective investment schemes in the Russian capital
 market. Unlike the PIFs, the new unit funds were required by law to be structured as open-ended
 funds which grant investors the right to redeem their shares. In fact, two types of unit funds were
 authorized: ‘Open funds’ that would be required to hold only liquid assets and ‘Interval funds’
 that would be allowed to invest part of their holdings in less liquid assets like real estate, etc. and
 would have periodic redemptions rather than offering redemptions on demand. In the Czech
 case, over 620 PIFs were established in the early stages of mass privatization but the number of
 PIFs that survived and participated in subsequent rounds of privatizations was markedly lower,
 with only 133 active PIFs from the first wave in 1991/2 participating in the next round. Like
 Russia, the Czech authorities gradually implemented new investment fund legislation aimed at
 improving investor protection and restoring trust in the capital markets. In short, the fate of the
 PIFs in Russia and the Czech Republic was closely linked to the strengthening of investment
 fund legislation and the emergence of more vibrant fund management industries in both
 countries.

 Source: Pistor, K and Spicer, A., ‘Investment Funds in Mass Privatization and Beyond: Experience from
 the Czech Republic and Russia’, Harvard Institute for International Development (Cambridge, MA,
 1997).




62. On a more positive note, several new open-end investment funds have recently been
established in both entities though at present their size is still quite small. Since 2009, a
number of new open-end investment funds have been established in both entities, and at present
there are 2 open-end funds in the RS and 6 open-end funds in the Federation which are available
to investors and quoted on the respective entity exchanges. The open-end funds segment in both
entities is still very small in terms of total assets, however, with just $34 million under management
in the Federation and an even smaller amount of $3 million under management in the RS.
Interestingly, there already appears to be some diversity in terms of the kinds of open end funds
that are available in the Federation as the open-end funds segment includes 4 balanced funds which
aim to invest in both equity and fixed-income instruments as well as 2 open-ended money market
funds which appear to be investing primarily in short-term treasury securities and bank deposits.
Given that the Federation treasury only began issuing T-bills in 2011, the early emergence of these
two money market funds represents is a particularly good sign. However, for the time being, the
                                                   23

potential for significant near-term growth in this area is likely to be constrained due to the relatively
limited volume of investment opportunities which are currently available, the prevailing low
interest rate environment and also the overwhelmingly negative perception which may individual
investors seem to have regarding funds, especially given the bad experience and investment losses
that many people have suffered with PIFs.


    X.       OTHER INSTITUTIONAL INVESTORS


63. Since both entities have still not reformed their pension systems, there are no major
investors within the pensions sector in the Federation or the RS. Although the subject falls
outside the scope of this technical note, the fact that this process has yet to begin in Bosnia presents
a major obstacle to the development of the country’s capital markets. Also, given the very high
levels of unemployment (approaching 30%), and particularly youth unemployment (which is closer
to 60%) that exist today, coupled with the challenge of dealing with an already high level of
mandatory contributions that people have to pay into the first pillar pension schemes in both entities
(reportedly 17% in the Federation and 18.5% in the RS), the task of implementing pension reforms
will be a huge challenge and is bound to take quite some time.

64. Although it is not a pension fund in the classical sense, the Pensions Reserve Fund
(‘PREF’) in the RS has recently begun to play a more meaningful role in the capital market.
This institution was originally established as part of the RS government’s mass privatization
program with the intention that it would receive a 10% holding of shares in all companies that were
to be privatized under the program, presumably with the aim of safeguarding and managing these
for the benefit of future retirees or pensioners. Because of the large number of companies that have
so far been privatized in the RS, PREF currently has a relatively big and reasonably well-diversified
investment portfolio totaling approximately KM 253 million as of July 2014. Although the
majority (over 75%) of PREF’s portfolio consists of equity shares in approximately 458 companies,
it is also a significant holder of bonds which account for roughly 16% of the total portfolio.

65. More interestingly, PREF appears to have an experienced and dynamic management
team which is actively seeking to manage the portfolio in an efficient and professional manner
which is typical of more advanced pension fund managers elsewhere. Evidence of this
approach, and the positive impact which PREF is already beginning to have on development of the
RS capital market can be seen from its strategy for investing in RS government debt instruments.
Rather than bidding for paper in primary auctions, the majority of PREF’s purchases of government
bonds are conducted on the secondary market where they claim to be able to obtain better prices,
and they are also prepared to sell or trade in the market when they see an opportunity for attractive
trading returns. In a nascent government debt market like Bosnia’s, it is valuable to ha ve
institutions like PREF who are prepared to participate actively in the capital market generally and
particularly in the secondary market for government securities. Unfortunately, there is no similar
institution today in the Federation.

66. The insurance sector in both entities is still relatively small, but could contribute to
capital market development as the industry grows. The insurance sector in Bosnia is at an early
stage of development and, with aggregate assets of KM 1.2 billion in assets as of year-end 2013, it
comprises only 4.8% of all financial assets today or approximately 4.3% of GDP. While the
industry appears to be growing (assets were up 4.9% in 2013), Bosnia’s insurance industry is still
substantially smaller than that of most other countries in the region. In absolute terms, the insurance
sectors in Croatia and Slovenia, for example, are roughly 8x and 11x larger than Bosnia’s,
equivalent to 5.8% of GDP and 10.5% of GDP respectively. At present, the industry consists of
                                                      24

25 companies, of which 10 are composite insurance companies, 14 are exclusively non-life
companies and 1 operates in the reinsurance segment. There are no pure life insurance companies.
The non-life segment is dominated by domestic insurers, with only 1 foreign operator in the
exclusively non-life business. The composite insurance segment consists primarily of foreign firms
with only 1 local operator offering both life and non-life products. Measured in terms of total
premiums, the insurance sector in the Federation is substantially larger than that in the RS,
accounting for 73% of total premiums in 2013, and in both entities non-life insurance business
accounts for a much higher percentage of overall premiums compared to the life insurance segment,
with non-life premiums representing 78% of all business in the Federation and 91% of all premiums
in the RS17. Although the presence of a number of leading foreign insurance companies in the
composite segment is an encouraging sign and could eventually contribute to the development of
new products such as unit trust linked policies and the like, the fact that the life insurance segment
is still relatively small suggests that it will be a while before Bosnia’s insurance industry is able to
make a meaningful impact in terms of capital market development.


67. Foreign portfolio investors represent another potential component of the investor base,
but they are unlikely to play a major role unless the macro-economic situation changes
dramatically and more, larger capitalization stocks become available. Based on the data
available from both stock exchanges, it is difficult to distinguish between foreign retail and
portfolio investors , though discussions with local brokers and other market participants suggest
that foreign individual investors are reasonably active on the stock markets generally and
particularly in the investment funds segment, where a number of funds are said to be closely-held
or controlled by leading business people from neighboring countries, specifically Slovenia, Croatia
and Serbia.

68. Although non-resident investors appear to be actively participating in the capital
markets, extensive data on this is not readily available and it is likely that foreign institutional
participation is fairly limited. In the overall equity market (which includes shares in funds),
foreign investors as a group accounted for 41% of aggregate turnover on the BLSE in 2013, which
is down from approximately 51% in 2007. Figures for the SASE are not directly comparable,
however, if one assumes that half of all turnover attributed to custody accounts was transacted on
account of foreign parties, then the contribution of foreign investors in SASE’s overall turnover
would be roughly similar at around 41% for 2013. Figures for the share of foreign investor
participation in the bond market, which consists almost entirely of government bonds and T-Bills
is considerably lower, comprising roughly 14% of all turnover in the RS in 2013. Again,
comparable figures for the Federation are not readily available, but is unlikely to be very different.
Although discussions with several leading banks and local brokers suggest that foreign institutional
investors remain interested in Bosnia’s government securities market, at present they appear to
have a relatively limited share of the overall market as most of the foreign interest reflected in the
percentages above appears to be attributable to foreign retail investors. It is also unlikely that
foreign institutions will become more active until the current macro-economic and situation has
improved and there are more large-capitalization companies whose shares are available to buy.




17
   All calculations are for 2013, and based on data contained in the latest ‘Statistics of Insurance Market in
Bosnia and Herzegovina’ published annually by The Insurance Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the
State-level insurance industry regulator. (Insurance Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina, 2013).
25
                                                      1




   XI.       RECOMMENDATIONS BY ENTITY

Recommendations and Authority Responsible for Implementation – FBiH                                  Time
Enhancing coordination and cooperation among key stakeholders
Co-sponsor (together with RS counterparts) formation of a Canadian-style ‘Bosnia Securities            I
Regulatory Association’ to enhance coordination on regulatory matters (FedSC)
Co-sponsor (together with RS counterparts) formation of a ‘Capital Market Development Task             I
Force) to spearhead market development matters
(Fed SC, FedMoF, SASE)
Supporting Development of Government Debt Markets
Working through above groups, develop new framework to enable REPO transactions                        I
(FedSC / FedMoF / Local Banks / SASE
Working through above groups, develop new framework to enable OTC trading in government                I
securities including post-trade reporting through the exchange
(FedSC / FedMoF / Local Banks / SASE
Develop framework (jointly with Fed Banking Agency and Fed Insurance regulator) to allow              NT
for limited holding of T-Bills as liquid reserve assets as this market continues to expand and
deepen
(FedSC/ FedMof / Local Banks / Banking and Insurance regulators)
Improving transparency and the integrity of capital market data
Publish all capital market related laws, regulations and rulebooks, etc. in both local and             I
English languages
Create a separate category for all firms and institutions who are required to report share capital     I
transactions to the exchange but who are not part of the capital market and clarify or amend
rules related to this requirement
(SASE / FedSC)
Restoring investor trust and fostering growth of the institutional investor base
Develop legislation for reform of the closed-end investment funds sector (in parallel with
similar efforts in the RS) and implement transformation of legacy PIFs to open-ended funds             I
(FedSC)
Expanding the size of the equity market and attracting more investors
Government to consider engaging qualified advisors to develop a strategy for privatizing and
recapitalizing selected large and profitable public sector enterprises via the capital market          I
(Federation Government / Privatization Agency / FedSC)
Working through the joint groups above, link the two entity stock exchanges and CSDs
electronically and create an EU-style ‘passporting’ regime covering issuers, investors and
market intermediaries                                                                                 NT
(FedSC / SASE)
                                                      2

Recommendations and Authority Responsible for Implementation - Republika Srspka                      Time
Enhancing coordination and cooperation among key stakeholders
Co-sponsor (together with Federation counterparts) formation of a Canadian-style ‘Bosnia               I
Securities Regulatory Association’ to enhance coordination on regulatory matters (RSSC)
Co-sponsor (together with Federation counterparts) formation of a ‘Capital Market                      I
Development Task Force) to spearhead market development matters
(RSSC / RSMoF / BLSE)
Supporting Development of Government Debt Markets
Working through above groups, develop new framework to enable REPO transactions                        I
(RSSC / RSMoF / Local Banks / BLSE
Working through above groups, develop new framework to enable OTC trading in government                I
securities including post-trade reporting through the exchange
(RSSC / RSMoF / Local Banks / BLSE
Develop framework jointly with RS Banking Agency to allow for limited holding of T-Bills as           NT
liquid reserve assets as this market continues to expand and deepen
(RSSC/ RSMof / Local Banks / Banking Agency ))
Improving transparency and the integrity of capital market data
Publish all capital market related laws, regulations and rulebooks, etc. in both local and             I
English languages (RSSC / BLSE)
Create a separate category for all firms and institutions who are required to report share capital     I
transactions to the exchange but who are not part of the capital market and clarify or amend
rules related to this requirement
(BLSE / RSSC)
Restoring investor trust and fostering growth of the institutional investor base
Develop legislation for reform of the closed-end investment funds sector (in parallel with
similar efforts in the RS) and implement transformation of legacy PIFs to open-ended funds             I
(RSSC)
Expanding the size of the equity market and attracting more investors
Government to consider engaging qualified advisors to develop a strategy for privatizing and
recapitalizing selected large and profitable public sector enterprises via the capital market          I
(RS Government / IDBRS / RSSC)
Working through the joint groups above, link the two entity stock exchanges and CSDs
electronically and create an EU-style ‘passporting’ regime covering issuers, investors and
market intermediaries                                                                                 NT
(RSSC/BLSE)
