                                                                                 98302




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM

BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
BCBS – IADI CORE PRINCIPLES FOR EFFECTIVE DEPOSIT
INSURANCE SYSTEMS

TECHNICAL NOTE
JUNE 2015
This Technical Note was prepared in the context of a joint World Bank-IMF Financial Sector
Assessment Program mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina during October – November, 2014
led by Michael Edwards, World Bank and Sonia Munoz, IMF, and overseen by Finance and
Private Sector Development Vice Presidency, World Bank and the Monetary and Capital
Markets Department, IMF. The note contains technical analysis and detailed information
underpinning the FSAP assessment’s findings and recommendations. Further information on
the FSAP program can be found at www.worldbank.org/fsap.


                       THE WORLD BANK GROUP
                       FINANCE & MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE
                                                             Contents



GLOSSARY................................................................................................................................... 1

I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .................................................................................................... 2

II. INTRODUCTION AND PRECONDITIONS .................................................................... 8
A. INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................... 8
B. PRECONDITIONS FOR AN EFFECTIVE DEPOSIT INSURANCE SYSTEM ..................................... 10

III. MAIN FINDINGS ................................................................................................................ 14

A. ASSESSMENT OF THE OBSERVANCE OF THE CORE PRINCIPLES..................... 14
TABLE 1: DEPOSIT INSURANCE SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT TABLE .................................................. 15
TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES ..... 24
TABLE 3: RECOMMENDED CORRECTIVE ACTION PLAN TO IMPROVE COMPLIANCE WITH THE
DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES ..................................................................................... 25
TABLE 4: DETAILED ASSESSMENT OF DEPOSIT INSURANCE PRINCIPLES .................................. 28
                                       1


                                  GLOSSARY



BARS   Banking Agency of Republika Srpska

BCP    Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision

BiH    Bosnia and Herzegovina

CAR    Capital Adequacy Ratio

CBBH   Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina

DGSD   EU Directive on Deposit Guarantee Schemes 2014/49/EU

DIA    Deposit Insurance Agency of Bosnia and Herzegovina

DIS    Deposit Insurance System

EBRD   European Bank for Reconstruction and Development

EU     European Union

FBA    Banking Agency of the Federation of Bosnia & Herzegovina

FSAP   Financial Sector Assessment Program

LDI    Law on Deposit Insurance in Banks of Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOB    Law on Banks

MoF    Ministry of Finance

MoU    Memorandum of Understanding

NPLs   Non-performing Loans

P&A    Purchase and Assumption

PPOs   Public Policy Objectives

SCFS   Standing Committee for Financial Stability

                                       1
                                                          2




                                        I.       EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1.      The FSAP team found the DIA is to be Compliant or Largely Compliant with 12 out
of 16 applicable Core Principles and Materially Non-Compliant with three Core Principle.1
The DIA has constantly been working on its framework and capacity. In particular, the team would
like to note favorably the many accomplishments of the DIA, including:

    i) Development of a sound governance framework and basic coordination arrangements with
       other financial safety-net participants;

    ii) A well designed depositor reimbursement system capable of prompt payouts which
        includes the regular testing of Member Banks’ depositor data;

    iii) Building up of capabilities and analyzing skills to analyze bank reports, supervisory reports
         and general audits as well as its own rating system for Member Banks.

2.     However, the team found a number of areas where some deficiencies exist in the
deposit insurance system and financial safety-net arrangements and accordingly is proposing
a corrective action plan to address these areas (see Tables 1 and 2). These deficiencies lie
mostly outside the sphere of the Agency but can be found in the broader legal framework of BiH.
The major findings are:

    i) The deposit insurance framework is not mandatory for all banks operating in BiH as
       it is linked to the fulfillment of special membership criteria. One bank in BiH is
       currently operating without being a member of DIA. Authorities should find a solution for
       this problem and change the membership rules. Membership in the DIA should be linked
       to the licensing process.

    ii) The payout timeframe in which depositors have to be reimbursed by DIA is with 90
        days too long and it should be significantly shortened. The current timeframe does not
        support consumer confidence and financial stability. For example, in the European Union

1
 Core Principle 16 Effective resolution processes was non-compliant. Core Principles 2 (Mitigating moral hazard),
Core Principle 8 (Compulsory membership) and Core Principle 15 (Early detection and timely intervention) were
materially non-compliant. Core Principle 10 (Transitioning from a blanket guarantee) and Core Principle 7 (Cross-
border issues) were not applicable. Core Principle 6 (Relationship with other safety-net participants), Core Principle
11 (Funding), Core Principle 12 (Public Awareness), Core Principle 17 (Reimbursing Depositors), and Core
Principle 18 (Recoveries) were largely compliant. All remaining Core Principles were fully compliant.
                                                          2
                                                3


    deposits are currently reimbursed within 30 working days at the latest, but EU Member
    States will shorten the pay-out delay to 7 working days within the next 10 years. DIA has
    already in place a software system to identify insured deposits and is receiving from
    Member Banks deposit data at an on-going basis. The DIA seems therefore capable to meet
    shorter pay-out deadlines, as for example the 30 working day period. DIA should aim to
    find ways to further shorten the pay-out timeframe in the future to 7 days.

iii) As the EBRD back-up line runs out end of 2017, DIA should start now to explore
     possible ways to secure proper back-up funding in the future. DIA should also abolish
     the possibility to invest its funds into private banks and their bonds.

iv) Information sharing and coordination arrangements with the Banking Agencies,
    CBBH and MoF need to be updated and enhanced. Furthermore, all problem banks in
    Bosnia and Herzegovina should be regularly discussed in the Standing Committee for
    Financial Stability.

v) As the Bosnian banking sector is dominated by foreign banks, it is paramount that
   DIA via the Banking Agencies receives information about the situation of the owners
   its Member Banks. If there is a problem with the main office of a local subsidiary there
   needs to be some ability for the deposit insurer to coordinate communication with the home
   country DIS when questions from depositors come in.

vi) There are significant deficiencies in BiH’s current early intervention and bank
    resolution regime, and draft legislation is in the process of being developed to address
    them and establish a bank resolution framework. The role of the DIA in future
    resolution process (e.g. financing of resolution measures) has yet to be defined.

vii) As there has not been a payout event for the DIA since its founding in 2002,
     contingency planning and crisis exercises become key. DIA is already active in this field
     (e.g. testing depositor data on a regular basis). But in addition to its internal stress testing,
     DIA should also start with external stress tests which should include other safety-net
     participants. Furthermore, crisis simulations for all safety-net participants should be
     conducted.

viii)      To clarify the rank of the DIA in bankruptcy proceedings, the revised Law on
    Banks should precisely define the term “secured creditor" which are ranked in
    second class before the DIA’s claims (such a definition is currently missing in the law).
    Furthermore, it should be legally regulated that costs which are connected to the
                                                3
                                                     4


             reimbursement process (e.g. the costs to engage an agent bank) have to be borne by the
             insolvent Member Bank. The provisional administrator and the bankruptcy trustee should
             be obliged by law to cooperate with the deposit insurer to facilitate the reimbursement
             process.



                        Bosnia and Herzegovina: FSAP Key Recommendations
[Key: C = Compliant; LC = Largely Compliant; MNC = Materially Non-compliant; NC = Non-compliant;
                                     NA = Not Applicable]
Principle          Compliance     Recommendations                                                      Time
                                                                                                       1



1. Public         C
Policy
Objectives
2. Mitigating     MNC             There are a number of deficiencies in the supervisory framework          I
Moral Hazard                      (e.g. need to enhance the powers of the Banking Agencies)
                                  which needs to be addressed and a bank resolution framework
                                  is missing. The weaknesses in supervision and resolution do
                                  appear to be serious and pose limited restraint on risk taking. In
                                  addition, DIA is not applying risk weighted premiums and the
                                  deposit insurance fund is missing an official target ratio.
3. Mandate        C

4. Powers         C

5. Governance     C

6.                LC              As the MoU between DIA and the other financial safety-net                I
Relationship                      participants is over 10 years old, the financial safety-net
with Other                        participants should revise the memorandum. The current
Safety Net
                                  exchange of information should be enhanced and be on an
Participants
                                  automatic basis. Regular meetings should be used to discuss and
                                  exchange views on all problem banks. Once the coordinated
                                  contingency plan is drafted and the new Law on Banks is
                                  adopted, the financial safety-net participants should engage in
                                  joint crisis simulation exercises. Furthermore, all problem banks
                                  in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be discussed in the SCFS.


                                                     4
                                            5


7. Cross-         NA    From DIA’s 26 Member Banks 15 banks are foreign owned
border Issues           (majority foreign capital). Due to the high concentration of
                        foreign-owned banks in BiH, the Banking Agencies should be
                        in a position to exchange information about the financial health
                        of the parent companies of foreign subsidiaries and inform the
                        DIA accordingly (for example via the SCFS). There is a need
                        for stronger cross border supervisory cooperation (e.g. MoU
                        with the Austrian authorities).
8.                MNC   All banks which are allowed to collect deposits in BIH should          I
Compulsory              be members of the DIA. For the one remaining bank outside the
Membership              DIA a solution has to be found by the competent Banking
                        Authority. In future, the membership within the deposit
                        insurance system should be linked to the issuance (and
                        withdrawal) of the bank’s operating license.
9. Coverage       C

10.               NA
Transitioning
from Blanket
Guarantee
11. Funding       LC    As the EBRD back-up line runs out end of 2017, DIA should              NT
                        start now to explore possible ways to secure proper back-up
                        funding in the future. In the light of the need to reduce the payout
                        period in the future, the payout period for any back-up founding
                        source will also have to be shortened accordingly. DIA should
                        also abolish the possibility to invest its funds into private banks
                        and their bonds. Furthermore, the Agency should explore the
                        possibility to move its assessment base for annual premiums
                        from “eligible” to “covered” deposits. DIA’s deposit insurance
                        fund is missing a public and transparent fund reserve ratio.
12. Public        LC    The public awareness program should be evaluated on a regular          I
Awareness               basis for its effectiveness.
13. Legal         C
Protection
14. Dealing       C
with Parties at
Fault

                                            5
                                         6


15. Early       MNC                                                                        NT
Detection and         Deficiencies in early detection and timely intervention should
Timely                be addressed through the development of draft legislation for an
Intervention          enhanced early intervention and resolution regime (Law on
and                   Banks).
Resolution
16. Effective   NC    The Federation of BiH and the Republika Srpska should develop        NT
Resolution            a comprehensive resolution framework in line with international
Processes             best practice (Currently, with the help of the IMF the new Law
                      on Banks is drafted and shall include such provisions.).

                      If a role for the DIA or the use of its funds for the purpose of
                      bank resolution is foreseen in the future resolution framework,
                      the provisions should be in line with the revised and soon to be
                      published IADI Core Principles for Deposit Insurance Systems
                      (CP 9 Sources and Uses for Funds, EC 8). Proper safeguards
                      should be foreseen so that the DIA is able to perform its role as
                      a deposit insurer and its funds are not depleted through a bank
                      resolution. For example, the deposit insurer should be informed
                      and involved in the resolution decision-making process. Where
                      a bank is resolved through a resolution process other than
                      liquidation, the resolution results in a viable, solvent and
                      restructured bank, which limits the exposure of the deposit
                      insurer to contribute additional funding in respect of the same
                      obligation. Furthermore, contributions should be restricted to
                      the costs the deposit insurer would otherwise have incurred in a
                      payout of insured depositors in a liquidation net of expected
                      recoveries (least cost rule). Contributions should not be used for
                      the recapitalization of resolved institutions unless shareholder’s
                      interests are reduced to zero and uninsured, unsecured creditors
                      are subject to parri passu losses in accordance with the legal
                      claim priority. The use of the deposit insurer’s funds should be
                      transparent and documented and be clearly and formally
                      specified; it should be subject to an independent audit and to ex-
                      post review.



                                         6
                                                       7


17.                LC              The payout timeframe should be aligned with international best           I
Reimbursing                        practice and shortened (e.g., to a maximum of 30 working days
Depositors                         as it is the norm now in the European Union). DIA should aim
                                   to further shorten the payout delay in line with emerging
                                   international best practice of a payout of 7 days.
                                   DIA should in addition to its internal stress testing also start with
                                   external stress tests which should include other safety-net
                                   participants.
18.                LC              The revised Law on Banks should precisely define the term
Recoveries                         “secured creditor". Furthermore, the Law on Bankruptcy
                                   Proceedings (or the revised Law on Banks) should clarify that
                                   costs which are connected to the reimbursement process have to
                                                                                                            NT
                                   be borne by the insolvent Member Bank. The provisional
                                   administrator and the bankruptcy trustee should be obliged by
                                   law to cooperate with the deposit insurer to facilitate the
                                   reimbursement process.


   1         I-Immediate” is within one year; “NT-near-term” is 1–3 years; “MT-medium-term” is 3–5 years.




                                                       7
                                                          8


                              II.      INTRODUCTION AND PRECONDITIONS
                                               A. INTRODUCTION


During October 29 - November 18, 2014 an assessment under the IMF/World Bank Financial
Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) was conducted for Bosnia and Herzegovina. As part of
the FSAP, the deposit insurance system was assessed against the BCBS-IADI Core Principles for
Effective Deposit Insurance Systems from 2010.

1.     The assessment was conducted by a team of experts from the World Bank and IMF.2
The team held meetings with officials from the Deposit Insurance Agency of Bosnia and
Herzegovina (DIA), the Ministry of Finance (MoF) of Republika Srpska, the MoF of the
Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina (CBBH), the
Bank Agency (BA) of Republika Srpska, the BA of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
the Banks Association of Bosnia and Herzegovina and a number of commercial banks. The
assessment team would like to thank the authorities and the staff of the DIA in particular for their
help and cooperation during the mission.

2.      The team found the DIA is Compliant or Largely Compliant with 12 out of 16
applicable Core Principles and Materially Non-Compliant with three Core Principles.3 This
report is made up of a review of the background and structure of the DIA, a review of preconditions
for effective deposit insurance systems, a summary of key finding and recommendations and a
section providing the detailed assessment of the Core Principles.

Background and Structure of the DIA

3.      The 1995 Dayton Peace Agreements, which ended the war in BiH, created a uniquely
complex institutional structure. As a result, the country is divided into two main semi-
autonomous political entities - the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina (the ‘Federation’) and
the Republica Srpska (‘RS’). In addition, there is a central - or “state” level administration headed
by a rotating presidency, but with few enumerated powers. This framework has allowed each entity
to adopt measures generally independent of one another.


2
  The assessment was conducted by Jan Philipp Nolte (World Bank). The FSAP was led by Michael Edwards
(World Bank) and Sonia Munoz (IMF).
3
  Core Principle 16 (Effective resolution processes) was non-compliant. Core Principles 2 (Mitigating moral hazard),
Core Principle 8 (Compulsory membership) and Core Principle 15 (Early detection and timely intervention) were
materially non-compliant. Core Principle 10 (Transitioning from a blanket guarantee) and Core Principle 7 (Cross-
border issues) were not applicable. Core Principle 6 (Relationship with other safety-net participants), Core Principle
11 (Funding), Core Principle 12 (Public Awareness), Core Principle 17 (Reimbursing Depositors), and Core
Principle 18 (Recoveries) were largely compliant. All remaining Core Principles were fully compliant.
                                                          8
                                                        9


4.      As it regards the financial sector environment, only the CBBH and DIA are
responsible across BiH. The regulatory and supervisory responsibilities for banking, insurance
and capital markets are separately undertaken in each entity in accord with their respective laws
and regulations, though each is said to be harmonized to varying degrees.

5.     The DIA was established in 2002. This time saw the rapid closure of banks in Bosnia and
Herzegovina. From 1998 to 2004, 37 banks were closed. Therefore strict membership criteria for
DIA were created to prevent unstable banks entering the deposit insurance system thereby
preventing the risk of depletion of the Deposit Insurance Fund. Membership is compulsory for all
domestic banks which fulfill the membership criteria. Currently, one bank operates in Bosnia and
Herzegovina which is not a member of the DIA.

6.      The DIA was established as an independent, non-profit, legal entity with full authority
under the Law of the State of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The DIA operates at the state level. It
comprises of the Head Office and Branch Offices in each entity (RS and Federation). The DIA is
governed by a Management Board of up to five persons. Members of the Management Board
include the Governor of the CBBH, Minister of Finance and Treasury of Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Minister of Finance of Republika Srpska, the Minister of Finance of Federation of Bosnia and
Herzegovina and a member on behalf of Governing Board of CBBH. DIA has currently a staff of
19 full-time employees.

7.     Information sharing and coordination arrangements are established and include
provisions for information sharing and coordination within the financial safety-net. In
addition, a Standing Committee for Financial Stability Committee (SCFS) is used as a coordination
mechanism for promoting financial stability and crisis preparedness (with members from the MoF,
CB and Banking Agencies). The DIA is a permanent member of the SCFS.

8.      As of 31 October 2014, the membership included 26 domestic banks. There are no
foreign bank branch DIA members presently. Coverage is limited to the KM 50,000 (or about EUR
25,000). In addition to the coverage limit per depositor per bank on the level of coverage, the scope
of coverage is restricted (e.g. depositors who are deemed professional financial market
participants, bank management as well as its shareholders/stakeholders are not covered).

9.      The DIA is a “paybox” system.4 Its present responsibilities include: collecting deposit
insurance premiums; inspecting depositor information; analyzing data on its member banks;
conducting on- as well as off-site risk assessment; and reimbursing insured depositors. Legislation
is under development to create a bank resolution regime in BiH as such a framework is currently
not in place.


4
 According to the definitions of deposit insurer mandates in the FSB Thematic Review on Deposit Insurance
Systems (2012) the DIA presently fits into the category of a “pay-box”.
                                                       9
                                                 10


10.      The DIA has comprehensive funding resources. Its Deposit Insurance Fund is ex-ante
funded by Member Banks. Emergency back-up funding is available from the EBRD of up to EUR
50 million. The DIA is not applying a differential “risk-adjusted” premium system. DIA funds are
sufficient to cover the payout of guaranteed deposits up to the 7th largest bank in Bosnia and
Herzegovina (reflecting an ex-ante coverage ratio – the proportion of guaranteed deposits covered
– of 4.6 percent). The Deposit Insurance Fund is operating without a public target fund ratio as
none is determined by the Law. This target would serve as a guide for the authorities in determining
if additional funds are needed and a guide to private depositors, giving them assurance that funding
will be available. This is particularly important in Bosnia and Herzegovina, where the central bank
has no LOLR facility.

11.     Depositor reimbursement systems are developed and capable of payouts within the
given timeframe. Payout processes are highly supported with banks required to report to the DIA
depositor data on an ongoing basis, and data quality is monitored by the Agency. A Single
Customer View (SCV) system is in use. The payout process is capable of reimbursing depositors
within a maximum of 90 or in special cases 150 days. Depositors are informed on an ongoing basis
about the existence of the DIA and terms and conditions of coverage through a wide range of
communication vehicles (e.g. DIA membership logo in branches, brochures, web sites, prints).

12.    The DIA has been active in implementing measures to further boost depositors’
confidence and enhance its capacity. These include: (i) a €50 million stand-by line of credit
with the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development as backstop to the Deposit
Insurance Fund; (ii) the increase in the deposit insurance coverage to KM 50,000, effective as of
January 1, 2014; and (iii) amendments to the DIA Law to, among other things, ensure both that
coverage is extended to small- and medium-sized enterprises and that all banks are members of
the deposit insurance scheme, including those that may fall under provisional administration. The
Law on Deposit Insurance was last amended in 2013.



   B. PRECONDITIONS FOR AN EFFECTIVE DEPOSIT INSURANCE SYSTEM


Banking System

3.      BiH’s banking sector remains the dominant segment of the financial sector,
comprising about 87 percent of total financial system assets and 89 percent of GDP at end-
2013. The banking system is dominated by foreign banks in the form of subsidiaries accounting
for 90.5 percent of banking sector assets. Bank concentration is one of the lowest in the region,
with top three banks holding about 41 percent of the market share, while top five hold about 53

                                                10
                                                       11


percent as of mid-2013. There are 27 banks operating in both Entities. 5 The lower level of
concentration as well as high number of banking institutions serving a country of just under four
million people is partly a result of BiH’s fragmented political structure and banking sys tem with
two banking authorities (one in each Entity) in charge of licensing, regulation and supervision of
its own banks. Furthermore, subsidiaries of foreign banks (some of which are separately licensed
to operate in each Entity) are still reliant on parent bank support, rendering the banking system
vulnerable to external developments from the jurisdictions where these banks operate.

4.      There are four public owned banks operating in BiH with a total market share of
about 5 percent at end-2013 (or about one-half of the domestic owned banking sector), two
of which are development banks. Over the last decade, the majority of public owned banks have
been privatized in BiH (down from 12 public banks in 2002). However, existing governance
weaknesses of public banks are believed to be many and can be crystallized through two key facts:
(i) one bank has operated until recently for more than 12 years under provisional administration
for several years without deposit insurance coverage; and (ii) the recent nationalization of the
rather small Balkan Investment Bank (BIB) through its (off-budget) recapitalization by the RS
government owned Investment Development Bank. These and other cases highlight the need for
further analysis of current governance structures, internal control and risk management systems,
transparency and financial reporting of public banks.

Sound Governance of Agencies Comprising the Financial Safety Net

5.      BiH has a split system of banking supervision, with the CBBH playing a coordinating
role. Each entity maintains separate bank supervisory agencies (Banking Agencies) and separate
banking laws and regulations, although they generally work closely together and aim to harmonize
their regulatory frameworks. While the CBBH has no supervisory powers, it is tasked with
coordinating jointly with the Banking Agencies matters of financial stability in the context of the
Standing Committee on Financial Stability (SCFS). Furthermore, the CBBH performs top-down
credit risk stress tests on the basis of bank data provided by the Banking Agencies. MoUs have
been signed between the Agencies and the CBBH and the Agencies are obliged by law to provide
information to the CBBH in order for it to fulfill its stability mandate.

6.     The Banking Agencies and DIA are provided with a range of powers to support
financial system stability. They perform financial stability analysis and data collection. The DIA
manages the deposit guarantee system in BiH and is integrated into the nascent crisis preparedness



5
 17 banks operate in the Federation and 10 banks operate in RS. One bank is currently not a member of DIA (see
CP 8 – Compulsory membership).
                                                       11
                                                12


and management framework. The safety-net participants exhibit operational independence and
accountability and have transparency and disclosure frameworks.

7.     Bosnia’s regulatory, supervisory, and resolution frameworks are influenced by
developments at the European Union (EU) level. Not being a member of the EU, BiH is not
obliged to comply with EU directives when they come into force. However, the legislation is
influenced by the EU legal texts.

Prudential Regulation and Supervision

8.      Oversight of the banking sector is mainly the task of the Banking Agencies. They are
responsible for prudential supervision as well as for competition, conduct of business, consumer
protection issues. BiH has adopted a comprehensive strategy to safeguard financial sector stability
and strengthen banking legislation and supervision. A very important element of improving
banking regulation and aligning BiH with the European Union (EU) framework for bank
supervision is the passage of new Law on Banks in both entities. The Banking Laws need to
strengthen supervisory powers, prudential and bank governance requirements, and to establish a
clear legal framework for addressing a failing bank.

9.      The Banking Agencies have intensified their supervisory approach and improved
since the last FSAP in 2006. Nevertheless, there are a number of areas that need to be addressed
such as deficiencies in the powers of the Banking Agencies in the course of ongoing supervision.
In particular, the laws of the Agencies should clearly define the regulatory instruments available
to the Banking Agencies for conducting ongoing bank supervision. Neither do the laws on the
Banking Agencies explicitly provide for powers to intervene in the operations of a bank. During
this FSAP a BCP Assessment was also completed, which elaborates further on this issue.

Legal Framework

10.    Banking laws and regulations in BiH are updated as necessary to ensure that they
remain effective and relevant to a changing industry; however, the legal framework needs
improvement in areas such as corporate governance, early intervention and resolution. The
Banking Act is silent regarding fit-and-proper criteria for members of the banks’ governing bodies.
A resolution framework is nonexistent. The legal framework needs to be improved in a number of
key dimensions to ensure sound and consistent requirements in the above-mentioned areas.

11.     Participants in the financial safety-net are entitled to protect depositors through
depositor reimbursement and there is room for improvement in the framework for bank
resolution. A future resolution framework should provide flexible resolution tools and powers.
The Bosnian authorities are in the process of drafting a new Law on Banks which will include
resolution provisions. The CBBH does not have lender of last resort responsibilities. Moreover,
banking regulation, supervision and licensing are separately performed by agencies in the two
                                                12
                                                13


entities, notwithstanding increased cooperation between the authorities. Ongoing efforts to
improve the existing crisis management framework should continue, and there is a need to continue
pursuing stronger cross-border supervisory cooperation.

12.    Some information exchange between the financial system safety-net participants is
provided in order to protect depositors and enable safety-net participants to intervene in
bank failures. But there is room for improvement in regard to the involvement of the DIA (see
assessment of CP 6). All communications between safety-net participants are subject to
confidentiality provisions. All safety-net participants have developed their own financial crisis
contingency plans which are used to create a single (master) plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina.

13.     Debt resolution, businesses reorganization and bankruptcy liquidation do work
effectively The Law on Bankruptcy Proceedings, court procedures as well as the debt enforcement
process need improvement. A separate assessment of the insolvency and creditor/debtor regime
will be provided as part of the FSAP.

Sound Accounting and Disclosure Regimes

14.    Accounting and disclosure regimes support the ability of the supervisor and deposit
insurer to adequately evaluate the health of individual banks and the banking system as a
whole. Audited financial statements of banks and similar financial institutions must be published.
With respect to the DIA a comprehensive deposit insurance information system has been
developed allowing access to detailed information about deposits on an ongoing basis. There is a
sound process in place to examine and verify the quality of data by the DIA.




                                               13
                                               14


                                    III. MAIN FINDINGS

           A. ASSESSMENT OF THE OBSERVANCE OF THE CORE PRINCIPLES

1.      The ratings for compliance were awarded according to the methodology prescribed
in the Core Principles Methodology (December 2010). This methodology established five levels
of compliance: compliant, largely compliant, materially non-compliant, non-compliant and not
applicable. The criteria for awarding these ratings are as follows:


          Compliant – When the Essential Criteria are met without any significant deficiencies.

          Largely Compliant – When only minor shortcomings are observed and the authorities
           are able to achieve full compliance within a prescribed time frame.

          Materially Non-compliant – Severe shortcomings which cannot be rectified easily.

          Non-compliant – No substantive implementation of the Core Principle.

          Not Applicable – Not considered given the structural, legal and institutional features
           of the deposit insurance system.




                                               14
                                                15


                 TABLE 1: DEPOSIT INSURANCE SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT TABLE
Core Principle 1: Public policy objectives. The first step in adopting a deposit insurance
system or reforming an existing system is to specify appropriate public policy objectives that it
is expected to achieve. These objectives should be formally specified and well integrated into
the design of the deposit insurance system. The principal objectives for deposit insurance
systems are to contribute to the stability of the financial system and protect depositors.

Description        The public policy objectives for the DIA are formally specified, publically
                   disclosed and well integrated into the design features of the deposit insurance
                   system.

Assessment         Compliant

Comments           The DIA’s two public policy objectives are protecting depositors and
                   contributing to financial stability.

Core Principle 2: Mitigating moral hazard. Moral hazard should be mitigated by ensuring
that the deposit insurance system contains appropriate design features and through other
elements of the financial system safety net.
Description         The design of the deposit insurance system recognises the existence of moral
                    hazard and mitigates it as much as possible, in line with public policy
                    objectives. However, certain deficiencies with the supervisory and regulatory
                    system identified in the FSAP need to be addressed in order to mitigate moral
                    hazard more effectively. This is of particular importance given that the
                    coverage limit is relatively high, covering 98.9 percent individual depositor
                    accounts and 56.2 percent of the total value of deposits in the banking system.

Assessment          Materially non-compliant
Comments           There are a number of deficiencies in the supervisory framework (e.g. need
                   to enhance the powers of the Banking Agencies) which needs to be
                   addressed and a bank resolution framework is missing. The weaknesses in
                   supervision and resolution do appear to be serious and pose limited restraint
                   on risk taking. In addition, DIA is not applying risk weighted premiums and
                   the deposit insurance fund is missing an official target ratio.
Core Principle 3: Mandate. It is critical that the mandate selected for a deposit insurer is
clearly and formally specified and that there is consistency between the stated public policy
objectives and the powers and responsibilities given to the deposit insurer.

Description        The DIA’s mandate as a pay box is clearly specified in the LDI and
                   consistent with the public policy objectives and the DIA’s powers and
                   responsibilities.

                                                15
                                                16


Assessment        Compliant

Comments          The DIA has a narrow “pay box” mandate, meaning it can only pay-out insured
                  deposits when the system is triggered.

Core Principle 4: Powers. A deposit insurer should have all powers necessary to fulfil its
mandate and these should be formally specified. All deposit insurers require the power to
finance reimbursements, enter into contracts, set internal operating budgets and procedures,
and access timely and accurate information to ensure that they can meet their obligations to
depositors promptly.

Description       The LDI provides the DIA with all powers necessary to fulfil its mandate and
                  DIA Management Board is making use of this powers effectively.

Assessment        Compliant

Comments          The DIA is an independent legal entity with full-authority under the law of
                  BiH. DIA has all necessary powers to fulfill its narrow “pay box” mandate,
                  e.g. calculating premiums and paying out insured depositors.

Core Principle 5: Governance. The deposit insurer should be operationally independent,
transparent, accountable and insulated from undue political and industry influence.

Description       The governance structure of the DIA is overall compliant and demonstrates
                  operational independence, transparency, accountability and integrity.

Assessment        Compliant

Comments          The DIA’s Management Board is well balanced and consists of
                  representatives of all important members of the financial safety-net. The
                  LDI should clarify that no active banker can be member of DIA’s
                  Management Board.

Core Principle 6: Relationships with other safety-net participants. A framework should be
in place for the close coordination and information sharing, on a routine basis as well as in
relation to particular banks, among the deposit insurer and other financial system safety-net
participants. Such information should be accurate and timely (subject to confidentiality when
required). Information-sharing and coordination arrangements should be formalized.

Description       Formal information sharing is foreseen in the LDI. Coordination
                  agreements have been developed between the DIA and the safety-net
                  participants which support the DIA in fulfilling its mandate. DIA is a full
                  member of the Standing Committee of Financial Stability (SCFS) and
                                                16
                                              17


                  participates in the Coordination Committee of Banking Supervision. There
                  is frequent exchange of information, however not on an automatic basis.

Assessment        Largely Compliant

Comments          As the MoU between DIA and the other financial safety-net participants is
                  over 10 years old, the financial safety-net participants should revise the
                  memorandum. The current exchange of information should be enhanced
                  and be on an automatic basis. Regular meetings should be used to discuss
                  and exchange views on all problem banks. Once the coordinated
                  contingency plan is drafted and the new Law on Banks is adopted, the
                  financial safety-net participants should engage in joint crisis simulation
                  exercises. Furthermore, all problem banks in Bosnia and Herzegovina
                  should be discussed in the SCFS.

Core Principle 7: Cross-Border Issues. Provided confidentiality is ensured, all relevant
information should be exchanged between deposit insurers in different jurisdictions and
possibly between deposit insurers and other foreign safety-net participants when appropriate.
In circumstances where more than one deposit insurer will be responsible for coverage, it is
important to determine which deposit insurer or insurers will be responsible for the
reimbursement process. The deposit insurance already provided by the home country system
should be recognized in the determination of levies and premiums.

Description       Currently, there are no branches of banks from BiH operating outside the
                  country where DIA could be responsible to insure the deposits held in such
                  branches. All foreign banks in BiH operate via subsidiaries which are full
                  members of DIA. As there are no current cross-border issues this Core
                  Principle is not applicable. In case the situation would change, DIA would
                  have the (legal) capacity to enter into cooperation agreements (e.g. MoU
                  with the Austrian authorities).
Assessment        Not Applicable

Comments          From DIA’s 26 Member Banks 15 banks are foreign owned (majority
                  foreign capital). Due to the high concentration of foreign-owned banks in
                  BiH, the Banking Agencies should be in a position to exchange information
                  about the financial health of the parent companies of foreign subsidiaries
                  and inform the DIA accordingly (for example via the SCFS). There is a
                  need for stronger cross border supervisory cooperation.




                                              17
                                              18


Core Principle 8: Compulsory membership. Membership in the deposit insurance system
should be compulsory for all financial institutions accepting deposits from those deemed most
in need of protection (e.g. retail and small business depositors) to avoid adverse selection.

Description       Membership in the DIA is compulsory for all banks licensed by the Bank
                  Agencies which meet the DIA’s membership criteria. There is currently one
                  bank operating in BiH which is accepting deposits while not being a
                  member of DIA as it does not fulfill the membership criteria.

Assessment        Materially Non-compliant

Comments          All banks which are allowed to collect deposits in BIH should be members
                  of the DIA. For the one remaining bank outside the DIA a solution has to be
                  found by the competent Banking Authority. In future, the membership
                  within the deposit insurance system should be linked to the issuance (and
                  withdrawal) of the bank’s operating license.

Core Principle 9: Coverage. Policymakers should define clearly in law, prudential
regulations or by-laws what is an insurable deposit. The level of coverage should be limited
but credible and be capable of being quickly determined. It should cover adequately the large
majority of depositors to meet the public policy objectives of the system and be internally
consistent with other deposit insurance system design features.

Description       Insured (guaranteed) deposits are clearly defined in law and public
                  decisions of the management board.

Assessment        Compliant

Comments          Coverage is limited to KM 50,000 per depositor per bank which is
                  relatively high (e.g., covering 98.9 percent of individual depositors and 56.2
                  percent of the total value of deposits). Thus it is imperative that safety-net
                  participants maintain an effective supervisory and regulatory system and
                  other measures to mitigate moral hazard.

Core Principle 10: Transitioning from a blanket guarantee to a limited coverage deposit
insurance system. When a country decides to transition from a blanket guarantee to a limited
coverage deposit insurance system, or to change a given blanket guarantee, the transition
should be as rapid as a country’s circumstances permit. Blanket guarantees can have a number
of adverse effects if retained too long, notably moral hazard. Policymakers should pay
particular attention to public attitudes and expectations during the transition period.


                                              18
                                                 19


Description        The Core Principle is not applicable as there is no blanket guarantee in BiH.

Assessment         Not Applicable

Comments

Core Principle 11: Funding. A deposit insurance system should have available all funding
mechanisms necessary to ensure the prompt reimbursement of depositor’s claims including a
means of obtaining supplementary back-up funding for liquidity purposes when required.
Primary responsibility for paying the cost of deposit insurance should be borne by banks since
they and their clients directly benefit from having an effective deposit insurance system. For
deposit insurance systems (whether ex-ante, ex-post or hybrid) utilizing risk-adjusted
differential premium systems, the criteria used in the risk-adjusted differential premium
system should be transparent to all participants. As well, all necessary resources should be in
place to administer the risk-adjusted differential premium system appropriately.

Description        The DIA is well funded and has a variety of funding mechanisms available,
                   including access to supplementary back-up funding, to ensure the prompt
                   reimbursement of depositors claims.
Assessment         Largely Compliant

Comments              As the EBRD back-up line runs out end of 2017, DIA should start now to
                      explore possible ways to secure proper back-up funding in the future. In the
                      light of the need to reduce the payout period in the future, the payout period
                      for any back-up founding source will also have to be shortened accordingly.
                      DIA should also abolish the possibility to invest its funds into private banks
                      and their bonds. Furthermore, the Agency should explore the possibility to
                      move its assessment base for annual premiums from “eligible” to “covered”
                      deposits. DIA’s deposit insurance fund is missing a public and transparent
                      fund reserve ratio.
Core Principle 12: Public Awareness. In order for a deposit insurance system to be effective
it is essential that the public be informed on an ongoing basis about the benefits and limitations
of the deposit insurance system.

Description        The DIA undertakes a range of good practices to promote public awareness
                   on an ongoing basis about deposit insurance.
Assessment         Largely compliant

Comments           The public awareness program should be evaluated on a regular basis for its
                   effectiveness.

                                                19
                                               20


Core Principle 13: Legal Protection. The deposit insurer and individuals working for the
deposit insurer should be protected against lawsuits for their decisions and actions taken in
“good faith” while discharging their mandates. However, individuals must be required to
follow appropriate conflict-of-interest rules and codes of conduct to ensure they remain
accountable. Legal protection should be defined in legislation and administrative procedures,
and under appropriate circumstances, cover legal costs for those indemnified.

Description       The DIA and individuals working for it are protected against lawsuits for
                  their decisions and actions taken in “good faith” while discharging their
                  mandates. Legal protection is defined in legislation and administrative
                  procedures, and under appropriate circumstances, legal costs for those
                  accused are covered.

Assessment        Compliant

Comments

Core Principle 14: Dealing with parties at fault in a failure. A deposit insurer, or other
relevant authority, should be provided with the power to seek legal redress against those
parties at fault in a bank failure.

Description       The relevant authorities (i.e., the public prosecutor) and the administrator
                  (in a liquidation or bankruptcy) are provided with appropriate powers to
                  seek legal redress against those parties deemed to be at fault in a bank
                  failure.

Assessment        Compliant

Comments

Core Principle 15: Early detection and timely intervention and resolution. The deposit
insurer should be part of a framework within the financial system safety net that provides for
the early detection and timely intervention and resolution of troubled banks. The determination
and recognition of when a bank is or is expected to be in serious financial difficulty should be
made early and on the basis of well-defined criteria by safety-net participants with the
operational independence and power to act.

Description       The deposit insurer is part of a framework within the financial safety-net
                  and provides to early detection via its own analysis of Member Banks. The
                  2014 BCP assessment identified a number of deficiencies in the supervisory
                  framework regarding early detection and timely intervention which need to
                  be addressed.
                                              20
                                                21


Assessment         Materially Non-compliant

Comments              Deficiencies in early detection and timely intervention should be addressed
                      through the development of draft legislation for an enhanced early
                      intervention and resolution regime (Law on Banks).
Core Principle 16: Effective resolution processes. Effective failure-resolution processes
should: facilitate the ability of the deposit insurer to meet its obligations including
reimbursement of depositors promptly and accurately and on an equitable basis; minimise
resolution costs and disruption of markets; maximise recoveries on assets; and, reinforce
discipline through legal actions in cases of negligence or other wrongdoings. In addition, the
deposit insurer or other relevant financial system safety-net participant should have the
authority to establish a flexible mechanism to help preserve critical banking functions by
facilitating the acquisition by an appropriate body of the assets and the assumption of the
liabilities of a failed bank (e.g. providing depositors with continuous access to their funds and
maintaining clearing and settlement activities).

Description        Republika Srpska and the Federation of BiH do not have a bank resolution
                   framework.

Assessment         Non-compliant

Comments           The Federation of BiH and the Republika Srpska should develop a
                   comprehensive resolution framework in line with international best practice
                   (Currently, with the help of the IMF the new Law on Banks is drafted and
                   shall include such provisions.)
                   If a role for the DIA or the use of its funds for the purpose of bank
                   resolution is foreseen in the future resolution framework, the provisions
                   should be in line with the revised and soon to be published IADI Core
                   Principles for Deposit Insurance Systems (CP 9 Sources and Uses for
                   Funds, EC 8). Proper safeguards should be foreseen so that the DIA is able
                   to perform its role as a deposit insurer and its funds are not depleted through
                   a bank resolution. For example, the deposit insurer should be informed and
                   involved in the resolution decision-making process. Where a bank is
                   resolved through a resolution process other than liquidation, the resolution
                   results in a viable, solvent and restructured bank, which limits the exposure
                   of the deposit insurer to contribute additional funding in respect of the same
                   obligation. Furthermore, contributions should be restricted to the costs the
                   deposit insurer would otherwise have incurred in a payout of insured
                   depositors in a liquidation net of expected recoveries (least cost rule).
                   Contributions should not be used for the recapitalization of resolved
                   institutions unless shareholder’s interests are reduced to zero and uninsured,
                                               21
                                               22


                  unsecured creditors are subject to parri passu losses in accordance with the
                  legal claim priority. The use of the deposit insurer’s funds should be
                  transparent and documented and be clearly and formally specified; it should
                  be subject to an independent audit and to ex-post review.

Core Principle 17: Reimbursing depositors. The deposit insurance system should give
depositors prompt access to their insured funds. Therefore, the deposit insurer should be
notified or informed sufficiently in advance of the conditions under which a reimbursement
may be required and be provided with access to depositor information in advance. Depositors
should have a legal right to reimbursement up to the coverage limit and should know when and
under what conditions the deposit insurer will start the payment process, the time frame over
which payments will take place, whether any advance or interim payments will be made as
well as the applicable coverage limits.

Description       DIA has developed an automated system for the payment of insured
                  deposits and is performing inspections how Member Banks keep depositor
                  records. Procedures for informing depositors about reimbursement
                  processes are specified in DIA’s contingency plan.
                  The LDI provides for three pay-out timeframes: The first two options
                  (Article 12.2.1 and 12.2.2) provide that the reimbursement process must
                  begin within 60 days from the date of revocation of license and completed
                  within 90 days from the date of revocation of license. The third situation
                  (Article 12.2.3) provides that the reimbursement process must begin and
                  end within 60 days from the date of revocation of the operating license. The
                  current framework requires reimbursement of depositors is too long to
                  promote public confidence and financial stability.

Assessment        Largely Compliant

Comments          The payout timeframe should be aligned with international best practice and
                  significantly shortened (e.g., to a maximum of 30 working days as it is the
                  norm now in the European Union). DIA should aim to further shorten the
                  payout delay in line with emerging international best practice of a payout of
                  7 days.

                  DIA should in addition to its internal stress testing also start with external
                  stress tests which should include other safety-net participants.

Core Principle 18: Recoveries. The deposit insurer should share in the proceeds of recoveries
from the estate of the failed bank. The management of the assets of the failed bank and the


                                               22
                                               23


recovery process (by the deposit insurer or other party carrying out this role) should be guided
by commercial considerations and their economic merits.

Description        The DIA shares in the proceeds of recoveries from failed banks. Asset
                   management practices emphasize maximizing economic returns.

Assessment         Largely Compliant

Comments           The revised Law on Banks should precisely define the term “secured
                   creditor". Furthermore, the Law on Bankruptcy Proceedings (or the revised
                   Law on Banks) should clarify that costs which are connected to the
                   reimbursement process have to be borne by the insolvent Member Bank.
                   The provisional administrator and the bankruptcy trustee should be obliged
                   by law to cooperate with the deposit insurer to facilitate the reimbursement
                   process.




                                               23
                                       24


  TABLE 2: SUMMARY OF COMPLIANCE WITH THE DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES

[Key: C = Compliant; LC = Largely Compliant; MNC = Materially Non-compliant; NC =
                       Non-compliant; NA = Not Applicable]

1. Public Policy              C
Objectives (PPOs)
2. Mitigating Moral           MNC
Hazard
3. Mandate                    C

4. Powers                     C

5. Governance                 C

6. Relationship with          LC
Other Safety Net
Participants
7. Cross-border Issues        NA
8. Compulsory                 MNC
Membership
9. Coverage                   C

10. Transitioning from        NA
Blanket Guarantee
11. Funding                   LC
12. Public Awareness          LC

13. Legal Protection          C

14. Dealing with Parties      C
at Fault
15. Early Detection and       MNC
Timely Intervention and
Resolution
16. Effective Resolution      NC
Processes
17. Reimbursing               LC
Depositors
18. Recoveries                LC


                                       24
                                       25


TABLE 3: RECOMMENDED CORRECTIVE ACTION PLAN TO IMPROVE COMPLIANCE WITH THE
DEPOSIT INSURANCE CORE PRINCIPLES

 CP 2: Mitigating Moral     There are a number of deficiencies in the supervisory framework
 Hazard                     (e.g. need to enhance the powers of the Banking Agencies) which
                            needs to be addressed and a bank resolution framework is missing.
                            The weaknesses in supervision and resolution do appear to be
                            serious and pose limited restraint on risk taking. In addition, DIA
                            is not applying risk weighted premiums and the deposit insurance
                            fund is missing an official target ratio.
 CP 6: Relationships        As the MoU between DIA and the other financial safety-net
 With Other Safety Net      participants is over 10 years old, the financial safety-net
 Participants               participants should revise the memorandum. The current exchange
                            of information should be enhanced and be on an automatic basis.
                            Regular meetings should be used to discuss and exchange views
                            on all problem banks. Once the coordinated contingency plan is
                            drafted and the new Law on Banks is adopted, the financial safety-
                            net participants should engage in joint crisis simulation exercises.
                            Furthermore, all problem banks in Bosnia and Herzegovina should
                            be discussed in the SCFS.

 CP 7: Cross-border         From DIA’s 26 Member Banks 15 banks are foreign owned
 Issues                     (majority foreign capital). Due to the high concentration of
                            foreign-owned banks in BiH, the Banking Agencies should be in a
                            position to exchange information about the financial health of the
                            parent companies of foreign subsidiaries and inform the DIA
                            accordingly (for example via the SCFS). There is a need for
                            stronger cross border supervisory cooperation (e.g. MoU with the
                            Austrian authorities).
 CP 8: Compulsory           All banks which are allowed to collect deposits in BIH should be
 Membership                 members of the DIA. For the one remaining bank outside the DIA
                            a solution has to be found by the competent Banking Authority. In
                            future, the membership within the deposit insurance system should
                            be linked to the issuance (and withdrawal) of the bank’s operating
                            license.


                                       25
                                     26


CP 11: Funding           As the EBRD back-up line runs out end of 2017, DIA should start
                         now to explore possible ways to secure proper back-up funding in
                         the future. In the light of the need to reduce the payout period in
                         the future, the payout period for any back-up founding source will
                         also have to be shortened accordingly. DIA should also abolish
                         the possibility to invest its funds into private banks and their bonds.
                         Furthermore, the Agency should explore the possibility to move
                         its assessment base for annual premiums from “eligible” to
                         “covered” deposits. DIA’s deposit insurance fund is missing a
                         public and transparent fund reserve ratio.
CP 12: Public            The public awareness program should be evaluated on a regular
Awareness                basis for its effectiveness.
CP 15: Early Detection   Deficiencies in early detection and timely intervention should be
and Timely Resolution    addressed through the development of draft legislation for an
                         enhanced early intervention and resolution regime (Law on
                         Banks).
CP 16: Effective         The Federation of BiH and the Republika Srpska should develop a
Resolution Processes     comprehensive resolution framework in line with international
                         best practice (Currently, with the help of the IMF the new Law on
                         Banks is drafted and shall include such provisions.).

                         If a role for the DIA or the use of its funds for the purpose of bank
                         resolution is foreseen in the future resolution framework, the
                         provisions should be in line with the revised and soon to be
                         published IADI Core Principles for Deposit Insurance Systems
                         (CP 9 Sources and Uses for Funds, EC 8). Proper safeguards
                         should be foreseen so that the DIA is able to perform its role as a
                         deposit insurer and its funds are not depleted through a bank
                         resolution. For example, the deposit insurer should be informed
                         and involved in the resolution decision-making process. Where a
                         bank is resolved through a resolution process other than
                         liquidation, the resolution results in a viable, solvent and
                         restructured bank, which limits the exposure of the deposit insurer
                         to contribute additional funding in respect of the same obligation.
                         Furthermore, contributions should be restricted to the costs the
                         deposit insurer would otherwise have incurred in a payout of

                                     26
                                 27


                     insured depositors in a liquidation net of expected recoveries (least
                     cost rule). Contributions should not be used for the recapitalization
                     of resolved institutions unless shareholder’s interests are reduced
                     to zero and uninsured, unsecured creditors are subject to parri
                     passu losses in accordance with the legal claim priority. The use
                     of the deposit insurer’s funds should be transparent and
                     documented and be clearly and formally specified; it should be
                     subject to an independent audit and to ex-post review.

CP 17: Reimbursing   The payout timeframe should be aligned with international best
Depositors           practice and shortened (e.g., to a maximum of 30 working days as
                     it is the norm now in the European Union). DIA should aim to
                     further shorten the payout delay in line with emerging international
                     best practice of a payout of 7 days. .
                     DIA should in addition to its internal stress testing also start with
                     external stress tests which should include other safety-net
                     participants.
CP 18: Recoveries    The revised Law on Banks should precisely define the term
                     “secured creditor". Furthermore, the Law on Bankruptcy
                     Proceedings (or the revised Law on Banks) should clarify that
                     costs which are connected to the reimbursement process have to
                     be borne by the insolvent Member Bank. The provisional
                     administrator and the bankruptcy trustee should be obliged by law
                     to cooperate with the deposit insurer to facilitate the
                     reimbursement process.




                                27
                                                           28


               TABLE 4: DETAILED ASSESSMENT OF DEPOSIT INSURANCE PRINCIPLES


    Principle 1        Public policy objectives

                       The first step in adopting a deposit insurance system or reforming an existing
                       system is to specify appropriate public policy objectives that it is expected to
                       achieve. These objectives should be formally specified and well integrated
                       into the design of the deposit insurance system. The principal objectives for
                       deposit insurance systems are to contribute to the stability of the financial
                       system and protect depositors.

    Description        The public policy objectives for the DIA are formally specified, publically
                       disclosed and well integrated into the design features of the deposit insurance
                       system.

    Assessment         Compliant

    Comments          The DIA’s two public policy objectives are protecting depositors and
                      contributing to financial stability.

Essential                1. The public policy objectives of the deposit insurance system are clearly
Criteria                      defined and formally specified, for example, through legislation or
                              documents accompanying legislation.6
    Description       The public policy objectives of the deposit insurance system are clearly defined
                      and formally specified in the Law on Deposit Insurance (Art. 1 (2) LDI). These
                      objectives are:

                           i)       the protection of deposits of natural and legal persons in banks
                                    licensed either by the Banking Agency of the Federation of Bosnia
                                    and Herzegovina or the Banking Agency of the Republika Srpska,
                                    and



6
  The public policy objectives of the deposit insurance system refer to the objectives or goals the system is
expected to achieve. The mandate of the deposit insurer refers to the set of official instructions or statement of
purpose describing its roles and responsibilities. There is no single mandate or set of mandates suitable for all
deposit insurers. Existing deposit insurers have mandates ranging from narrow, so-called “paybox” systems to
those with broader powers or responsibilities, such as preventive action and loss or risk minimisation/
management, with a variety of combinations in between.

                                                           28
                                            29


                 ii)     thus to contribute to the preservation of the overall financial
                         stability.

Comments

Essential        2. The public policy objectives of the deposit insurance system are
Criteria            publically disclosed.

Description   Public policy objectives are disclosed in the LDI and in DIA’s annual reports,
              flyers and the website of the DIA all of which are accessible by the public.

Comments

Essential         3. There is a review of the extent to which a deposit insurance system is
Criteria              meeting its public policy objectives on a regular basis (e.g. between two
                      to five years or on a more frequent basis as deemed necessary). This
                      review takes into consideration the views of stakeholders.
Description   The Management Board is reviewing the public policy objectives and how well
              they are met in the course of its semi-annual and annual business reports. Art.
              18.4 LDI also foresees an annual review of the LDI in relationship to the Law
              on Banks of both entites. Other stakeholders (on state and on entity level) are
              involved in this process via their seats in the Management Board of DIA (see
              CP 5 – Governance).

Comments

Principle 2   Mitigating moral hazard

              Moral hazard should be mitigated by ensuring that the deposit insurance
              system contains appropriate design features and through other elements of the
              financial system safety net (see Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance
              Systems “Preconditions” paragraph 16).

Description   The design of the deposit insurance system recognises the existence of moral
              hazard and mitigates it as much as possible, in line with public policy
              objectives. However, certain deficiencies with the supervisory and regulatory
              system identified in the FSAP need to be addressed in order to mitigate moral
              hazard more effectively. This is of particular importance given that the
              coverage limit is relatively high, covering 98.9 percent individual depositor
              accounts and 56.2 percent of the total value of deposits in the banking system.

                                           29
                                                        30


    Assessment        Materially non-compliant

    Comments         There are a number of deficiencies in the supervisory framework (e.g. need to
                     enhance the powers of the Banking Agencies) which needs to be addressed and
                     a bank resolution framework is missing. The weaknesses in supervision and
                     resolution do appear to be serious and pose limited restraint on risk taking. In
                     addition, DIA is not applying risk weighted premiums and the deposit
                     insurance fund is missing an official target ratio.

Essential                 1.The design of the deposit insurance system recognises the existence of
Criteria                    moral hazard and mitigates it as much as possible in-line with public
                            policy objectives. Specific design features that mitigate the risk of
                            moral hazard may include: limited deposit insurance coverage and
                            scope; where appropriate, deposit insurance premiums that are assessed
                            on a differential or risk- adjusted basis; and, minimizing the risk of loss
                            through timely intervention and resolution by the deposit insurer or
                            other participants in the safety net with such powers.
    Description      The deposit insurance system in BiH recognises the existence of moral hazard
                     and has a number of features mitigating the effect of moral hazard arising from
                     deposit insurance, these include:

                          i)       Limited coverage – the amount based on the LDI, decided by the
                                   Management Board of DIA and published in the Official Gazette of
                                   BiH is KM 50.000 (USD 33.100) per depositor, regardless of the
                                   balance and number of accounts in which the depositor keeps funds
                                   in a given bank or the number of claims to which said depositor has
                                   legal rights with respect to this bank (Art 4 LDI). The scope of
                                   deposit insurance is also limited (Art. 5 LDI) including the types of
                                   bank customers whose deposits are not covered (e.g., professional
                                   financial market participants, bank management as well as its
                                   shareholders),
                          ii)      the application of set-off when calculating the pay-out amount (Art.
                                   4 (1) LDI),
                          iii)     the basis for calculating the annual premium contributions could
                                   take into account risk (Art. 10 LDI)7,



7
  Currently, DIA is not making use of this provision as more harmonization of the banking supervisory practices in
both entities is needed before DIA can apply a uniform rating methodology for the whole banking sector.
                                                        30
                                            31


               iv)       banks’ obligations to inform clients who use or are interested in
                         using their services about the limited insurance coverage (Art. 9
                         LDI),
               v)        the DIA possesses inspection powers with respect to banks in terms
                         of data correctness (Art. 7a LDI),
               vi)       the liability in case of non-performance or improper performance by
                         a bank of obligations (Art. 24 LDI), and
               vii)      the cooperation with other safety-net participants.

            Besides the design of the DIA itself, there are other factors mitigating moral
            hazard through minimising the risk of loss, including but not limited to:

               i)        banking supervision – banks’ obligations as well as requirements
                         for them, and the powers of domestic banking supervision (the
                         Banking Agencies of Republika Srpska and the Federation of BiH)
                         are specified in the Law on Banks of the Federation of Bosnia and
                         Herzegovina and the Law on Banks of Republika Srpska, however
                         supervisory practice are lacking effectiveness,
               ii)       administrative powers of the Banking Agencies towards banks in
                         the event of a breach of supervisory regulations, and
               iii)      the DIA supports bank supervision by collecting and analyzing
                         information about Member Banks which aims to identify the
                         significant risks in a single bank. Indications obtained from these
                         findings are shared with the Banking Agencies. The DIA
                         participates as a full member at the meetings of the Standing
                         Committee of Financial Stability (SCFS) and is a permanent
                         participant in the Coordination Committee of Banking Supervision.

Comments    There are a number of deficiencies in the supervisory framework (e.g. need to
            enhance the powers of the Banking Agencies) which needs to be addressed.
            The weaknesses in supervision pose limited restraint on risk taking of banks
            which could not effectively limited by introducing risk-based contribution by
            DIA.

Essential      2.     The financial safety net creates and supports appropriate incentives to
Criteria              mitigate moral hazard. These may include: the promotion of good
                      corporate governance and sound risk management of individual banks,
                      effective market discipline and frameworks for, and enforcement of,
                      strong prudential regulation, supervision and laws and regulations (to
                      be assessed through a review of “Preconditions”, see pages 8-9.).
                                           31
                                             32


Description   The financial safety net creates and supports incentives to mitigate moral
              hazard, which are as follows (apart from the features enumerated in EC1):

                 i)        operationally independent, transparent and accountable financial
                           safety-net participants,
                 ii)       the existence of a variety of information sharing and coordination
                           arrangements (see CP6),
                 iii)      prudential regulations for banks, defined in the Law on Banks of the
                           Federation of BiH and the Republika Srpska, and
                 iv)       requirements regarding internal inspection/internal audit in banks.

              The 2014 FSAP (BCP assessment) showed that the system of banking
              supervision oversight has significantly improved since the last FSAP review in
              2006, but shortcomings remain. Both supervisory authorities have made
              progress in enhancing the regulatory framework and supervisory processes
              since the 2006 FSAP. However, the FSAP identified the following
              shortcomings:

                       Cooperation and coordination among the various institutions involved
                        in banking oversight is very complex, having potential repercussions in
                        times of financial sector stress.
                       Information asymmetries are created as the banking agencies do not
                        always share the full information on individual bank financial
                        conditions (e.g., CAMEL ratings) with relevant stakeholders (the other
                        banking agency, CBBH, and the DIA).
                       Several problem banks are identified and placed under special
                        supervision; however banks may remain in the category for an extended
                        period.
                       Supervisory activities frequently identify related and connected party
                        violation of regulatory limits. In addition, the domestic banking sector
                        has an opaque ownership structure. Root cause of this problem seems to
                        lie at the licensing and approval process that has been mostly formal
                        instead of substantial, and inadequate corporate governance and risk
                        management.
                       Enforcement powers are limited when addressing individual
                        supervisory board members and controlling owners. Regulations
                        establish requirements on internal controls and governance and the
                        responsibilities of the supervisory board. However, the enforcement
                                             32
                                              33


                       powers of the Agencies are limited for imposing penalties and fines on
                       supervisory board members. The authority for replacing or restricting
                       the powers of controlling owners outside of provisional administration
                       is also lacking.
                      Under the legal framework the agencies possess operational
                       independence, however government actions may impact future
                       independence.

              The authorities in BiH are currently working on a revised Law on Banks that
              should address the deficiencies in the supervisory powers, resolution tools, and
              consolidated supervision. This is a welcomed first step, but substantial
              improvements in prudential rules and in supervisory practices are necessary to
              mitigate moral hazard effectively.

Comments      While the measures taken with respect to promoting sound risk management
              and prudential regulation provide mitigation to moral hazard, there are a
              number of deficiencies in the supervisory framework (e.g. need to enhance the
              powers of the Banking Agencies, create a bank resolution framework) which
              need to be addressed.

Principle 3   Mandate

              It is critical that the mandate selected for a deposit insurer is clearly and
              formally specified and that there is consistency between the stated public
              policy objectives and the powers and responsibilities given to the deposit
              insurer.

Description   The DIA’s mandate as a paybox is clearly specified in the LDI and consistent
              with the public policy objectives and the DIA’s powers and responsibilities.

Assessment    Compliant

Comments      The DIA has a narrow “pay box” mandate, meaning it can only pay-out insured
              deposits when the system is triggered.

Essential         1.   The deposit insurer has a mandate that is clearly defined and formally
Criteria               specified, for example, through legislation or documents accompanying
                       legislation. The mandate clarifies the role and responsibilities of the
                       deposit insurer within the financial safety net.

                                             33
                                                          34


    Description        The DIA has a “paybox”8 mandate which is clearly defined and formally
                       specified in the LDI. The mandate provides for:

                                 1) the functioning of an obligatory and contractual guarantee system for
                                    all banks in BiH which fulfill the membership criteria (Article 3, 6
                                    LDI), including:

                                 i)      specifying the amount of mandatory annual contributions
                                         payable to DIA by the entities covered by the guarantee system,
                                 ii)     specifying the amount of coverage,
                                 iii)    insuring deposits in Member Banks under the conditions
                                         stipulated in LDI,
                                 iv)     issuing and revoking membership certificates for financial
                                         institutions which fulfil the membership criteria to join the
                                         insurance system, and
                                 v)      invest the assets of the Deposit Insurance Fund.

                                 2) Inspecting the correctness of depositor data included in banks’ IT
                                    systems and analyse other bank reports or audits (Art. 7a LDI).

    Comments

Essential                   2.   The mandate is consistent with the stated public policy objectives and
Criteria                         the powers, roles and responsibilities given to the deposit insurer.

    Description        The mandate is consistent with the stated public policy objectives (see CP1).
                       The protection of depositors and financial stability is maintained through the
                       provision of the depositor reimbursement arrangements and supported by data

8
 Mandates can range from narrow “pay box” systems to those with extensive responsibilities, such as preventive
action and loss or risk - minimisation/ management, with a variety of combinations in between. These can be
broadly classified into four categories:

      a.   A “pay box” mandate, where the deposit insurer is only responsible for the reimbursement of insured
           deposits;
      b.   A “pay box plus” mandate, where the deposit insurer has additional responsibilities such as certain
           resolution functions (e.g. financial support);
      c.   A “loss minimiser” mandate, where the insurer actively engages in a selection from a range of least-cost
           resolution strategies; and
      d.   A “risk minimiser” mandate, where the insurer has comprehensive risk minimisation functions that include
           risk assessment/management, a full suite of early intervention and resolution powers, and in some cases,
           prudential oversight responsibilities.
                                                         34
                                            35


              quality standards and inspection. The mandate of DIA is also consistent with
              its powers necessary to fulfil its responsibilities.

Comments

Principle 4   Powers

              A deposit insurer should have all powers necessary to fulfil its mandate and
              these should be formally specified. All deposit insurers require the power to
              finance reimbursements, enter into contracts, set internal operating budgets and
              procedures, and access timely and accurate information to ensure that they can
              meet their obligations to depositors promptly.

Description   The LDI provides the DIA with all powers necessary to fulfil its mandate and
              DIA Management Board is making use of this powers effectively.

Assessment    Compliant

Comments      The DIA is an independent legal entity with full-authority under the law of
              BiH. DIA has all necessary powers to fulfill its narrow “pay box” mandate, e.g.
              calculating premiums and paying out insured depositors.

Essential        1.  The powers (legal authority) of the deposit insurance system are clearly
Criteria             defined and formally specified in law or regulation (including approved
                     self-regulation in the context of private or public deposit insurance
                     systems).
Description   DIA’s powers are clearly defined and formally specified in the Law on Deposit
              Insurance (LDI).
              The most important of the LDI’s powers are as follows (see Art. 15 LDI):
                 i)      insuring eligible deposits of natural persons and legal entities in
                         member banks,
                 ii)     issuing membership certificates to those banks who qualify for
                         participation in the deposit insurance program,
                 iii)    revoking membership certificates,
                 iv)     investing the assets of the Deposit Insurance Fund pursuant to the
                         restrictions of the Agency’s Investment Policy and in accordance
                         with the LDI,

                                           35
                                        36


              v)      paying out deposit insurance in the event of a Member Bank’s
                      cessation of operations, and
              vi)     enacting bylaws regulating deposit insurance and the operations of
                      the Agency in accordance with the LDI.
           In addition, the DIA Management Board is provided with the following
           important powers (see Art. 18.4 LDI):
              i)      being the sole governing body of DIA,
              ii)     making decision on criteria for banks’ participation in the deposit
                      insurance program with DIA,
              iii)    approving membership participation of banks and membership
                      cessation of Member Banks,
              iv)     making decisions on the insurance premium collected from Member
                      Banks, and
              v)      making decisions on change in the deposit insurance coverage of
                      insured eligible deposits.
           The DIA Management Board may also institute by-laws and regulations in
           relation to the management of DIA and related administrative matters. In
           accordance with the LDI and the Statutes of DIA, the DIA Management Board
           shall supervise the activities of the DIA and shall also have powers including,
           but not limited to:
              i)      adopting corporate and financial plans for the DIA,
              ii)     reviewing annually the LDI in relationship to the Law on Banks of
                      Republika Srpska and the Federation of BiH,
              iii)    adopting an investment policy for the Deposit Insurance Fund,
              iv)     approving annually the appointment of DIA’s external auditors,
              v)      appointing an independent auditor for situations of dispute with a
                      Member Bank over reporting accuracy, and
              vi)     appointing members of the Agency’s Violation Committee.

Comments


                                        36
                                              37


Essential        2.     The powers of the deposit insurer are aligned to its mandate and public
Criteria                policy objectives.

Description   The powers of the DIA are consistent with its mandate and public policy
              objectives as stipulated in the LDI (see also CP1 and CP 3).

Comments

Essential        3.     The deposit insurer has the following minimum powers:
Criteria

                 a.  compel member banks to comply with their obligations to the deposit
                     insurer, or request that the supervisor or another safety-net participant
                     do so on behalf of the deposit insurer;
Description   The DIA may compel its members to comply with their obligations (for
              example, a Member Bank’s obligation on information and record keeping and
              providing reports) or request that the Banking Agencies do so (Art. 7 (7 and 8)
              LDI). These powers include:

                 i)        a procedure for undertaking actions against a Member Bank based
                           on a decision of the Management Board (Art. 7 (7) LDI, Art. 15 (3)
                           LDI),
                 ii)       imposing sanctions through its Violations Committee (Art. 24 LDI),
                           and
                 iii)      powers to apply to the Banking Agencies for proposing the
                           revocation of the Member Bank (Art. 7 (9) LDI).

Comments

                 b.     have the legal authority and capability to reimburse depositors;

Description   The DIA has the legal authority and capability to reimburse guaranteed funds
              to depositors (Art. 15 (1e) LDI).

Comments

                 c. enter into contracts (e.g., agreements/transactions to obtain goods and
                    services/insurance);
Description   The DIA is an independent legal entity with full-authority under the law of
              BiH (Art. 14 (3) LDI) and has the legal capacity to perform acts in law,

                                              37
                                            38


              capacity to be a party in court proceedings, enter into contracts and to acquire
              and to dispose of movable and immovable property.

Comments

                 d.   set internal operating budgets and internal policies and procedures (e.g.
                      in areas such as human resources and information technology);
Description   The DIA has an annual budget, which is developed (in the form of a Financial
              Plan) by the DIA’s Director and is adopted by the DIA Management Board.
              The financial plan in particular, determines the budget for staff training,
              investment in IT and staff remuneration which is sufficient for the operations
              of the DIA.

              DIA Management Board according to Art. 18 (4) LDI can:

                 i)      approve the Agency’s Statute and its other general enactments,
                 ii)     approve all regulations, policies, guidelines and fees for the
                         management and operation of the Agency and its Fund as required,
                 iii)    approve the salaries and benefits for all of the Agency’s staff upon
                         the recommendation of the DIA’s Director, and
                 iv)     adopt the Agency’s financial plan upon recommendation of the
                         DIA’s Director.

Comments

                 e.   access timely and accurate information to promptly meet their
                      obligations to depositors;
Description   The DIA can access timely and accurate information on its Member Banks.
              Prior to the fulfillment of guarantee conditions:

                 i)      banks are obliged to provide DIA with reports prescribed by the
                         competent Banking Agency, external audit reports and reports
                         prescribed by DIA itself and within set deadlines (Art. 7a (1) LDI
                         and DIA’s “Guidelines for Monitoring of Banks and Payout of
                         Insured Depositors”),
                 ii)     for evaluation of the bank’s eligibility to participate in deposit
                         insurance program, DIA can conduct on-site visitations to a bank to
                         confirm information received from the bank (Art. 7a (2) LDI),


                                            38
                                              39


                 iii)      DIA can prescribe the manner of keeping records on deposits in
                           Member Banks for the reporting of relevant data to DIA (Art. 7a (3)
                           LDI);
                 iv)       in order to test the accuracy of reporting to DIA and in accordance
                           with the Contract on Deposit Insurance between DIA and Member
                           Banks and its Annex, the DIA can carry out external and internal
                           controls of the Member Banks,
                 v)        Member Banks have to – at all times – make available to DIA
                           information on depositors and their deposits, in the form and
                           manner as DIA requests, and
                 vi)       DIA is also receiving information about Member Banks from the
                           Banking Agencies.

Comments

                 f.     share information with other safety-net participants;

Description   The scope and procedures of the exchange of information between DIA and
              other members of the financial safety-net (e.g., Banking Agencies, Central
              Bank) are defined in Articles 22 and 23 of LDI. In accordance with that
              provision:

                 i)        DIA is required, upon written request, to provide to the Banking
                           Agencies or any other state agency as appropriate, such information
                           that the Agency obtains pursuant to LDI,
                 ii)       the Banking Agencies and any other state agency are required,
                           based on mutuality, to provide necessary cooperation to DIA for the
                           accomplishment of the Agency’s responsibilities under this Law,
                           particularly with the purpose of the Agency’s obtaining all
                           necessary standardised reports from the Banking Agencies upon
                           written request,
                 iii)      the Central Bank shall, upon request of DIA, provide reports and
                           information it disposes with, that are needed for DIA to monitor
                           banks’ business operations regarding compliance with membership
                           criteria, and
                 iv)       the DIA has the legal right to expect that the Banking Agencies will
                           inform it of any action contemplated by the Banking Agencies in
                           response to action planned by the Agency and that was disclosed by
                                              39
                                            40


                         the DIA to the Banking Agencies or action planned by the Banking
                         Agencies themselves.

              In addition, the DIA is a permanent member of the Coordination Committee of
              Banking Supervision and the Standing Committee on Financial Stability
              (SCSF), where participants of the financial safety-net exchange information.

              There are no laws or regulation in place which would prevent DIA to exchange
              information within the financial safety-net and DIA does share information in
              the above mentioned ways and in the mentioned meetings and committees.

              The detailed scope of the sharing of information with other members of the
              financial safety-net is described in CP6 (Relationships with other safety-net
              participants).

Comments

                 g.   engage in information sharing and coordination agreements with
                      deposit insurers in other jurisdictions (subject to confidentiality when
                      required); and
Description   As an independent legal entity, the DIA may cooperate with deposit insurers in
              other countries. The DIA has the right to conclude agreements on information
              sharing with those entities, but has not made use of it as there are currently no
              cross-border issues (see assessment of CP 7).

              DIA is a full member of the International Association of Deposit Insurers
              (IADI) and the European Forum of Deposit Insurers (EFDI).

Comments

                 h.   engage in contingency planning.

Description   DIA has developed and implemented a detailed contingency plan for its
              operations.

Comments

Essential        4.   In support of the deposit insurance system, the other participants in the
Criteria              financial safety-net are provided with all powers necessary to fulfil
                      their mandates (see Preconditions).

                                            40
                                            41


Description   The powers of other members of the financial safety-net regarding the deposit
              insurance system (Central Bank, Banking Agencies, the MoF ) are referenced
              in the following acts:

                 i)      the Law on Banks of the Federation of BiH,
                 ii)     the Law on the Banking Agency of the Federation of BiH,
                 iii)    the Law on Banks of Republika Srpska,
                 iv)     the Law on the Banking Agency of Republika Srpska, and
                 v)      the Law on the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina.

Comments      An assessment of Preconditions and the review of the supervisory/regulatory
              system (see CP 2 and CP 15) indicate there are a number of deficiencies in the
              supervisory framework (e.g. need to enhance the powers of the Banking
              Agencies, create a bank resolution framework) which need to be addressed.

Principle 5   Governance

              The deposit insurer should be operationally independent, transparent,
              accountable and insulated from undue political and industry influence.

Description   The governance structure of the DIA is overall compliant and demonstrates
              operational independence, transparency, accountability and integrity. The LDI
              should clarify that no active banker can be member of DIA’s Management
              Board.

Assessment    Compliant

Comments      The DIA’s Management Board is well balanced and consists of representatives
              of all important members of the financial safety-net.

Essential        1.   The deposit insurer is able to use the powers and means assigned to it
Criteria              without undue influence from external parties. There is in practice no
                      significant evidence of government or industry interference in the
                      operational independence of the deposit insurer and its ability to obtain
                      and deploy the resources needed to carry out its mandate.
Description   The DIA is an independent, non-profit legal entity (Art. 14 (3) LDI) with full
              authority under the law of BiH. It consists of a head office and of branches in
              the two state entities.



                                            41
                                        42


           Within the scope of its operations the DIA manages its operations on an
           independent basis (Art. 16 (1) LDI).

           The sole governing body of DIA is the DIA Management Board (Art. 18 LDI).
           The Management Board consists of:

              i)      the Governor of the Central Bank, or his / her nominee, is ex officio
                      a member of the Management Board,
              ii)     the Minister for Treasury of the Institutions of Bosnia and
                      Herzegovina, or his / her nominee, is ex officio a member of the
                      Management Board,
              iii)    the Governing Board of the Central Bank has the right to appoint
                      one member of the Management Board, and
              iv)     the Minister of Finance of the Federation of BiH and the Minister of
                      Finance of the Republika Srpska each has the right to appoint one
                      member from their respective entities to the Management Board.

           Each donor agency or nation has the right to appoint an advisor to the
           Management Board (Art. 19.3 (10)). Currently there are two advisors one from
           the German KfW (“Kreditanstalt fuer Wiederaufbau”) and USAID.

           The Management Board elects a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from among
           its members. The Directors of the Banking Agencies, should they be appointed
           to this Management Board by one of the appointing authorities, cannot serve as
           either Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Board.

           The Management Board appoints the DIA’s Director (which represents and
           manages the DIA), approves the Statues and other regulations, approves new
           Member Banks applications, adopts the investment policy and decides about
           the insurance premium rate.

           The DIA is independent in its formulation of the Annual Financial Plan, which
           constitutes the basis for its financial operations.

           Independent funding of DIA is guaranteed as its operational expenses are
           financed from membership fees and returns on investment of the Deposit
           Protection Fund’s capital.

Comments


                                        42
                                            43


Essential        2. The operational funding of the deposit insurer is provided in a manner
Criteria            that does not undermine its autonomy or independence and permits it to
                    fulfil its mandate. Examples include:
                 a) Salary scales that allow it to attract and retain qualified staff;

Description   The DIA is independent in its formulation of its Annual Financial Plan, which
              constitutes the basis for its financial operations. The financial plan is compiled
              by the DIA’s Director and is adopted by the DIA Management Board.

              Determining the remuneration levels of DIA employees is the decision of the
              DIA Management Board upon a recommendation of the Director (Art. 18.4 (1)
              Nr. 14 LDI). The DIA offers its employees also diverse benefits or
              compensations (e.g. for meals, transportation).

              In accordance with the Financial Plan for 2014, expenditures due to DIA
              employee remuneration amounted to 53 percent of total costs. DIA has
              currently 19 staff members.

Comments

                  b) The ability to hire outside experts to deal with special situations,
                      subject to appropriate confidentiality restrictions;
Description   The DIA, having legal person status and thereby being fully entitled to enter
              into legally binding agreements, has the right to contract the services of
              external experts. According to Art. 2 of the “Regulation on Internal
              Organisations and Systematization of Working Positions” this hiring is
              foreseen for technical functions necessary for the Agency’s development that
              are not available within the existing DIA’s labor pool.

              Persons providing services to DIA are bound by a confidentiality requirement
              (Art. 20 LDI) to keep as a business secret all the information that they have
              gained during their work.

Comments

                   c) A training budget and programme that provides appropriate training
                      opportunities for staff;
Description   According to the Art. 74 of the “Rules of Procedure” the DIA shall constantly
              try to give opportunities to employees for advanced training. Funds for training
              are allocated in the financial plan. According to the 2014 Financial Plan,
                                            43
                                            44


              expenditures on training courses amounted to 1.2 percent of total costs. In
              2013, staff attended seminars in accounting standards, market risks and
              international standards for financial reporting, electronic archive management
              and public procurement.

Comments

                  d) A budget for computers and other equipment sufficient to equip its staff
                      with tools needed to fulfil its mandate; and
Description   Funds for capital expenditures on and maintenance of IT hardware and
              software are allocated in the annual DIA Financial Plan as Current
              Maintenance Costs. According to the 2014 Financial Plan, expenditures on
              tangible assets and services in the area of IT amounted to 1.75 percent of total
              costs. In addition during 2014, DIA has invested in new pay-out software and
              the supporting hardware.

Comments

                 e) A travel budget that allows appropriate on-site work.

Description   Funds for business travel are allocated in the Annual Financial Plan.
              According to the 2014 Financial Plan, expenditures on business travel
              amounted to 5 percent of total costs.

Comments

Essential        3.   The governing statute, internal policies of the deposit insurer or other
Criteria              relevant laws or policies specify:

                 a.  the governing body and management are fit and proper persons and
                     have the requisite knowledge or experience;
Description   The LDI (Art. 18 (1)) specifies the composition and mode of appointment of
              the DIA’s governing body – the Management Board – and requirements for
              persons performing functions in this body.

              The sole governing body of DIA is the Management Board. The Management
              Board consists of:

                 i)      the Governor of the Central Bank, or his / her nominee, is ex officio
                         a member of the Management Board,

                                            44
                                            45


                 ii)     the Minister for Treasury of the Institutions of Bosnia and
                         Herzegovina, or his / her nominee, is ex officio a member of the
                         Management Board,
                 iii)    the Governing Board of the Central Bank has the right to appoint
                         one member of the Management Board,
                 iv)     and the Minister of Finance of the Federation of BiH and the
                         Minister of Finance of the Republika Srpska each has the right to
                         appoint one member from their respective entities to the
                         Management Board.

              Individuals in the DIA’s Management Board, who are not ex officio members,
              must be individuals who have achieved reputations for financial or banking
              expertise and who also possess reputations for high moral standards by which
              to perform their entrusted duties.

              The Management Board appoints the Director and the two Branch Directors of
              the DIA taking into consideration their background, e.g., educational, personal
              reputation and professional background (Art. 17 of DIA Statute).

Comments

                 b.   members of the governing body (with the exception of ex-officio
                      appointees) and the head of the deposit insurer are subject to limitations
                      on their term of appointment; and
Description   The mandate of Management Board members, who are appointed by an
              authority and who are not ex officio, is five years (Art 18 (7 and 8) LDI). Any
              member who is not an ex officio may be appointed for two consecutive terms
              only, so that during the appointment for each next mandate, at least two
              members from a previous mandate of Management Board shall be appointed.

              The Management Board appoints the Director and Branch Directors of the
              Agency for a period of five years (Art. 17 of DIA Statute). The Management
              Board may reappoint the Director and the Branch Directors without any limit
              as to the number of appointments but the full confirmation process must be
              repeated at each appointment.

Comments



                                            45
                                            46


                 c.   members of the governing body can be removed from office during
                      their term only for reasons specified or defined in law or rules of
                      professional conduct, and not without cause.
Description   A majority of the members of the Management Board has the right to remove a
              member of the Management Board for criminal or illegal conduct in breach or
              contravention of duties in connection with serving on the Management Board
              (Art. 18 (2) LDI).

              It is the duty and responsibility of the Management Board to inform the
              Council of Ministers of BiH of any criminal or illegal conduct of any member
              of the Management Board.

              A member of the Management Board shall be automatically suspended if
              acting in contradiction with any of the provisions on conflict of interest
              stipulated in Art. 18.1 (10 – 13) LDI.

Comments

Essential        4.  The members of the governing body (e.g., directors or officers) and
Criteria             management of the deposit insurer are held accountable to a higher
                     authority, whether public or private, through a transparent framework
                     for the discharge of the system’s duties in relation to its objectives and
                     mandate.
Description   The Management Board is responsible for the activities of the DIA (Art. 18.5
              LDI). The Management Board adopts the Annual Business Report and
              Financial Plan for the next year and submits it for publication in the “Official
              Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina” within three months from the end of the
              preceding calendar year.

              The Management Board also provides a copy of its annual business report and
              its Financial Plan to the Presidency of BiH for information within three months
              from the end of the preceding calendar year.

              The Director and the Branch Directors are responsible for their work to the
              Management Board (Art. 19.2 (7) LDI).

Comments




                                            46
                                            47


Essential        5.   The deposit insurer operates in a transparent and responsible manner. It
Criteria              discloses and publishes on a regular basis appropriate information on its
                      activities, governance practices, structure and financial results.
Description   The Management Board adopts the Annual Business Report and Financial Plan
              for the next year and submits it for publication in the “Official Gazette of
              Bosnia and Herzegovina” within three months from the end of the preceding
              calendar year.

              The Management Board also provides a copy of its Annual Business Report
              and its financial plan to the Presidency of BiH for information within three
              months from the end of the preceding calendar year.

              The DIA ensures the transparency of its operations in co-operation with media
              and with informing the public about DIA’s work and operation, as it is
              foreseen in Art. 20 DIA Statutes. According to its statute, a leading principle is
              that the DIA’s work and operation is to be made transparent to the public by
              publishing any information that has not been declared a business secret by the
              Management Board.

Comments

Essential        6.  The deposit insurer is structured such that the potential for conflicts of
Criteria             interest for or between members of the governing body and
                     management is minimised and that they are subjected to appropriate
                     codes of conduct/ethics.
Description   According to Art. 18.1 LDI, Management Board members cannot be related to
              one another, or to the DIA’s Director or the Branch Directors, by blood or
              marriage, up to the third degree of consanguinity.

              Management Board members cannot be executives or members of the
              supervisory or management board of any Member Bank, or any other bank
              licensed within BiH, during the course of their mandate.

              Management Board members cannot own, either directly or indirectly, more
              than 5 percent of the equity of any Member Bank and must disclose in writing
              to the Management Board any equity interest that is held in a Member Bank by
              them or by any one related to them, by blood or marriage, up to the third
              degree of consanguinity.


                                            47
                                             48


              Management Board members must provide to the DIA a written disclosure of
              all interests they, or any one related to them, by blood or marriage, up to the
              third degree of consanguinity, have in any other bank or commercial enterprise
              in which they own more than five percent of a bank’s or an enterprise’s equity.

              The Director and the Branch Directors cannot be members of the Supervisory
              or Management Board of any Member Bank or any other bank by themselves
              or by any one related to them, by blood or marriage, up to the third degree of
              consanguinity (Art. 19 (5) LDI).

              The Director or the Branch Directors cannot own, by themselves or by any one
              related to them, by blood or marriage, up to the third degree of consanguinity,
              either directly or indirectly, more than 5 percent of the equity of any Member
              Bank (Art. 19.1 (6) LDI).

              The Director and the Branch Directors must provide to the DIA a written
              disclosure of all interests they have by themselves or by any one related to
              them, by blood or marriage, up to the third degree of consanguinity, in any
              Member Bank and in any other bank or commercial enterprise in which they
              own of any share of a bank’s equity or they own more than 5 percent of an
              enterprise’s equity, or they are members of the supervisory or management
              boards of any commercial enterprise (Art. 19.1 (7) LDI).

              The Director and the Branch Directors shall not accept a position in a Member
              Bank within 2 years after their employment with the Agency has ended without
              the prior written permission of the DIA’s Management Board (Art. 19.1 (8)
              LDI).

Comments      At least in theory, the Central Bank and the two Ministers of Finance of the
              entities could nominate an active banker to the Board of DIA who is not an
              executive of a bank (e.g. bank clerk). However unlikely an appointment of
              such a person is, it is best practice that no active bankers are represented in the
              Board of a deposit insurer and the LDI should be clarified in that sense.

Essential        7.   The deposit insurer takes into consideration the views of stakeholders.
Criteria

Description   The DIA communicates and consulates with the Banking Association of BiH
              on a frequent and constant basis (monthly Banking Coordination meetings,
                                            48
                                                         49


                      annual General Assembly of the Banking Association) and on an ad-hoc basis
                      (e.g. concerning legal changes to the LDI via consultations) which is sufficient
                      for banking sector of the size of BiH.



    Comments

Essential                 8.  Where decision making is delegated by the governing body of the
Criteria                      deposit insurer to its employees, the governing body has appropriate
                              procedures to oversee the exercise of delegation.
    Description       There is no delegation of decision making processes as the Management Board
                      is the sole decision making body of the DIA (Art. 18 (1) LDI).

    Comments

Essential                 9.    The deposit insurer is subjected to regular external audits with reports
Criteria                        provided to the authority to which it is accountable.

    Description       There is an annual external audit of DIA, the auditors are appointed by the
                      Management Board (Art. 18.4 Nr. 16 LDI). The reports are – as part of the
                      annual business report – published and sent to the Presidency of BiH.

    Comments

Essential                 10.   The deposit insurer has a governing body approved strategic plan in
Criteria                        place.9

    Description       The Management Board adopts a work program on an annual basis which is
                      proposed by the Director which includes strategic aspects. It also identified in
                      its 2013 “Plan for Crisis Situation” activities and recommendations for
                      improvement and development of its operations during the next period.

    Comments          However, a strategic plan which combines and consolidates the strategic
                      planning contained in different documents is missing.




9
 The term “strategic plan” refers to a document which sets out an organisation’s goals and how it plans to
achieve them.

                                                         49
                                            50


Essential        11.   Regular board meetings are held (e.g. on a quarterly basis or more
Criteria               frequently as deemed necessary).

Description   Sessions of the Management Board may be held on an ad hoc basis but must be
              held at least once each calendar quarter (Art. 18.3 (1) LDI). In practice, 10 to
              11 meetings are held every year.

Comments

Additional       1. The deposit insurer adheres to best practices in corporate governance,
Criterion           such as:

                 a.  Regular assessments of the extent to which the governing body is
                     meeting its objectives are carried out. Systems and practices are in
                     place to facilitate assessments of its effectiveness;
Description   Not applicable

Comments

                 b.   The governing body has a well-defined charter that outlines the specific
                      powers reserved for the board and those delegated to management.
Description   The Management Board has adopted the DIA Statutes which outlines the
              specific powers. DIA’s “Regulation on Internal Organisation and
              Systematisation of the DIA of BiH” determines the duties, tasks and
              conditions for performing the duties of different work positions within the
              Agency.

Comments

Principle 6   Relationships with other safety-net participants

              A framework should be in place for the close coordination and information
              sharing, on a routine basis as well as in relation to particular banks, among the
              deposit insurer and other financial system safety-net participants. Such
              information should be accurate and timely (subject to confidentiality when
              required). Information-sharing and coordination arrangements should be
              formalised.

Description   Formal information sharing is foreseen in the LDI. Coordination agreements
              have been developed between the DIA and the safety-net participants which
              support the DIA in fulfilling its mandate. DIA is a full member of the Standing
                                            50
                                            51


              Committee of Financial Stability and participates in the Coordination
              Committee of Banking Supervision. There is frequent exchange of supervisory
              information, however not on an automatic basis.

Assessment    Largely Compliant

Comments      As the MoU between DIA and the other financial safety-net participants is over
              10 years old, the financial safety-net participants should revise the
              memorandum. The current exchange of information should be enhanced and be
              on an automatic basis. Regular meetings should be used to discuss and
              exchange views on all problem banks. Once the coordinated contingency plan
              is drafted and the new Law on Banks is adopted, the financial safety-net
              participants should engage in joint crisis simulation exercises. Furthermore, all
              problem banks in Bosnia and Herzegovina should be discussed in the SCFS.

Essential         1. A framework for timely information sharing and the coordination of
Criteria              actions among the deposit insurer and other safety-net participants, on a
                      routine basis as well as in relation to particular banks, is explicit and
                      formalised through legislation, regulation, memoranda of
                      understanding, legal agreements or a combination of these instruments.
Description   The DIA receives from safety-net participants, as well as from Member Banks
              directly, information allowing prompt and effective payout procedures.

              The exchange of information among safety-net participants is formalised
              through legislation and agreements. The information received includes among
              other things data on depositors and deposits, reports on banks and the banking
              sector as well as bank ratings from the Banking Agencies and banks’ external
              audit reports. However, the exchange is not an automatic one (there is no
              automatic exchange of bank reports or access of the DIA to these reports), but
              questions of the DIA directed at the Banking Agencies have always been
              answered in a timely manner.

              The fundamental regulations ensuring that the DIA has access to timely
              information about the possibility of fulfilling the guarantee condition with
              respect to a bank covered by the deposit guarantee scheme are as follows:

                 i)      Art. 22 (3) LDI, stipulating that the Banking Agencies and any
                         other state agency are required, based on mutuality, to provide
                         necessary cooperation to the DIA for the accomplishment of the

                                           51
                             52


           DIA’s responsibilities under the LDI, particularly with the purpose
           of the DIA’s obtaining all necessary standardized reports from the
           Banking Agencies upon written request,
   ii)     Art. 22 (5) LDI, stipulating that the DIA has a legal right to expect
           that the Banking Agencies will inform it of any action contemplated
           by the Banking Agencies in response to an action planned by the
           DIA and that was disclosed by the DIA to the Banking Agencies or
           action planned by the Banking Agencies themselves,
   iii)    Art. 23 (3) LDI, stipulating, that the Central Bank of BiH shall,
           upon request of the DIA, provide reports and information it
           disposes with, that are needed for the DIA to monitor banks’
           business operations regarding compliance with membership criteria.

The Law on the Banking Agency of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
in its Art. 19 b (1d) and the Law on Banking Agency of Republika Srpska in
Art. 31 (1d) allow the respective agency to share confidential information with
the DIA.

The exchange of information between the DIA and the Banking Agencies is
further regulated by the “Letter of Agreement on Cooperation” from 2003. The
cooperation is based on mutuality and equality. On the basis of this agreement,
the main area of cooperation are:

   i)      sharing and exchanging of financial and other information on banks
           which may have influence on their present or future eligibility for
           the deposit insurance program of DIA, and conduction of their
           banking business in general,
   ii)     developing and applying a joint rating system for banks,
   iii)    timely informing each other on intended decisions regarding the
           issuance or revocation of banking licenses and/or deposit insurance
           membership certificates,
   iv)     cooperating in the area of information technology,
   v)      cooperating in the area of staff development, and
   vi)     cooperation in the process of bankruptcy and liquidation.

So far, a joint rating model has not been developed and each agency applies its
own model. The Banking Agencies and DIA exchange information on banks,
however this exchange is not automatic. For example, reports from the
Banking Agencies are not shared with DIA automatically and sometimes a

                             52
                              53


delay in the exchange occurs. On the other hand, all request for information
made by DIA have always been answered in a timely manner.

The exchange of information between safety-net participants has also been
supported by the creation of the Standing Committee for Financial Stability
(SCFS). Members of the SCFS are the Fiscal Council of BiH (Minister of
Finance & Treasury of BiH, two entity Ministers of Finance), the CBBH, the
two Banking Agencies and the DIA. The objective of the Standing Committee
is (according to its MoU from 2009) to promote financial stability and crisis
preparedness and facilitate crisis management. The parties to the MoU (in
normal as well as in crisis times)

   i)      ensure cooperation at all times through appropriate procedures for
           sharing of information and assessments,
   ii)     prepare common solutions and actions to manage a crisis,
   iii)    coordinate joint public communications, and
   iv)     establish contingency plans (including stress testing and simulation
           exercises).

The SCFS shall meet at least once every quarter to share assessments regarding
financial stability issues. Members can request ad-hoc meetings (and DIA has
requested so in the past). Issues discussed were the impact of the natural
disasters on the financial sector, the results of stress tests, information of the
health of the financial sector, and the draft amendments to the Law on Banks.

Both entities consider the SCFS a place where only systemic relevant banks (or
banks which are active in both entities) are discussed. This leaves the
discussion for smaller banks which nevertheless are a Member Bank of the
DIA to the entity level. In the Repulika Srpska a special committee has been
formed where such banks would be discussed. However, the DIA as an
institution at the state level is not a member of this committee. In the
Federation of BiH no such committee exists, but non-systemic banks would
still be only discussed at the entity level, resulting in the DIA potentially not
being involved in discussions of smaller non-systemic banks in the Federation.

The DIA is also a member of the Coordination Committee of Banking
Supervision, which also includes the CBBH and the Banking Agencies. The
Committee meets bi-monthly and even more often when needed. In the


                              53
                                            54


              meetings the state of the banking sector as well as the conditions of individual
              banks are discussed.

              Furthermore the DIA is involved in a Working Group comprising all financial
              safety-net participants which are drafting a new Law on Banks.

Comments      As the Agreement on Cooperation between DIA and the other financial safety-
              net participants is over 10 years old, the financial safety-net should revise the
              memorandum. The current exchange of information should be enhanced and be
              on an automatic basis. Existing regular meetings should be used to discuss and
              exchange views on problem banks. The provisions for cooperation should also
              be included in the new Law on Banks which is currently being drafted.

              All problem banks – regardless of their systemic relevance – should be
              discussed in the SCFS. Otherwise the DIA would not be fully involved in the
              ongoing exchange within the safety net which is key for its payout
              preparations.

Essential         2. Planning and operations of safety-net participants, both individually
Criteria               and together, not only cover past and ongoing circumstances but also
                       consider plausible future scenarios.
Description   The individual scope of planning and operations by the DIA encompasses
              consideration of plausible future scenarios, the central component of which is
              the DIA’s contingency plan from 2013 (“Plan for Crisis Situation”). The inter-
              institutional scope of planning and operations by DIA.

              The DIA carries out effectiveness tests with respect to its data systems,
              especially in terms of the payout process. For example, depositor data from
              Member Banks which are considered as problem banks are processed and
              checked twice a month.

              DIA is meeting the Banking Agencies on a quarterly basis. Through the SCFS,
              the Banking Agencies, the CBBH, the Ministry of Finance and Treasury of
              BiH and the entity Ministries of Finance meet regularly.

              With the help of the IMF, all members of the financial safety-net have written
              their own contingency plans. A coordinated plan of action is going to be
              developed in the future. The CBBH has the coordinating role for the task of



                                           54
                                            55


              integrating all the individual plans into a master plan (to be done by the end of
              2014).

              The financial safety-net participants have not yet undertaken joint crisis-
              simulation exercises.

Comments      Once the coordinated contingency plan is drafted and the new Law on Banks is
              adopted, the financial safety-net participants should engage in joint crisis
              simulation exercises.

Essential         3. All deposit insurers are provided with information on a timely basis to
Criteria              be able to reimburse depositors’ claims promptly including information
                      on the amount of insured deposits held by individual depositors.
Description   In order to ensure the correctness of information on depositors and on their
              claims in the event of the guarantee condition being fulfilled, banks covered
              under the deposit guarantee scheme are obliged to make available at all times
              information on depositors and deposits to DIA, in a form and manner the
              Agency requests them (Art. 7a (5) LDI and individual contract between DIA
              and Member Banks), and DIA has been granted the right to verify the
              correctness of data with on- and off-site inspections (Art. 7a (4) LDI).

              The scope and structure of the data that must be contained in a bank’s IT
              system are prescribed by the DIA (“Contract on Deposit Insurance between
              DIA and member institutions”, DIA’s “Guidelines for Monitoring of Banks
              and Payout of Insured Depositors”).

              The DIA has the right to receive, on an ongoing basis, data contained in bank
              IT systems that is necessary to carry out disbursement of guaranteed funds,
              thereby enabling DIA to monitor said data for correctness. The DIA also makes
              on-site inspection in Member Banks in line with its “Guidelines for Monitoring
              of Banks and Payout of Insured Depositors” at least once every two years.

              In practice, when DIA requests data it receives a full set of depositor data
              within 24 hours. Per month 2 - 5 Member Banks are tested. Problem banks are
              tested twice a month. The software is able to detect errors (e.g. misspellings of
              names or addresses).

Comments



                                            55
                                            56


Essential        4. Rules regarding confidentiality of information apply to all safety-net
Criteria            participants and the exchange of information among them.

Description   The DIA and other financial safety-net participants are obliged to comply with
              the following legal acts:

                 i)      Art. 20 LDI,
                 ii)     Art. 4 of the Letter of Agreement on Cooperation between DIA and
                         the Banking Agencies,
                 iii)    the Banking Acts – Art. 19 Law on the Banking Agency of the
                         Federation of BiH and Art. 29 Law of the Banking Agency of
                         Republika Srpska, and
                 iv)     other legal acts with general rules on confidentiality of information,
                         under which financial safety-net participants operate (e.g. Law on
                         Business Secrets).

              The above-mentioned acts specify data which are protected by the law.

Comments

Essential        5. The safety-net participants make information on banks that are in
Criteria             financial difficulty or are expected to be in financial difficulty available
                     to the deposit insurer in advance and, where confidentiality
                     requirements prevent this, or where the information is not available
                     from other safety-net participants, the deposit insurer has the power to
                     collect information directly from such banks.
Description   As described in EC1, the DIA with other safety-net participants:

                 i)      share and exchange financial and other information on banks which
                         may have influence on their present or future eligibility for the
                         deposit insurance program of DIA, and conduct of their banking
                         business in general,
                 ii)     timely inform each other on decisions regarding the issuance or
                         revocation of banking licenses and/or deposit insurance
                         membership certificates


Comments



                                            56
                                            57


Additional       1.  A deposit insurer with a broader mandate, such as “loss-” or “risk-
Criterion            minimisation”, has access to timely and accurate information so that it
                     can assess the financial condition of individual banks, as well as the
                     banking industry. These deposit insurers may also need access to
                     information regarding the value of the bank’s assets and the expected
                     time frame for the liquidation process, given that the value of a bank’s
                     assets depends, in part, on the time necessary to liquidate them.
Description   Not applicable

Comments

Principle 7   Cross-border issues

               Provided confidentiality is ensured, all relevant information should be
              exchanged between deposit insurers in different jurisdictions and possibly
              between deposit insurers and other foreign safety-net participants when
              appropriate. In circumstances where more than one deposit insurer will be
              responsible for coverage, it is important to determine which deposit insurer or
              insurers will be responsible for the reimbursement process. The deposit
              insurance already provided by the home country system should be recognised
              in the determination of levies and premiums.

Description   Currently, there are no branches of banks from BiH operating outside the
              country where DIA could be responsible to insure the deposits held in such
              branches. All foreign banks in BiH operate via subsidiaries which are full
              members of DIA. As there are no current cross-border issues this Core
              Principle is not applicable. In case the situation would change, DIA would
              have the (legal) capacity to enter into cooperation agreements.

Assessment    Not Applicable

Comments      From DIA’s 26 Member Banks 15 banks are foreign owned (majority foreign
              capital). Due to the high concentration of foreign-owned banks in BiH, the
              Banking Agencies should be in a position to exchange information about the
              financial health of the parent companies of foreign subsidiaries and inform the
              DIA accordingly (for example via the SCFS). There is a need for stronger cross
              border supervisory cooperation (e.g. MoU with the Austrian authorities).

Essential        1.   Appropriate cross-border bilateral/multilateral agreements are in place
Criteria              in circumstances where, due to the presence of cross-border banking

                                           57
                                            58


                    operations, coverage for deposits in foreign branches is provided by the
                    deposit insurer in another jurisdiction or by a combination of deposit
                    insurers in different jurisdictions. For example, where the home country
                    system provides coverage for the branches of its domestic bank, banks
                    in the host countries and/or the host country system provides
                    supplementary coverage for foreign bank branches.
Description   Not Applicable

Comments

                 a. The agreements involve appropriate home and host deposit insurers as
                    well as other appropriate financial safety-net participants when
                    appropriate, including in circumstances where one deposit insurer will
                    be solely responsible for coverage.
Description   Not Applicable

Comments

                 b. The agreements provide for ongoing close coordination and
                    information sharing between home/host deposit insurers and possibly
                    other safety-net participants, as well as in relation to particular banks
                    when necessary.
Description   Not applicable

Comments

                 c. The agreements specify which deposit insurer or insurers will be
                    responsible for reimbursement as well as premium assessment, cost
                    sharing, and the deposit insurance public awareness issues raised by
                    cross-border banking.
Description   Not Applicable

Comments

Essential        2.   Depositors in the jurisdictions affected by cross-border banking
Criteria              arrangements are provided with clear and easily understandable
                      information on the existence and identification of the deposit insurance
                      system legally responsible for reimbursement and the limits and scope
                      of coverage. Information on the deposit insurance system’s source of
                      funding and standard claims procedures and reimbursement options is
                      also available to affected depositors (e.g. such as on the deposit
                      insurer’s website, through printed materials or similar means).

                                           58
                                            59


Description   Not Applicable

Comments

Principle 8   Compulsory membership

              Membership in the deposit insurance system should be compulsory for all
              financial institutions accepting deposits from those deemed most in need of
              protection (e.g. retail and small business depositors) to avoid adverse selection.

Description   Membership in the DIA is compulsory for all banks licensed by the Banking
              Agencies which meet the DIA’s membership criteria. There is currently one
              bank operating in BiH which is accepting deposits while not being a member
              of DIA as it does not fulfill the membership criteria.

Assessment    Materially non-compliant

Comments      All banks which are allowed to collect deposits in BiH should be members of
              the DIA. For the one remaining bank outside the DIA a solution has to be
              found by the competent Banking Authority. In future, the membership within
              the deposit insurance system should be linked to the issuance (and withdrawal)
              of the bank’s operating license.

Essential        1. Membership in a deposit insurance system is compulsory for all
Criteria            financial institutions accepting deposits from those deemed most in
                    need of protection (e.g. retail or individual depositors and small
                    business depositors).
Description   Membership in the DIA is compulsory for all domestic banks licensed by the
              Banking Agencies which meet the DIA’s membership criteria (Art. 6 (1) LDI).

              The DIA must determine that a bank meets all requirements and all safety and
              soundness criteria established by the LDI as well as the Law on Banks of the
              Federation of BiH or the Republika Srpska, before issuing a membership
              certificate to a bank. Newly formed banks have to give evidence of their ability
              to meet the membership criteria for the next 3 calendar years. Final decision
              about membership is the sole authority of the DIA (Art. 6 (8) LDI). A newly
              licensed bank would therefore be without deposit insurance coverage as DIA
              cannot prevent the issuing of the license, which is not an acceptable praxis.



                                            59
                             60


Member Banks, in addition to being licensed by the competent Banking
Agency, must meet the following criteria (“quality standards”) laid down in
Art 7 (1) LDI (which the DIA has further specified in its “Decision on Bank’s
Participation Criteria in the Deposit Insurance Program”) :

           i) capital,
           ii) liquidity,
           iii) asset quality,
           iv) governance,
           v) profitability,
           vi) accounting standards,
           vii) reserve and market risks.

For example, a bank can participate in the deposit insurance program as a
Member Bank only if its latest and currently still valid CAMEL rating given by
the competent Banking Agency is rated 3 or higher and with no individual
rating component rated 5 (Art. 7 (3) LDI). In addition, no bank under
provisional administration may apply for membership participation.

When a bank passes the criteria, the DIA and each Member Bank sign a
membership contract which defines the membership rights and obligations
(Art. 8 LDI). The membership contract is identical for each Member Bank. The
DIA provides the bank with a certificate that evidences the bank’s membership
in the DIA.

DIA is on an ongoing basis monitoring the Member Banks’ business operations
in regard to their compliance with the membership criteria (Art. 7 (6) LDI).
The DIA can verify the accuracy of reporting with off-site and on-site
examination at Member Banks. Member Banks are obliged to make available
to the DIA information on depositors and their deposits at all time and in the
form and manner as requested by DIA (Art. 4 Decision on Bank’s Participation
Criteria). In the case of status changes in Member Banks (e.g., a merger or
acquisition) membership in the deposit insurance program of the newly formed
bank has to be confirmed by the Management Board with a formal decision.

When DIA finds that the Member Bank has seriously deteriorated criteria (e.g.
the bank is undercapitalised or has insufficient liquidity) the DIA informs the
bank about it and the Member Bank has to provide DIA with an acceptable
rehabilitation plan within 30 days (Art. 5 Decision on Bank’s Participation

                             60
                                            61


              Criteria). If the bank does not submit or implement the rehabilitation plan, the
              DIA informs the respective Banking Agency which might lead to a revocation
              of the banking license (Art. 6 Decision on Bank’s Participation Criteria).

              As of 31 October 2014, the membership included 26 banks.

              When the DIA was established in 2002, the banking market in BiH was in
              turmoil and a several banks were under temporary administration. These were
              banks that did not meet the basic business criteria and were considered
              unstable. In order to deal with these problems but also to protect the Deposit
              Insurance Fund from immediate depletion, the decision was made that banks
              have to fulfil strict membership criteria to join the DIA. There was the
              (political) understanding at that time that the banks not qualifying for
              membership in DIA would soon be closed and liquidated. However, currently
              one bank (PBS in the Federation of BiH) still operates in the banking market
              which is not a member in the deposit insurance scheme. It is expected by the
              DIA that in the near future the remaining non-member bank will improve its
              business operations and thus fulfill the requirements for membership in the
              deposit insurance program or it will finally be resolved. As the DIA is legally
              bound to apply its membership criteria it is in the responsibility of the
              competent Banking Authority to find a solution for that bank which for 12
              years has been unable to meet the membership criteria.

              The DIA proposes to change the LDI after a solution has been found and link
              the membership within the deposit insurance system with the issuance (and
              withdrawal) of the bank’s operating license.

Comments      For the one remaining bank outside the DIA a solution has to be found by the
              competent Banking Authority. In the near future, the membership within the
              deposit insurance system should be linked to the issuance (and withdrawal) of
              the bank’s operating license.

Essential        2. Policymakers determine whether eligible banks will be given
Criteria            membership as a part of the licensing process or upon application to the
                    deposit insurer.
Description   See EC 1. Banks are given membership upon application to the deposit insurer.

Comments


                                           61
                                            62


Essential        3. Criteria for membership that detail the conditions, process and time
Criteria            frame for attaining membership are explicitly stated and transparent.

Description   See EC 1. Membership criteria are clearly defined in Art. 6 and 7 LDI and the
              “Decision on Bank’s Participation Criteria in the Deposit Insurance Program”.

Comments

Essential        4. If the deposit insurer does not control membership (i.e. cannot refuse
Criteria             membership), the law or administrative procedures describe a clear
                     time frame in which the deposit insurer is consulted about or informed
                     in advance of “newly licensed” banks.
Description   Not applicable as DIA is controlling membership. The final decision about
              membership is the sole authority of the DIA (Art. 6 (8) LDI).

Comments

Essential         5. When deposit insurance membership is terminated by the deposit
Criteria             insurer, arrangements are in place that provide for coordination in
                     withdrawing the bank’s operating license by the relevant authority. If
                     relevant, an appropriate general notice is given to depositors (e.g. on
                     the deposit insurer’s website) to inform them that any new deposits
                     issued will not receive deposit protection.
Description   The LDI foresees different ways to terminate membership in the deposit
              insurance scheme:

                 i)      Art. 12 LDI regulates the termination of membership in the deposit
                         insurance program when one of the Banking Agencies suspends a
                         Member Bank’s operating license and a pay-out of deposits
                         becomes necessary. After the official notification of the suspension
                         (in the respective Law on Banks it is regulated that the competent
                         Banking Agency notifies the DIA about revocation of the license),
                         the DIA Board decides about the termination of membership. The
                         decision is published in the Official Gazette of Bosnia and
                         Herzegovina and the Banking Agencies are informed. Art. 12.1 (4)
                         LDI stipulates that the Member Bank, when it receives the notice
                         of termination of its participation in deposit insurance, is obliged to
                         immediately notify in writing all existing depositors.
                 ii)     Art. 13 LDI regulates a termination of membership by decision of
                         the DIA Management Board which is not resulting in a deposit pay-
                                           62
                                                        63


                                       out. This termination of membership in this case is limited to
                                       situations where the member bank is not paying its deposit
                                       insurance premiums (Art. 13.2 and 13.3 LDI) and if external
                                       measures are imposed (Art. 13.4 LDI). In these cases the DIA has to
                                       inform the Banking Authorities about its decision and publish the
                                       decision in the Official Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The
                                       Bank has to make a public announcement that new deposit will not
                                       be insured.

 Comments               Art. 12 and 13 should be revised and clarified. Art. 13 raises concerns as the
                        termination of membership by DIA without withdrawing the bank’s operating
                        license will result in banks doing business without offering insurance for new
                        deposits. In principal all banks operation in BIH should be covered by the
                        deposit insurance system. In the revision, the provisions of Art. 13.4 LDI
                        should be dropped as the underlying reason for this provision seems to no
                        longer exist.

Essential                   6. All financial institutions accepting deposits are subject to strong
Criteria                       prudential regulation and supervision and are financially viable when
                               they become members of a deposit insurance system.10
 Description            All deposit-taking financial institutions are subject to supervision by the
                        Banking Agencies and must meet the requirements stipulated in the respective
                        Banking Laws and the strict membership criteria in the LDI. However,
                        weaknesses in the bank supervision framework and its implementation need to
                        be addressed.

 Comments

 Principle 9            Coverage

                        Policymakers should define clearly in law, prudential regulations or by-laws
                        what is an insurable deposit. The level of coverage should be limited but
                        credible and be capable of being quickly determined. It should cover
                        adequately the large majority of depositors to meet the public policy objectives
                        of the system and be internally consistent with other deposit insurance system
                        design features.



10
     See discussion “Preconditions”.
                                                        63
                                            64


Description   Insured (guaranteed) deposits are clearly defined in law and public decisions of
              the management board.

Assessment    Compliant

Comments      Coverage is limited to KM 50,000 per depositor per bank which is relatively
              high (e.g., covering 98.9 percent of individual depositors and 56.2 percent of
              the total value of deposits). Thus it is imperative that safety-net participants
              maintain an effective supervisory and regulatory system and other measures to
              mitigate moral hazard.

Essential         1. Insured deposits are clearly and publicly defined. This comprises the
Criteria              level and scope of coverage. If certain depositors are ineligible for
                      deposit protection, the criteria are clearly defined.
Description   The scope and limit of coverage is clearly defined in law and public decisions
              of the management board. The level of coverage is limited to KM 50,000 per
              depositor per bank. Deposits denominated in foreign currency are converted
              into KM for the purpose of a payout.

              In addition to the KM 50,000 limit on the level of coverage, the scope of
              coverage is restricted following the scope of the EC Directive of Deposit
              Insurance 94/19. The DIA covers natural and legal persons, but not depositors
              who are deemed professional financial market participants, like government
              and insurance companies, bank management as well as its shareholders (Art. 5
              LDI).

Comments

Essential         2. The definition of “insured deposit” reflects the public policy objectives
Criteria              of protecting depositors and promoting public confidence and financial
                      stability (e.g. protect small transaction accounts).
Description   The definition of insured deposits is based on EC Directive 94/19 (which BiH
              being not an EU member is not obliged to follow) and reflects the public policy
              objectives of protecting depositors and promoting financial stability.

Comments

Essential        3. The level of coverage is limited but credible (e.g. the level of coverage
Criteria            is high enough to maintain confidence, but limited to maintain market


                                           64
                                                          65


                             discipline). The level of coverage is consistent with the deposit
                             insurer’s public policy objectives.
 Description          Based on the data provided by the DIA, the current limit covers 98.9 percent of
                      depositors and 56.2 percent of the total value of deposit liabilities (as of
                      beginning of 2014). The coverage limit was raised by the Management Board
                      to KM 50,000 beginning of 2014.

 Comments

Essential                 4. Depositors have sufficient information readily available to determine
Criteria                     the amount of coverage for their individual deposits.

 Description          The level of coverage is clearly described in the website of the DIA, in
                      brochures, booklets and in information provided by banks.

 Comments

Essential                 5. The coverage limit applies equally to all banks in a deposit insurance
Criteria                     system.

 Description          There is only one coverage limit for all banks.

 Comments

Essential                6. The deposit insurance system does not incorporate co-insurance, where
Criteria                     depositors absorb some portion of the loss under the coverage limit in
                             the event of bank failure.11
 Description          Co-insurance is not part of the design features of the DIA.

 Comments

Essential                 7. Deposit insurance coverage is reviewed periodically to ensure that it
Criteria                     can meet the public policy objectives of the deposit insurance system.

 Description          Twice a year as part of its target ratio analysis DIA reviews if the coverage
                      level is sufficient. This analysis takes into account among other things the


11
  Although the use of co-insurance can encourage depositors to monitor bank risk taking, it presents a number
of serious problems. In order to provide effective market discipline it assumes that depositors will have access
to the necessary financial information and that most retail/individual depositors can accurately assess risk.
And, even when depositors are in a position to make such determinations, co-insurance provides strong
incentives for depositors to run on a bank to avoid even a small loss of their funds.
                                                         65
                                                          66


                      coverage level in neighboring countries, the European Union and the effects of
                      an expanded coverage on the Deposit Insurance Fund.

 Comments

Additional                 1. If set-off is utilized by the deposit insurance system, it is consistent
Criterion                     with the prevailing legal framework.

Description           DIA utilizes set-off which is in line with the national insolvency laws (Art. 4
                      (1) LDI). DIA’s pay-out software allows it to calculate the set-off amount and
                      still be able to compensate depositors within the given time frame.. The
                      maximum amount of an insured deposit, including any accrued interest, to be
                      reimbursed by the DIA per depositor is the eligible deposit less legal or
                      contractual debt owed to the Member Bank by the depositor up to the amount
                      determined by the decision of the Management Board of the Agency or
                      whichever is smaller. Set-off is only utilized with claims due at the time of the
                      compensation event.

Comments

Additional                 2. In the event of a merger of separate banks that are members of the
Criterion                     deposit insurance system, depositors of the merged banks enjoy
                              separate coverage (up to the maximum coverage limit) for each of the
                              banks for a limited but publicly stated period in which case the merging
                              banks must be held responsible for notification of affected depositors,
                              including the date at which time the separate coverage will expire.

Description           Not assessed (such a provision does not exist in LDI).

Comments              DIA should consider to introduce such a regulation.

 Principle 10         Transitioning from a blanket guarantee to a limited coverage deposit
                      insurance system

                      When a country decides to transition from a blanket guarantee to a limited
                      coverage deposit insurance system, or to change a given blanket guarantee, the
                      transition should be as rapid as a country’s circumstances permit.12 Blanket

12
  A “blanket guarantee” is a declaration by authorities that in addition to the protection provided by limited
coverage deposit insurance or other arrangements, certain deposits and perhaps other financial instruments
                                                          66
                                                          67


                      guarantees can have a number of adverse effects if retained too long, notably
                      moral hazard. Policymakers should pay particular attention to public attitudes
                      and expectations during the transition period.

 Description          The Core Principle is not applicable as there is no blanket guarantee in BiH.

 Assessment            Not Applicable

 Comments

Essential                1. A situational analysis of the economic environment as it affects the
Criteria                    banking system is conducted before a country begins a transition from a
                            blanket guarantee to limited coverage.
 Description          Not Applicable

 Comments

Essential                2. The situational analysis assesses structure and soundness of the banking
Criteria                    system including an evaluation of the condition of banks’ capital,
                            liquidity, credit quality, risk management policies and practices, and the
                            extent of any problems; and an evaluation of the number, type and
                            characteristics of banks.
 Description          Not Applicable

 Comments

Essential                3. The situational analysis assesses the strength of prudential regulation
Criteria                    and supervision, the effectiveness of the legal framework, and the
                            soundness of the accounting and disclosure regimes.
 Description          Not Applicable

 Comments

Essential                4. The pace of the transition to limited coverage is consistent with the
Criteria                    state of the banking industry, prudential regulation and supervision,
                            legal framework and accounting and disclosure regimes.
 Description          Not Applicable


will be protected. A wide range of factors need to be considered when introducing blanket guarantees,
including decisions on the scope of the guarantee (e.g. the type of institutions, products and term maturities
covered) and whether the banks utilising the guarantees will be required to contribute in some manner to the
costs of providing the guarantees.
                                                          67
                                             68


Comments

Essential         5. Policymakers are aware of the tradeoff between the length of time it
Criteria             takes for the transition to the limited coverage system and the degree of
                     moral hazard in the system, and have planned the transition
                     accordingly.
Description    Not Applicable

Comments

Essential         6. Policymakers are aware of and anticipate the reaction of the public to a
Criteria             reduction in coverage levels. Policymakers develop effective
                     communication strategies to mitigate adverse public reaction to the
                     transition.
Description    Not Applicable

Comments

Essential         7. Where there is a high level of capital mobility, and/or a regional
Criteria             integration policy, the decision to lower coverage levels (and/or scope)
                     considers the effects of different countries’ protection levels and related
                     policies.
Description    Not Applicable

Comments

Essential         8. The new limited-coverage deposit insurance system has access to
Criteria             adequate funding during and after the transition. Policymakers consider
                     the capacity of the banking system to fund a limited-coverage deposit
                     insurance scheme. If the banking system is unable to fund the cost of
                     the blanket guarantee, government funding may be needed.
Description    Not Applicable

Comments

Principle 11   Funding

               A deposit insurance system should have available all funding mechanisms
               necessary to ensure the prompt reimbursement of depositors’ claims including
               a means of obtaining supplementary back-up funding for liquidity purposes
               when required. Primary responsibility for paying the cost of deposit insurance
               should be borne by banks since they and their clients directly benefit from
                                            68
                                            69


              having an effective deposit insurance system. For deposit insurance systems
              (whether ex-ante, ex-post or hybrid) utilising risk-adjusted differential
              premium systems, the criteria used in the risk-adjusted differential premium
              system should be transparent to all participants. As well, all necessary
              resources should be in place to administer the risk-adjusted differential
              premium system appropriately.

Description   The DIA is well funded and has a variety of funding mechanisms available,
              including access to supplementary back-up funding, to ensure the prompt
              reimbursement of depositors claims.

Assessment    Largely Compliant

Comments      As the EBRD back-up line runs out end of 2017, DIA should start now to
              explore possible ways to secure proper back-up funding in the future. In the
              light of the need to reduce the payout period in the future, the payout period for
              any back-up founding source will also have to be shortened accordingly. DIA
              should also abolish the possibility to invest its funds into private banks and
              their bonds. Furthermore, the Agency should explore the possibility to move its
              assessment base for annual premiums from “eligible” to “covered” deposits.
              DIA’s deposit insurance fund is missing a public and transparent fund reserve
              ratio.

Essential         1. Funding arrangements for the deposit insurance system are provided on
Criteria             an ex-ante or an ex-post basis or some (hybrid) combination of these
                     and are clearly defined and established in law or regulation.
Description   The Deposit Insurance Fund’s primary source of funding is the insurance
              premium paid by its member banks on a quarterly basis (ex-ante funding). The
              funding is regulated in Art. 10, 11, 21 LDI, the “Contract on Deposit
              Insurance” between the DIA and the individual member banks and the
              decisions made by the Management Board on the amount of the insurance fee.
              The premiums collected are not risk-based.

              The funding arrangements are published in the Law and the Official Gazette of
              Bosnia and Herzegovina. For the year 2014 the annual insurance fee is 0.26 %
              on the basis of average eligible deposits at the end of each month including
              interest.

              Apart from premium fees the DIA receives membership fees (Art. 8 (3) LDI),
              return on investments of the Deposit Insurance Fund’s capital, recoveries from
                                            69
                                            70


              past bank insolvencies (there has been none since the introduction of deposit
              insurance) and donations (Art. 11 (3) LDI). DIA has also established various
              ways of back-up funding.

Comments      As the DIA is able via its IT system and deposit reports of its Member Banks
              to identify the covered deposits held with each bank it should explore the
              possibility to use covered deposits (instead of eligible deposits) as the
              assessment base for its annual insurance fee. Thereby the DIA would collect an
              insurance premium only for the actual risk which is insured. A move to this
              assessment base would have to include an adjustment of the current fee level as
              the DIA will still need enough annual premiums to meet its obligations.

Essential         2. Funding arrangements for the deposit insurance system ensure the
Criteria               prompt reimbursement of depositors’ claims and include a pre-arranged
                       and assured source(s) of back-up funding for liquidity purposes. Such
                       sources may include a funding agreement with the central bank, a line
                       of credit with the government treasury, or another type of public fund
                       or market borrowing. If market borrowing is used by the deposit insurer
                       it should not be the sole source of back-up funding. The deposit insurer
                       should not be overly dependent on a line of credit from any single
                       private source.
Description   The coverage ratio (relation between the capital of the Fund and potential
              liability of the DIA) amount to 4.6 % as per December 31, 2013. The
              supplementary sources of DIA funding are as follows:

                 i)      A credit line from the European Bank for Reconstruction and
                         Development (EBRD). On 27 January 2010, DIA has signed a loan
                         agreement with the EBRD for a period of seven years, which
                         enables the DIA in case of an insufficiency of funds to pay-out the
                         the insured deposits. The DIA may, at any time, withdraw a loan of
                         up to EUR 50 million. The loan is available within 15 business days
                         upon request without any further conditions to be met. For the
                         credit line the State of BiH has provided a guarantee.
                 ii)     The DIA has the possibility of calling for extraordinary premiums
                         from Member Banks. In accordance with Art. 10 (10) LDI, in the
                         case when the capital of the Fund is not sufficient for the pay-out of
                         insured deposits, additional funds are to be provided by an
                         extraordinary collection of insurance premiums from the Member
                         Banks. The decision of the extraordinary collection of premiums, its
                                           70
                                            71


                         amount and modalities of collection shall be decided by the DIA’s
                         Management Board.
                 iii)    The DIA has the option of taking loans and guarantees in
                         accordance with Art. 21 (8) LDI, thereby using future premium
                         payments as a security and as the source for debt repayment.

              DIA is considering introducing a legislative proposal that allows issuance of
              bonds as a form of back-up funding in the future.

              Due to its limited mandated, CBBH cannot act as a lender of last resort.

Comments      As the EBRD back-up line runs out end of 2017, DIA should start now to
              explore possible ways to secure proper back-up funding in the future. The 15
              day payout period for EBRD loan is only acceptable because the payout period
              is 60 days. In the light of the need to reduce the payout period in the future, the
              payout period for any back-up founding source will also have to be shortened
              accordingly.

Essential        3. Primary responsibility for funding the deposit insurance system is borne
Criteria            by member banks and is enforceable by the deposit insurer.

Description   The main source of funding of the Deposit Insurance Fund is borne by member
              banks.

Comments

Essential         4. If an ex-ante deposit insurance fund is established the size of the fund
Criteria              (e.g. the fund reserve ratio) is defined on the basis of clear, consistent
                      and well-developed criteria that aim at meeting the public policy
                      objectives. If an ex-post funding arrangement is used the main source
                      of funding is credible and readily available.
Description   The DIA has no pre-defined target fund level defined in the LDI. But DIA
              performs twice a year a mandatory analysis for the purpose of determining the
              insurance coverage, the premium rate and the adequacy of the current Fund
              level. The analysis is based on an evaluation of the quality of the entire
              banking sector and the risk of the Deposit Insurance Fund.

              It is the DIA’s conclusion that a fund reserve ratio of 5.85 percent is the worst
              case scenario the Fund would have to pay-out. As of December 31 2013, the
              financial resources at DIA’s disposal amounted to KM 285 million (USD 182
                                            71
                                            72


              million) in total. The total amount of funds at DIA’s disposal has been
              increasing steadily. The DIA’s ex-ante coverage ratio for guaranteed (i.e.
              insured) deposits is currently 4.6 percent (in comparison the new EU Directive
              on Deposit Guarantee Schemes only foresees a coverage ratio of 0.8 %).

              The current level would allow the payment of the guaranteed deposits of up to
              the 7th largest bank. Including the credit line from EBRD in an emergency
              case, DIA would be able to cover all guaranteed deposits up to the 4th largest
              bank. The DIA can cover from its own assets simultaneously the potential
              liability of the eight smallest banks (including EBRD credit line:
              simultaneously the nine smallest banks).

              DIA has a credible plan in place to reach the fund reserve ratio of 5.86 percent.

Comments      DIA’s deposit insurance fund is missing a public fund reserve ratio.

Essential         5. The deposit insurance fund has sound investment policies and
Criteria              procedures, internal controls and disclosure and reporting systems.
                      These are approved by the deposit insurer’s governing body and
                      subjected to regular review by an independent party. Investment
                      policies emphasise the need to ensure the preservation of fund capital
                      and liquidity.
Description   The DIA’s investment policy and guidelines are clearly defined in the LDI
              (Art. 11 LDI) and the DIA’s Investment Policy adopted by the Management
              Board (“Regulation on the Investment Policy for the Capital of the Deposit
              Insurance Fund” from November 26, 2008). All investments of the fund shall
              be undertaken with the view of preserving its capital and maintaining liquidity
              (Art. 11 (8) LDI).

              The investment policy for the Deposit Insurance Fund is based on achieving
              the following goals:

                 i)      Safety;
                 ii)     Liquidity;
                 iii)    Low volatility;
                 iv)     Transparency;
                 v)      Performance.



                                           72
                             73


In accordance with Art. 11 (6) and (7) LDI, the DIA shall invest the capital of
the Fund in fixed income securities issued by, or guaranteed by, member
countries of the European Union, European Union governmental agencies, and
European supranational agencies as well as in fixed income securities issued or
guaranteed by the government or governmental agencies of the United States
of America. All instruments must be denominated in Euro.

Participation of fixed income securities – government (sovereign) bonds, must
be represented in portfolio with at least 50% of total portfolio and 75% of total
portfolio being rated with at least A.

The DIA may also invest the capital of the Fund in fixed income securities or
other debt instruments issued by European Union banks or companies or
United States of America based banks or companies with the highest ratings.
Such banks or companies must have a minimum quality rating of “A-”,
according to an internationally recognized bond-rating agency.

The DIA is allowed to deposit money of the Deposit Insurance Fund with the
CBBH (Art. 11 (1) LDI and to keep operational accounts with Member Banks
(Art. 5 (2) DIA Statute). The premium of Member Banks are collected at the
account at the CBBH.

Deposits with commercial banks are permitted (in accordance with minimum
credit risk permitted) with 10% of total portfolio at maximum, and deposits with
one bank cannot be more than 3% of portfolio.

In order to implement the investment policy, the DIA established an
Investment Committee of the DIA which comprises of:

   i)      Director of the DIA,
   ii)     Representative of the Central Bank of BIH,
   iii)    Directors of DIA’s Branch Offices,
   iv)     Advisors to the DIA, as members.

The Investment Committee has the following authorities:

   i)      on an ongoing basis monitoring the investment process and
           realization of the investment performance of the capital of the


                             73
                             74


           Deposit Insurance Fund in accordance with the adopted Investment
           Policy,
   ii)     preparing and making recommendations to the agency’s Director
           about initiating recommendations toward the Management Board
           for enacting or changing decisions and bylaws that regulate
           investment field,
   iii)    on an ongoing basis following and analysing the compliance and
           relevance of the “Regulation on Investment of the Capital of the
           Deposit Insurance Fund” and making recommendation to the
           Director for changing the same,
   iv)     following-up on the overall performance of the Asset Manager and
           making recommendations to the Director for operational work of
           the Asset Manager,
   v)      making recommendation to the Management Board of the DIA for
           taking up the procedure for changing the Asset Manager;
   vi)     participating in the selection and dismissal of the Asset Manager as
           an advisor,
   vii)    analysing the performance and investment strategy on a monthly,
           quarterly and annual basis,
   viii)   submitting the business report to the Management Board at least
           twice a year, and
   ix)     submitting Information on Investment Income Performance to the
           Management Board on a quarterly basis.

The Investment Committee is responsible for its work to the DIA’s
Management Board.

The DIA has appointed Deutsche Asset Management International GmbH as
investment manager (“Agreement on Asset Management”) and gives it written
instruction to monitor and make investment and reinvestment of the funds. The
asset manager delivers investment reports once a month and investment review
reports quarterly. There is a benchmark for the performance of the manager and
room for decisions is limited.

The DIA manages liquidity risk by investing into short-term deposits with
international banks and into securities with average portfolio maturity of five
years and maturity of individual bonds of 10 years at maximum.

                             74
                                           75


              The DIA is not carrying any currency risks (FX risks) as it only reimburses in
              KM (Art. 4 (4) LDI). The KM is also linked to Euro with a fixed exchange rate,
              so investments in Euro are not enhancing the currency exposure.

              The DIA’s investments are part of the external annual audit.

Comments      DIA should abandon the policy to invest money or debt instruments issued
              from banks.

Essential        6. For deposit insurers that use risk-adjusted differential premium
Criteria            systems:

                 a. the system for calculating premiums is transparent to all participants;

Description   Not Applicable. The DIA is not using its power (Art. 10 (9) LDI) to use risk-
              based contributions. It already has developed a framework to introduce such a
              premium system. Supervisory practices in the two entities have to be more
              aligned to create a level-playing field in the whole of BiH to ensure equal
              treatment of Member Banks.

Comments

                 b. The ratings and rankings resulting from the system pertaining to
                    individual member banks are kept confidential; and
Description   Not Applicable

Comments

                 c. policymakers ensure that the deposit insurer has the necessary
                    authority, resources and information in place to carry out its
                    responsibilities with regard to the operation of such systems.
Description   Not Applicable

Comments

Essential        7. In so far as the funds of the deposit insurer may be used by other
Criteria            members of the safety net for the purposes of depositor protection
                    and/or bank resolution, those circumstances are clearly stated and
                    public and known to member banks. The deposit insurer has adequate
                    information to:


                                           75
                                             76


Description    Not Applicable. DIA’s Fund can only be used for the pay-out of deposits (Art.
               21 (3) LDI.

Comments

                  a. understand the use of the funds;

Description    Not Applicable

Comments

                  b. seek reimbursement for the estate of the failed bank or participate in
                     recoveries from the bank;
Description    Not Applicable

Comments

                  c. restrict the resolution or depositor reimbursement amount to the costs
                     the deposit insurer would otherwise have incurred without such
                     intervention or resolution.
Description    Not Applicable

Comments

Principle 12   Public awareness

               In order for a deposit insurance system to be effective it is essential that the
               public be informed on an ongoing basis about the benefits and limitations of
               the deposit insurance system.

Description    The DIA undertakes a range of good practices to promote public awareness on
               an ongoing basis about deposit insurance.

Assessment     Largely compliant

Comments       The public awareness program should be evaluated on a regular basis for its
               effectiveness.

Essential         1. The deposit insurer is responsible for promoting public awareness of
Criteria              the deposit insurance system and how the system works, including its
                      benefits and limitations, on an on-going basis.
Description    The DIA as well as banks participating in the deposit guarantee system in
               Bosnia and Herzegovina conduct (in accordance with the obligations imposed
                                             76
                                             77


              on them by the LDI) information and promotion actions of the deposit
              guarantee system.

              Art. 9 of the LDI obliges Member Banks to provide information to depositors
              and other interested parties on deposit insurance, and in particular information
              on the amount and manner of payment of insured deposits. The information
              must be comprehensible and available in writing and cannot be used by the
              Member Banks for advertising purposes, or in a way that threatens the stability
              of the banking system and the confidence of depositors.

              In accordance with the LDI, the DIA provides promotional material, which is
              mandatory to be exhibited by the Member Banks. This material is in the form
              of leaflets, guidelines, manuals, posters, stickers, etc. Additionally, the public
              is informed through DIA’s official website, which is regularly updated, and
              through public announcements of the Agency.

              The DIA also provides a logo, that must be exhibited prominently and all times
              by all Member Banks.

              A Member Bank may also provide its own display material evidencing its
              participation in deposit insurance scheme. All display material is to be
              approved by the DIA as regards contents and usage.

              According to Art. 20 of the DIA Statutes, the DIA secures the transparency of
              its operations in co-operation with media and informing the public about the
              Agency’s work and operation.

Comments

Essential         2. The objectives of the public awareness programme are clearly defined
Criteria              and consistent with the public policy objectives and mandate of the
                      deposit insurance system.
Description   The communication plan was updated 2013 when developing the Contingency
              Plan. The plan is divided into communication in normal and in times of crisis.
              It defines the communication objectives, the target audience and their interests
              and needs, the necessary information to reach target audiences and
              communication channels used by the communication team.

Comments


                                            77
                                           78


Essential        3. The public awareness programme or activities convey information
Criteria            about the following:

                  a. which financial instruments are covered by deposit insurance and which
                     are not (e.g. whether the system covers foreign deposits);
                  b. which financial institutions offer insured deposits and how they can be
                     identified;
                  c. deposit insurance coverage limits and the potential for losses on
                     deposits in excess of those limits; and
                  d. the reimbursement process – how, when and where depositors may file
                     claims and receive reimbursements in the event of a bank failure.
Description   Information on membership, coverage terms and limits and reimbursement
              processes is provided by the DIA and communicated to bank customers by
              Member Banks, pursuant to the Art. 9 LDI. Information it is made public by
              the DIA via:

                 i)      DIA website,
                 ii)     brochures and leaflet inserts,
                 iii)    articles in daily newspapers, mass media interviews (radio and TV)
                         and public appearances.

              The list of all banks covered by the DIA’s guarantees is available on the
              websites:
              http://www.aod.ba/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=2&Itemi
              d=4&lang=en

Comments

Essential         4. There is an effective contingency planning process for public awareness
Criteria              and communication that addresses plausible future scenarios and that
                      involves the cooperation and coordination of other safety-net
                      participants as appropriate.
Description   The DIA has prepared a scenario in its “Plan for crisis situations”. The
              “Guidelines for the monitoring of banks and payment of insured deposit”
              clearly define cooperation and coordination in communication with other
              members of the financial safety network. Moreover, additional contingency
              planning is undertaken among all safety net participants through the SCFS and
              includes consideration of public awareness planning for both, single bank
              failures and in systemic circumstances. All individual contingency plans of the

                                           78
                                             79


              safety-net participants are in the process of being consolidated in a master
              contingency-plan.

Comments

Essential         5. The deposit insurer works closely with member banks and other safety-
Criteria              net participants to ensure consistency in the information provided and
                      to maximize awareness on an ongoing basis.
Description   The DIA works closely with its Member Banks and others to ensure
              consistency in the information provided to maximise awareness. This includes
              the preparation and distribution of DIA brochures which are distributed
              through bank branches and the authorisation of Member Bank’s information
              material. Cooperation with other financial safety-net participants takes place
              primarily through the SCFS.

Comments

Essential        6. The deposit insurer receives or conducts a regular evaluation of the
Criteria            effectiveness of its public awareness programme or activities.

Description   Research on public awareness about the DIA program was last conducted in
              April 2002. In the following years DIA concentrated its limited resources on
              building up fund capital and invest in IT and payout capacities.

              If a crisis situation or an insurance event occurs, the Contingency Plan states that
              the DIA, after completion of the payment of insured deposits, shall evaluate the
              effect of its crisis communication.

Comments      DIA should start evaluate regularly its public awareness program for its
              effectiveness.

Additional       1. The public awareness program is tailored to the needs of clearly defined
Criterion            target audience and utilises a variety of communication tools. The
                     desired level of visibility and awareness among the target audiences is a
                     primary factor in determining the budget for the public awareness
                     programme.
Description   Not applicable

Comments



                                            79
                                             80


Principle 13   Legal protection

               The deposit insurer and individuals working for the deposit insurer should be
               protected against lawsuits for their decisions and actions taken in “good faith”
               while discharging their mandates. However, individuals must be required to
               follow appropriate conflict-of-interest rules and codes of conduct to ensure
               they remain accountable. Legal protection should be defined in legislation and
               administrative procedures, and under appropriate circumstances, cover legal
               costs for those indemnified.

Description    The DIA and individuals working for it are protected against lawsuits for their
               decisions and actions taken in “good faith” while discharging their mandates.
               Legal protection is defined in legislation and administrative procedures, and
               under appropriate circumstances, legal costs for those accused are covered.

Assessment     Compliant

Comments

Essential           1. The deposit insurer and individuals working for the deposit insurer are
Criteria                protected against lawsuits for their decisions and actions taken in “good
                        faith” while discharging their mandates.
Description    Art. 16 (2) LDI ensures that the Director of the DIA, its Branch Directors and
               its staff, as well as other individuals appointed by the agency to perform certain
               activities within the scope of the LDI, cannot be prosecuted in a criminal or
               civil law procedure, for any action conducted in good faith, and in accordance
               with this law, during the execution or implementation of any task within their
               authority.

               This protection also extends to former or retired staff as the law determines the
               protection only on the grounds if the person was a staff member at the time the
               decision or action was taken.

Comments

Essential         2. Individuals are required to follow appropriate conflict-of-interest rules
Criteria             and codes of conduct to ensure they remain accountable.




                                             80
                                             81


Description    Persons performing functions in the Management Board of the DIA and its
               Directors cannot perform functions in the governing bodies of or be employed
               by banks (Art. 18 LDI and Art. 17 of the DIA Statutes).

Comments

Essential         3. Legal protection is defined in legislation and administrative procedures,
Criteria              and under appropriate circumstances, cover legal costs for those
                      indemnified.
Description    Legal protection is defined by the LDI (see EC 1).

               The DIA shall bear the expenses for any of its staff for any legal proceedings
               initiated against the employee for actions conducted in good faith in executing
               or implementing their duties within the scope of the LDI (if those expenses are
               not reimbursable from the party(ies) which bring suit against the staff) (Art. 16
               (3) LDI).

Comments

Principle 14   Dealing with parties at fault in a bank failure

               A deposit insurer, or other relevant authority, should be provided with the
               power to seek legal redress against those parties at fault in a bank failure.

Description    The relevant authorities (i.e., the public prosecutor) and the administrator (in a
               liquidation or bankruptcy) are provided with appropriate powers to seek legal
               redress against those parties deemed to be at fault in a bank failure.

Assessment     Compliant

Comments

Essential          1. The conduct of parties responsible for or who contributed to the failure
Criteria              of a bank (e.g. officers, directors, managers, auditors, asset appraisers
                      and related parties of the failed bank) are subject to investigation by the
                      deposit insurer or other relevant national authority. The investigation of
                      the conduct of such parties may be carried out by one or more of the
                      following: the deposit insurer, supervisor or regulatory authority,
                      criminal or investigative authorities, or a professional or disciplinary
                      body, as applicable.
Description    The DIA is not an authority responsible for carrying out investigations and
               criminal proceedings against persons who contributed to the failure of the
                                             81
                                             82


               bank. In BiH the public prosecutor and police are responsible for investigating
               criminal offences based on the national criminal laws.

Comments

Essential         2. If identified as culpable for the failure of a bank, such parties are
Criteria               subject to sanction and/or redress. Sanction or redress may include
                       personal or professional disciplinary measures (including fines or
                       penalties), criminal prosecution, and civil proceedings for damages
Description    The failure of a bank, as such is not an offence. But it may be caused by
               unlawful actions by parties at fault. Depending on the type of action, laws and
               regulations provide the following types of punishment of persons managing a
               bank:

                  i)      criminal liability, e.g., imprisonment, restriction of liberty,
                  ii)     civil liability, e.g., compensation, court invalidation of civil actions.

Comments

 Failure       The deposit insurer may, but often does not, perform many or most of the roles
resolution     identified in Core Principles 15 and 16. However, it is essential that one or
               more of the financial safety net participants performs these roles.

Principle 15   Early detection and timely intervention and resolution

               The deposit insurer should be part of a framework within the financial system
               safety net that provides for the early detection and timely intervention and
               resolution of troubled banks. The determination and recognition of when a
               bank is or is expected to be in serious financial difficulty should be made early
               and on the basis of well defined criteria by safety-net participants with the
               operational independence and power to act.

Description    The deposit insurer is part of a framework within the financial safety-net and
               provides to early detection via its own analysis of Member Banks. The 2014
               FSAP (BCP) assessment identified a number of deficiencies in the supervisory
               framework regarding early detection and timely intervention which need to be
               addressed.

Assessment     Materially Non-compliant


                                             82
                                            83


Comments      Deficiencies in early detection and timely intervention should be addressed
              through the development of draft legislation for an enhanced early intervention
              and resolution regime (Law on Banks).

Essential         1. The deposit insurer is part of a framework within the financial system
Criteria             safety net that provides for the early detection and timely intervention
                     and resolution of troubled banks (failure resolution framework).
Description   Most of the responsibilities covered in EC 1 are conducted by the Banking
              Agencies. However, the DIA plays a role in the early detection of risks in the
              banking sector through the process of collecting and analyzing information on
              its Member Banks.

              The DIA and other participants of the safety-net do in practice exchange
              information on banks on a regular basis, but there is room for improvement
              (see. Assessment of CP 6).

              The FBA has a number of enforcement tools to require banks to effect
              corrective action but powers concerning individual supervisory board members
              and controlling owners is limited. The FBA can impose fines, issue orders
              requiring increases in capital, cease and desist unsafe and unsound practices,
              impose temporary management and revoking the license. However, outside
              temporary administration, the banking law limits ability to replace or restrict
              powers of controlling owners and sanctioning individual supervisory board
              members.

              The FBA has not developed a remedial action program that aggregates all the
              tools, describes circumstance when they may be applied and outlines
              benchmarks for applying a hierarchy of actions. While FBA decisions and the
              banking law address situations that may be subject to sanctions and
              enforcement action, a comprehensive remedial action program would provide
              transparency, ensure consistency in application, provide clear internal guidance
              and facilitate timely corrective action.

              Problem banks may remain in that status for extended periods without defined
              prospects for recovery or resolution. Supervision of problem banks is labor-
              intensive and resolution costs tend to increase the longer the unstable situation
              is permitted to exist. Recovery or resolution options should be evaluated early
              and executed. Allowing banks that may no longer be viable to continue to
              operate results in increased risk as the bank may undertake transactions to raise

                                           83
                                           84


              funds or increase capital with back-to-back operations with other banks that
              may result in double gearing.

              The BARS has available a range of tools to require corrective action from
              banks, implementation could be enhanced by detailing a remedial action
              program. Existing regulations should be amended to implement a
              comprehensive remedial action program and clarify the hierarchy of
              enforcement actions and introduce new tools. Additionally, enforceable
              guidance to communicate the expectations of BARS on standards for corporate
              governance, risk management and other policy areas should be issued to
              support supervisors’ judgment concerning unsafe and unsound practices and
              facilitating enforcement.

Comments      The Banking Laws, and related laws, should be revised to incorporate a
              comprehensive set of tools and powers for early intervention. The supervisor
              should be empowered to take early corrective action (“early intervention”)
              when there are signs that a bank faces difficulties. In the present Banking
              Laws, there is no clear differentiation between early intervention and
              resolution.

Essential         2. The failure resolution framework is established by law or regulation,
Criteria              and is effective at the early detection and timely intervention and
                      resolution of troubled banks. The failure resolution framework is
                      insulated against legal actions that aim at the reversal of early and
                      timely decisions related to corrective procedures, interventions and
                      resolutions of troubled banks.
Description   The supervisory powers of the Banking Agencies to verify the financial
              condition of banks and apply early intervention measures are stipulated in the
              respective Banking Acts on the entity level.

              However, there are gaps in the early intervention powers and a resolution
              framework is missing (see CP 16).

Comments

Essential        3. The safety-net participants have the operational independence and
Criteria            power to perform their respective roles in the failure resolution
                    framework and a clearly defined early intervention mechanism exists
                    (including resolution tools) to ensure that appropriate action is taken (to
                    allow the orderly resolution of a troubled bank) by the responsible party
                    without delay.
                                           84
                                            85


Description   All safety-net participants (the Banking Agencies and DIA) have operational
              independence and power to perform their roles. Significant gaps are present in
              BiH with respect to the scope of intervention measures by the Banking
              Agencies that is being addressed through the development of draft legislation
              for an enhanced resolution regime (Law on Banks). For example, the current
              Laws in Banks in both entities do not provide a clear and explicit basis for the
              exercise of supervisory powers by the Agencies in the course of ongoing
              supervision. Neither do the laws on the Banking Agencies explicitly provide
              for powers to intervene in the operations of a bank.

Comments

Essential         4. The failure resolution framework includes a set of criteria that are used
Criteria              to identify banks that are or are expected to be in serious financial
                      difficulty and are used as a basis to initiate some form of early
                      intervention or corrective action to reduce the likelihood that a
                      resolution would be necessary. Such action should minimize losses to
                      the deposit insurance fund.
Description   A comprehensive failure resolution framework for the banking sector is
              currently missing. The authorities are working on provisions to be incorporated
              in a new Law on Banks.

              The DIA has set up system to identify problem banks which do not fulfill the
              membership criteria (under-capitalised bank, bank with insufficient liquidity,
              bank with inadequate rating) depending on the findings of DIA’s on-going
              monitoring efforts.

Comments

                  a. The criteria are clearly defined in law or regulation and are well
                      understood by banks and their stakeholders; and
Description    The criteria are clearly defined with in the LDI and regulation. Both are
              transparent and published on the website of DIA.

Comments

                 b. The criteria will be country specific and may reflect concerns about a
                      bank’s capital, liquidity, and asset quality, among other factors.
Description   The criteria the DIA uses are country specific.



                                           85
                                              86


Comments

Additional     1. A mechanism exists to review decisions taken with respect to the early
Criterion         detection and timely intervention and resolution of troubled banks.

               Not applicable



Principle 16   Effective resolution processes

               Effective failure-resolution processes should: facilitate the ability of the deposit
               insurer to meet its obligations including reimbursement of depositors promptly
               and accurately and on an equitable basis; minimise resolution costs and
               disruption of markets; maximise recoveries on assets; and, reinforce discipline
               through legal actions in cases of negligence or other wrongdoings. In addition,
               the deposit insurer or other relevant financial system safety-net participant
               should have the authority to establish a flexible mechanism to help preserve
               critical banking functions by facilitating the acquisition by an appropriate body
               of the assets and the assumption of the liabilities of a failed bank (e.g.
               providing depositors with continuous access to their funds and maintaining
               clearing and settlement activities).

Description    Republika Srpska and the Federation of BiH do not have a bank resolution
               framework in place.

Assessment     Non-compliant

Comments       The Federation of BiH and the Republika Srpska should develop a
               comprehensive resolution framework in line with international best practice
               (Currently, with the help of the IMF the new Law on Banks is drafted and shall
               include such provisions.)

               If a role for the DIA or the use of its funds for the purpose of bank resolution is
               foreseen in the future resolution framework, the provisions should be in line
               with the revised and soon to be published IADI Core Principles for Deposit
               Insurance Systems (CP 9 Sources and Uses for Funds, EC 8). Proper
               safeguards should be foreseen so that the DIA is able to perform its role as a
               deposit insurer and its funds are not depleted through a bank resolution. For
               example, the deposit insurer should be informed and involved in the resolution
                                             86
                                            87


              decision-making process. Where a bank is resolved through a resolution
              process other than liquidation, the resolution results in a viable, solvent and
              restructured bank, which limits the exposure of the deposit insurer to contribute
              additional funding in respect of the same obligation. Furthermore,
              contributions should be restricted to the costs the deposit insurer would
              otherwise have incurred in a payout of insured depositors in a liquidation net of
              expected recoveries (least cost rule). Contributions should not be used for the
              recapitalization of resolved institutions unless shareholder’s interests are
              reduced to zero and uninsured, unsecured creditors are subject to parri passu
              losses in accordance with the legal claim priority. The use of the deposit
              insurer’s funds should be transparent and documented and be clearly and
              formally specified; it should be subject to an independent audit and to ex-post
              review.

Essential         1. The overall national legal framework ensures the effective and timely
Criteria             functioning of the failure resolution framework, permitting the orderly
                     liquidation of the bank, the payout or transfer of insured deposits and
                     the intervention by a receiver to carry out the resolution functions.
Description   Republika Srpska and the Federation of BiH do not have a bank resolution
              framework in place. Under the current laws, the Banking Agencies have the
              following options when discovering problems with a bank which cannot be
              solved through early intervention:

                 i) provisional Administration (Art. 108 Law on Banks Republika Srpska
                      or Art. 53 Law on Banks BiH),
                 ii) liquidation or receivership (Art. 117 Law on Banks Republika Srpska
                      or Art. 61 Law on Banks BiH), or
                 iii) bankruptcy (Art. 109 Law on Banks Republika Srpska or Art. 54 Law
                      on Banks BiH).

              There is no designated resolution authority in BiH, nor is there a range of
              resolution tools available (e.g. bridge bank, transfer of assets, P&A).

Comments      Currently, with the help of IMF the authorities including the DIA have formed
              a working group to formulate new Law on Banks which will also include
              provisions for bank resolution.




                                           87
                                            88


Essential        2. The mandate of the deposit insurer or other safety-net participants
Criteria            allows for the effective resolution of banks of all sizes.

Description   See EC 1, an effective resolution framework is missing.

Comments

Essential        3. Bank resolution and depositor protection procedures are not limited to
Criteria            depositor reimbursement. The deposit insurer or other safety-net
                    participant has effective resolution tools designed to help preserve
                    critical bank functions, to achieve a transfer of accounts or
                    assets/businesses and/or maintain continuity of banking services.
Description   See EC 1, an effective resolution framework is missing.

Comments

Essential        4. Where no single authority is responsible for all resolution processes, the
Criteria            mandate, roles and responsibilities of each safety-net participant is
                    clearly defined and formally specified.
Description   See EC 1, an effective resolution framework is missing.

Comments

Essential        5. One or more of the resolution procedures allows the flexibility for
Criteria            resolution at a lesser cost than otherwise likely on a depositor
                    reimbursement in a liquidation.
Description   See EC 1, an effective resolution framework is missing.

Comments

Essential        6. A clear and well-sustained methodology is available to the deposit
Criteria            insurer or other safety-net participant to provide for the transfer of
                    insured deposits to stronger banks.
Description   See EC 1, an effective resolution framework is missing.

Comments

Essential        7. Resolution procedures clearly ensure that bank shareholders take first
Criteria            losses.

Description   See EC 1, an effective resolution framework is missing.


                                            88
                                              89


Comments

Principle 17   Reimbursing depositors

               The deposit insurance system should give depositors prompt access to their
               insured funds. Therefore, the deposit insurer should be notified or informed
               sufficiently in advance of the conditions under which a reimbursement may be
               required and be provided with access to depositor information in advance.
               Depositors should have a legal right to reimbursement up to the coverage limit
               and should know when and under what conditions the deposit insurer will start
               the payment process, the time frame over which payments will take place,
               whether any advance or interim payments will be made as well as the
               applicable coverage limits.

Description    DIA has developed an automated system for the payment of insured deposits
               and is performing inspections how Member Banks keep depositor records.
               Procedures for informing depositors about reimbursement processes are
               specified in DIA’s contingency plan.

               The LDI provides for three pay-out timeframes: The first two options (Article
               12.2.1 and 12.2.2) provide that the reimbursement process must begin within
               60 days from the date of revocation of license and completed within 90 days
               from the date of revocation of license. The third situation (Article 12.2.3)
               provides that the reimbursement process must begin and end within 60 days
               from the date of revocation of the operating license.

               The current framework requires reimbursement of depositors is too long to
               promote public confidence and financial stability.

Assessment     Materially non-compliant

Comments       The payout timeframe should be aligned with international best practice and
               significantly shortened (e.g., to a maximum of 30 working days as it is the
               norm now in the European Union). DIA should aim to further shorten the
               payout delay in line with emerging international best practice of a payout of 7
               days.

               DIA should in addition to its internal stress testing also start with external
               stress tests which should include other safety-net participants.

                                             89
                                                       90


Essential                1. The deposit insurer is able to reimburse depositors promptly after the
Criteria                     deposit insurance system is triggered by law, contract or the relevant
                             authority.13
 Description         DIA has not had to perform an insured deposit payout but has tested its ability
                     to do so. DIA uses a computerized depositor information system to prepare a
                     depositor pay-out. Furthermore, it can oblige Member Banks to keep depositor
                     records in a special format and is performing on-site inspections to assure that
                     banks comply with this format.

                     Through its “Contract on Deposit Insurance”, DIA obliges Member Banks to
                     establish and maintain for each depositor a “Depositor Status Report”, which
                     contains all data of the insured depositors and their deposits which may be
                     relevant in the case of an insurance event.

                     All business transactions regarding deposits have to be recorded in banks’
                     books on the same day they occurred. These transactions must simultaneously
                     be reflected in the “Depositor Status Report” to display the insured amount per
                     depositor on a daily basis, taking into consideration all the accounts of that
                     depositor maintained with the Member Bank (Single Customer View). The
                     bank’s senior management is responsible for implementation of the IT-
                     program.

                     The DIA has access to the depositors’ records at any time and receives monthly
                     Depositor Status Reports from Member Banks. It can also request for an
                     independent audit to assess the accuracy of the data – with or without prior
                     announcement. Based on the outcome of the audit, DIA can request its
                     Member Bank to improve its data system and report on the measures taken. A
                     follow-up audit could be requested also.

                     In case of a pay-out event, the DIA receives the Depositor Status Report within
                     five days at the latest (in practice, DIA receives the reports within 24 hours).
                     Both branches of the DIA have appointed a “Coordinator for increased bank
                     supervision and insured deposit pay-out” who monitors problem banks and is
                     involved in the pay-out team in case of an insurance event. DIA has 6 analyst
                     who analyse bank financial data on an on-going basis.



13
  A prompt reimbursement is defined to be when depositors are reimbursed within a time frame that does not
undermine financial stability and the proper functioning of payment systems.

                                                       90
                                           91


Comments

Essential         2. The time frame for accomplishing the reimbursement process is prompt
Criteria             and clearly stated to meet the public policy objectives of protecting
                     depositors and promoting public confidence and financial stability of
                     the deposit insurance system. The time frame is made public.
Description   Based on Art. 12.2 LDI, a pay-out of insured deposits is limited to the
              following situations:

                 i)      loss of the banking license of a Member Bank by action of a
                         Banking,
                 ii)     loss of banking license of a Member Bank in a voluntary winding-
                         up of bank’s operations,

              appointment of Provisional Administrator (PA) of a Member Bank in case the
              PA recommends revocation of the banking license. The LDI provides for three
              situations. The first two options (Article 12.2.1 and 12.2. ) provide that the
              reimbursement process must begin within 60 days from the date of revocation
              of license and completed within 90 days from the date of revocation of license.
              The third situation (Article 12.2.3) provides that the reimbursement process
              must begin and end within 60 days from the date of revocation of the operating
              license (e.g. when a Provisional Administrator makes recommendation, and the
              Banking Agency accepts it). This time frame is too long and not in line with
              international good practice. It is, for example, longer as the maximum 30
              working days European Union members have to comply with. Furthermore, the
              two different pay-out delays (90 and 150 days) might be difficult to understand
              for depositors.

              There has been no payout to determine if DIA could meet the current deadline.
              But the DIA has recently introduced its new pay-out software, has tested it and
              is regularly checking depositor records at Member Banks.

Comments      The payout timeframe should be aligned with international best practice and
              significantly shortened. The different timeframes makes it difficult for
              depositors to understand how the insurance system works. It is expected that
              the DIA with its payout software in place is able to reimburse depositors within
              a shorter timeframe of the proposed 30 working days. DIA should further aim
              to shorten the payout delay in line with emerging international best practice of
              a payout of 7 days.

                                           91
                                            92


                   a. Depositors are provided information after the failure on when and
                       under what conditions the deposit insurer will start the reimbursement
                       process and when the process is expected to be completed;
                   b. Information on coverage limits, scope of coverage and whether advance
                       or interim payments will be made is provided; and
                   c. If there is an interest-bearing account, the deposit insurer shall
                       reimburse depositors for interest as provided by contract, law or
                       regulation up until at least the date the deposit insurance obligation is
                       triggered.
Description   The LDI and DIA’s “Guidelines for Monitoring of Banks and Payout of
              Insured Deposits” and the 2013 contingency plan specify the content of
              information for depositors and when announcement have to be made. The
              information is available to the depositors via DIA’s webpage, media, displays
              at the failed bank and letters to the depositors (both insured and non-insured)
              sent by DIA.

              The DIA covers interest accruing until the day of the insurance event (Art. 4
              (5) LDI).

Comments

Essential        3. In order to promptly reimburse depositors, the deposit insurer has:
Criteria

                  a. Access to necessary data, including deposit account records, to prepare
                      for reimbursing depositors as soon as the supervisor is aware of a
                      likelihood of failure.
                  b. The power to review in advance by itself (or by request from the
                      supervisory authority) the way depositor records are kept by banks to
                      ensure the reliability of records, to reduce the time needed for
                      calculation and verification of depositors’ claims;
                  c. A range of payment methods for reimbursing depositors; and
                  d. Access to adequate and credible sources of funding (e.g. reserve fund,
                      Ministry of Finance, central bank) to meet its obligations under the
                      established time frames.
Description   The DIA has access to depositor records well in advance of a failure and on a
              regular basis (see CP 4 EC 3e; Art. 15 (4) LDI). After the failure, DIA has to
              receive the “Depositor Status Report” within 5 days at the latest.



                                            92
                                            93


              In practice, when the DIA requests data it receives a full set of depositor data
              within 24 hours. Per month, 2 - 5 Member Banks are tested. Problem banks are
              tested twice a month. The software is able to detect errors (e.g. misspellings of
              names or addresses).

              In case of bankruptcy or liquidation, the Banking Agencies are committed via
              the “Letter of Agreement on Cooperation between the DIA and Banking
              Agencies” from 2003 to oblige the Provisional Administrator and/or the
              Liquidator upon his appointment to closely cooperate with DIA with regard to
              any pay-out activities and strictly adhere to the DIA procedures and
              regulations.

              The DIA Management Board can decide about the method of payment and
              choose between the following options:

                 i)      Direct payment to the depositors at the branches of the closed
                         banks,
                 ii)     reimbursement via an agent bank, and
                 iii)    money transfer (if necessary).

              The DIA has started the public procurement procedure to choose an agent
              bank. In future, an agent bank will be contracted for the duration of 3 years.

              The DIA has also access to credible sources of funding (see CP 11 in detail).

Comments      The provisional and bankruptcy administrator should be obliged by law to
              cooperate with the DIA and give its staff access to depositor data when needed.

Essential        4. The deposit insurer has the capacity to carry out the reimbursement
Criteria            process in a timely manner, including:

                 a. Adequate information technology; and
                 b. Adequate personnel (in-house or contractor).


Description   The DIA has designed and implemented an internal IT system for the purpose
              of reimbursement. The scope, data and structure are based on the regular
              reports it receives from Member Banks (“Depositor Status Report”).

              The DIA is monitoring banks’ data quality on a constant basis. Problem banks
              are monitored twice a month. The DIA IT system helps to process data

                                            93
                                             94


              received from the bank into the depositor lists for prompt reimbursements
              (Single Customer View, SCV).

              Both branches of the DIA have a designated “Coordinator for increased bank
              supervision and insured deposits pay-out” who is monitoring problems bank
              and then would be part of the pay-out team.

              The DIA employs a suitably qualified and experienced in-house IT staff to
              support its reimbursement system. Databases are maintained at both DIA
              branches and according to international IT (safety) standards.

Comments

Essential         5. In situations where there may be extended delays in reimbursements,
Criteria             the deposit insurer can make advance, interim or emergency partial
                     payments.
Description   The DIA has not emphasized a formal interim payment system – although such
              arrangements could be utilized if needed.

Comments

Additional    The deposit insurer has contingency plans as well as regularly scheduled tests
Criteria      of its systems.

Description   The DIA has a contingency plan, written in 2013, and its “Guidelines for
              Monitoring of Banks and Payout of Insured Deposits”.

              On a monthly basis DIA performs a test of its systems with a select group
              banks. Data of problem banks are checked twice a month. In 2013, the DIA
              used the data of a bank (then under provisional administration) to test the
              promptness and efficiency of its payment systems and crisis communication.

Comments      DIA should in addition to its internal stress testing also start with external
              stress tests which should include other safety-net participants.

Additional    The reimbursement process is audited by an independent auditor or authority.
Criteria




                                            94
                                             95


Description    DIA has not had to perform a reimbursement yet. If such a payout would occur
               it would be covered by the annual audit and therefore controlled by an
               independent authority.

Comments

Principle 18   Recoveries

               The deposit insurer should share in the proceeds of recoveries from the estate
               of the failed bank. The management of the assets of the failed bank and the
               recovery process (by the deposit insurer or other party carrying out this role)
               should be guided by commercial considerations and their economic merits.

Description    The DIA shares in the proceeds of recoveries from failed banks. Asset
               management practices emphasize maximizing economic returns.

Assessment     Largely Compliant

Comments       The revised Law on Banks should precisely define the term “secured creditor ".
               Furthermore, the Law on Bankruptcy Proceedings (or the revised Law on
               Banks) should clarify that costs which are connected to the reimbursement
               process have to be borne by the insolvent Member Bank. The provisional
               administrator and the bankruptcy trustee should be obliged by law to cooperate
               with the deposit insurer to facilitate the reimbursement process.

Essential          1. If the deposit insurer plays a role in the recovery process, its role is
Criteria              clearly defined in law or regulation and the deposit insurer maximises
                      recoveries to the extent that it can from the failed bank on a commercial
                      or economic basis.
Description    The DIA’s role in the recovery process is clearly defined in the following legal
               acts:

                  i)      the LDI – according to which DIA is subrogated to the rights of
                          depositors in the amount of reimbursed deposits (Art. 12.2 (4) LDI),
                  ii)     the Law on Banks of the Federation of BiH and Republika Srpska
                          which define the class of the DIA’s claims (Art. 63 or 119),
                  iii)    the Law on Bankruptcy Proceedings which describes the rights and
                          duties of creditors in the event of the bank’s bankruptcy.



                                            95
                                            96


              Principles concerning pursuit of claims against insolvent debtors (including
              banks) are specified in the Law on Bankruptcy Proceedings.
              Activities in the bankruptcy proceedings are carried out by the administrator,
              appointed, directed and supervised by a court.

              The proceedings should be conducted in a manner which provides for the
              maximum satisfaction of the creditors’ claims (Article 2 of the Law on
              Bankruptcy Proceedings). The law also specifies rights of creditors.

Comments

Essential         2. The deposit insurer shares in the proceeds of the recoveries arising from
Criteria              the failure of its member banks. The deposit insurer is clearly
                      recognised as a creditor of the failed bank for the reimbursement of
                      losses and costs it incurs; and receives recoveries from the estate of the
                      failed bank directly.
Description   Article 12.2 (4) LDI ensures that DIA is sharing in the proceeds of the
              recoveries arising from the estate of the failed bank.

              The creditor ranking of the DIA in a Member Bank’s insolvency is stipulated
              in Art. 63 of the Law on Banks of the Federation of BiH and Art. 119 of the
              Law on Banks of the Republika Srpska.

              The DIA claims rank within class three (class one encompasses primarily the
              costs of bankruptcy proceedings, class two claims by secured creditors). The
              DIA claims are in a higher claim class in bankruptcy proceedings than the
              claims of uninsured depositors, other creditors and shareholders.

              However, the term “secured creditor” is not defined in the Law on Banks at all.
              This might lead to problems in a bankruptcy procedure when determining who
              benefits from being a class two claim and needs therefore a clarification.

              DIA would try to claim the costs of activities related to the preparation and
              execution of disbursement of guaranteed funds, but it is uncertain if the
              bankruptcy trustee would accept this claims.

Comments      The revised Law on Banks should precisely define the term “secured creditor ".
              Furthermore, the Law on Bankruptcy Proceedings (or the revised Law on
              Banks) should clarify that costs which are connected to the reimbursement
              process have to be borne by the insolvent Member Bank. The provisional

                                            96
                                                        97


                     administrator and the bankruptcy trustee should be obliged by law to cooperate
                     with the deposit insurer to facilitate the reimbursement process.

Essential               3. The deposit insurer has at least the same or comparable creditor rights
Criteria                    or status as a depositor in the conduct of the estate of the failed bank,
                            and has access to information to make and pursue its recovery claim
                            against the estate and to exercise the appropriate degree of influence on
                            the conduct of the estate.
 Description         See EC 2. The DIA is via the “cessio legis” of depositor claims enjoying the
                     same rights as other creditors of the failed bank.

                     The DIA would probably have a strong position as a major creditor which is a
                     consequence of the fact that the portion of DIA claims in the overall amount of
                     claims encumbering the bankruptcy estate would be large. The aggregate size
                     of DIA claims would enable the Agency, for instance, to become a member of
                     the Creditors’ Committee.

 Comments

Essential               4. If, in addition to creditor status, the deposit insurer is the
Criteria                    receiver/liquidator/ conservator of the failed bank or of only some
                            assets of the failed bank, then:
 Description         Not applicable; DIA is only involved as a creditor.

 Comments

                        a. the role played by the deposit insurer for asset management and
                            recovery is clearly defined in law or regulation; and
 Description         Not applicable

 Comments

                        b. its asset management and recovery approaches are guided by such
                            factors as: the quality of the assets, market conditions, expert advice,
                            and any legal requirements.14
 Description         Not applicable

 Comments



14
  In some circumstances the deposit insurer may seek to pursue the parties responsible for fraud or misconduct
even though costs may exceed recoveries.
                                                        97
                                            98


Essential         5. In determining the asset management and recovery approaches, the
Criteria              interests of all creditors are given appropriate weight and decisions on
                      asset disposal are made using concepts such as net present value to
                      balance the competing goals of securing maximum value and early
                      disposal.
Description   Bankruptcy proceedings are conducted in accordance with the Law on
              Bankruptcy Proceedings and should be conducted in a manner which provide
              for the maximum satisfaction of the creditors’ claims.

              The bankruptcy trustee is obligated to exercise a due diligence to enable the
              optimal management of the assets of the bankruptcy estate in order to satisfy
              creditor claims to the greatest possible extent, in particular by minimizing the
              costs of bankruptcy proceedings.

              Only persons who have appropriate professional qualifications and business
              experience can be appointed bankruptcy trustees from a list of certified trustees
              compiled by the Ministry of Justice of each state entity (Art. 23 (1) Law on
              Bankruptcy Proceedings).

              The conduct of proceedings by the trustee of the bankruptcy estate is subject to
              court supervision (Bankruptcy Judge, Art. 22 and 26 Law on Bankruptcy
              Proceedings). An additional form of supervision is imposed on the actions of
              the trustee by the Creditors’ Committee (of which DIA might become a
              member).

              A separate assessment of the insolvency and creditor/debtor regime will be
              provided as part of the FSAP.

Comments


Additional       1. The deposit insurer is entitled or authorised to be a member of the
Criterion           committee of creditors to follow the liquidation process of the failed
                    bank as it is usually subrogated to the rights of the insured depositors.

Description   The DIA may become a member of the Creditors’ Committee (appointed by
              the bankruptcy judge) being potentially one of the biggest creditors of the estate
              after it has reimbursed the insured depositors.
Comments

                                            98
99




99
