KENYA AND THE WORLD BANK GROUP:TAKING STOCK 2015
IN THIS REPORT:
Investments in Kenya        2
Better portfolio implementation  2
Policy advice and analytical services  3
Early results of the country strategy  3
Photo by David Waldorf
Is it just Grace?
The World Bank's $4.3 billion of investments in Kenya includes funding Grace's work in helping
disabled children with HIV/AIDS to become self-reliant. But is her story enough to tell whether the
overall portfolio of investments is paying off?
Forging a brighter future                           focus areas in the World Bank Group (WBG)'s Strateg
for Kenya. The WBG is investing $1 billion or more of new
For generations, the pastorialists of Samburu, a county  resources each year to support Kenya's ambitious agenda
400 kilometers north of Nairobi, have roamed from place  of promoting sustained, inclusive, and accountable growth;
to place in search of water and pasture for their animals.  lifting millions of families out of poverty and becoming a
In such nomadic communities, it is common for children  modern economy. Four out of ten Kenyans are poor and
born with disabilities and HIV/AIDS who cannot help herd  the richest 10% of the population receive 40% of the
animals in distant fields to be abandoned by their families.  nation's income. To fight poverty, the WBG support aims
"I met a blind boy who was left behind. I had to take him in,"  to promote growth, protect the vulnerable, and deliver a
says Grace Seneiya, who opened a school in Samburu for  devolution dividend while garnering good governance,
disabled children living with HIV/AIDS.              which is the connecting platform that will influence the
success of broad efforts in all areas. (Figure 1)
Since then, Grace has helped more than one boy. With the
support from the World Bank, her school center has trained  OUTCOMES WBG WANTS TO HELP KENYA ACHIEVE
health workers to ensure that the 150 disabled children
living with HIV/AIDS have access to nutrition, medicine,   Growth to    Human Resource   Delivering a
and home care. In fact, this is one part of a broader project  Eradicate  Development for  Devolution
- the Total War against HIV and AIDS (TOWA) - that has
counseled over 5 million people for HIV, distributed over
2 million insecticide-treated bed nets and 300 million
condoms nationwide, and funded grants to more than
10,000 community-based organizations to raise awareness
of HIV/AIDS. As a result, between 2007 and 2012, the HIV
prevalence rate across Kenya was reduced from 7.2% to
5.6% and new infections declined by 40%.
Fighting poverty
Grace is doing her part in protecting vulnerable groups              CONNECTING PLATFORM:
and helping them reach their potential, one of the key                 Garnerng Good Goverrnance


﻿KENYA AND THE WORLD BANK GROUP:TAKING STOCK 2015
BIG INVESTMENTS IN INFRASTRUCTURE                     Better implementation
Human             How can Kenya maintain this position and indeed accelerate
development
opmendisbursements and improve overall implementation? There
Infrastructure                                      are several challenges to be addressed.
Managing
$4.3                cimate k      PROCUREMNT
BILLION                           Getting up to speed
Is one stry                     tuough
One way is through better contract management and
are                     Eprompt procurement practices in projects. In some cases,
lengthy response times in getting clearances for high-value
contracts with complex technical aspects - sometimes
taking up to 191 days for Bank-financed urban infrastructure
Is one story enough?                                  project contracts to be signed - have created a logjam in
the project cycle. In other cases, when it has worked well,
Grace's story shows how one person's efforts can have a  there have been faster clearances, better procurement
transformative impact in the lives of vulnerable children.  planning, higher quality bidding documents, stronger
But what is the bigger picture of how WBG investments  contract management, and proper staffing to generate
are paying off In fiscal year 2015 alone, some $1.3 billion  better results. In transport, for instance, despite many
of new IDA resources - the Bank's finance at concessional  procurement challenges, the Government drew on Bank
rates - were committed: the largest in Kenya's history.  support and rebuilt core infrastructure as an emergency
The value of the overall portfolio of 27 projects of about  response to the tragic fire at Jomo Kenyatta International
$4.3 billion as of June 2015 is almost double what it was  Airport in the summer of 2013. Bank support since 2010 also
just five years ago. As figure 2 shows, investments are  helped repair 380 km of critical sections of the Northern
spread across many key sectors. Those range from hard  Corridor road between Mombasa and Nairobi. That has
infrastructure (roads and energy) to human development  reduced transit time between the two cities by a third,
(health and community development) to managing climate  from 11 to 8 hours, and lowered the cost of transport to
risk (agriculture and coastal management) to strengthening  drive business growth.
institutions delivering public services (judicial reform).  HOW ARE KENYAS PROJECTS DOING?
The World Bank and government teams carefully monitor
2014. But ee  e7projectsfixmonths- as summarized in two
key indicators: implementation progress (how well actions
are being taken and money is being spent) and meeting sfct o
development objectives (how likely it is that project results
will be achieved). As figure 3 shows, as of June 2015,18 out
of 27 projects - covering $2,850 million in net commitments
and in a range of sectors, including energy, water, transport
and agriculture - are performing satisfactorily overall. That
is about the ratio that is observed in Bank portfolios across    $150 MILLION
theglobe -andis aslight improvement on the figurefrom
2014. But there are 7 projects - for a bit more than $950               IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS
million in net commitments in health, judicial reform and      Moderately unsathsifacsory   Moderae satsfacory
urban infrastructure - that aren't making satisfactory             or worse              orbetter
progress and on current observation, may not achieve their  2 i-c   s ,,, S100e  Oce sinre vcr   cnrove-_- rf.i -nar cc , nt be-  t,cun:.8 , e
objectives. These require some "intensive care" of the kind
that will be discussed in the following section.        USING MONEY EFFECTIVELY AND ON TIME
Implementation is also about using money effectively                                              case
and on time. In Bank parlance, this is often measured
by the "disbursement ratio," or the amount disbursed      20s
as a percentage of the total undisbursed balance at the
1   1 5r
beginning of a fiscal year (cFY, which runs from July 1 to
June      si30thereahavereeenshasterfclearances,eartter5,rocurement
disbursement ratio is 22% - meeting the global target and
the highest ever seen in Kenya's history. in fact, some $450
million dollars was spent through the year - the highest
ever volume in disbursements, almost double what it was      0 11       012     2013. n supo201 sInce 2015 also
5 years ago.


﻿KENYA AND THE WORLD BANK GROUP:TAKING STOCK 2015
COUNTERPART FUNDS:
Making it countKNWEGADSTMOY
Makin  it  ountDelivering results is not always about money the Bank's policy advice and
Another challenge in implementation is ensuring analytical services an also help. A key focus area of the Bank's strategy is
counterpart funds" (the  Goverment'suin        on devolution. The Bank provided a "Devolution without Disruption" report in
counerpat  fnds"(th  Govrnmnt'sown  2012 and also helped with a major Nairobi conference on subnational fiscal
resources) are available on time alongside Bank  management in 2D14. Most recently, a Bank-financed Public Expenditure
financing. Counterpart funds have historically been  Review helped frame the policy debate on government spending on devolution
incorporated into development partner funding    and infrastructure. Other policy areas include improving the Integrated Financial
models to ensure that national governments sustain  Management Information System (an automated system that enhances
andefficiency in planning, budgeting, procurement, expenditure management, and
and  ncrasether rsoures o fnd  rogams reporting), making greater use of properly controlled electronic funds transfer,
in key sectors. When this hasn't happened there  and supporting the capacity of the country's supreme audit institution (KENAO)
have been delays - such as in a transport project  to deepen its work, including in performance audits. Getting these financial
which did not have the resources to pay contractors  systems working well is key in ensuring that scarce public resources are spent
working on roads. In other cases such as in social  smartly and are accounted for. This becomes more important than ever as
protection, things have been smoother and the    significant fiscal responsibilities get transferred to newly devolved counties.
timely combination of Government and Bank
finance has scaled up significantly in FY15, to ensure over  development. The new power is already reaching millions of
530,000 poor households are enrolled for welfare support.  homes and the price of electricity has fallen by 30% over the
However, as the program continues to grow, with 230,000  last year. Kenya leads the way in having more than half of all
more poor households expected to be enrolled by 2017,    its energy from climate-friendly sources.
budget for counterpart funds must be made available to
provide reliable transfers for the vulnerable.           SAFEmGUARDS:
COO RD INATI10N:                                         Do no harm
It takes two to cha-cha                                    One more challenge faced in Kenya - as in projects around
the world - is in implementing safeguard standards diligently.
Ensuring that project implementation units are well     The Bank's safeguard standards are to help countries address
coordinated is also key. This ranges from ensuring that  environmental and social issues in development projects, and
funds flow smoothly from the National Treasury to the    to provide an avenue for grievances to be aired. In the Bank-
line ministries and from  the line ministries to the project  financed Natural Resource Management Project, for example,
accounts, to making sure there is sequencing of key activities  complaints were made that the Bank had supported evictions
such as land acquisition and resettlement for the relocation  from the Embobut forest. The Inspection Panel - the Bank's
of utilities (power, sewer and water lines). For example, in  independent fact-finding body - found that the Bank was not
the energy sector, there were delays in the acquisition of land  responsible for that. Yet the Bank pledged to do whatever
for substations and rights of way for transmission lines out of  possible to address concerns of communities and build
the Olkaria field, a geothermally active region in the Great Rift  trust between them and key public agencies. A colloquium
Valley in Kenya that the government is harnessing to generate  in March 2015 brought together more than 300 participants
clean electrical power. Proactive Government efforts have  and provided a unique opportunity for the forest-dependent
now solved these problems. Indeed, with Bank support, there  communities to engage constructively with the government
is now 400 MW of geothermal energy production on stream  and other stakeholders on contentious challenges in the
in Olkaria - making it among the world's largest such new  management and sharing of forest resources.
Early results and
FROM PROJECTS TO RESULTS, STEP BY STEP                          a platform     of progress
thSneg           So the portfolio of Bank-supported projects
moves forward and tackling some hurdles. But
ValleyS ihow does it contribute to the country strategy as a
cleanwhole delivering results? Is it nudging Kenya closer
is nowrto its aspiration of being a globally competitive
homesT and prosperous nation by 2030?
Examp e:
Increased generation                    Frankly,    just one year in e th  country
capacity of geothermaliith-sinceouhs
MILESTONES  power plants  ostrategy (2014-2018) was approved, that question
cannot be answered with a simple yes or no. But
Constrtcton of                                    some light can be shed in following a discipline
ThesBanksssaof monitoring the "results chain." (Figure 5) Take
the energy sector as an example, where the first
step is on track - namely the project investments,
including  in  geothermal energy   production


﻿KENYAAND     THE WORLD     BANK  GROUP:TAKING STOCK 2015
HOW IS KENYA DOING WITH MILESTONES?                                i       Data is also missing for 50% of the
strategy's outcomes - the "destination"
En  esr nSocion Fitzk                   Health                of the strategy by 2018. (Figure 7) That
E                   Pmust be addressed in the coming
Cn                     period, including redoubling efforts
in  developing integrated  strategic
urban development plans, enhancing
agricultural   productivity,  and
managing climate risk to ensure Kenya
.                                                                        is on track to deliver results. Such a
pattern with weaknesses in the data
is not uncommon in complex country
c            w                                          programs, but these tend to be resolved
0
*                                 as the portfolio matures and progress
is made with project activities.
Managing    Service   County
Infrastructure Urban  Agriculture Climate Risk  Delivery  Governance  So this scorecard for the first
Growth to Eradicate Poverty  Human Resource Development Delivering a Devolution Dividend  twelve months highlights some good
for Shared Prosperity                     progress,  spotlights  weaknesses,
and conveys movement which is
T         s     ,   f   es1                 t, "    h  t   t of r        broadly on track. The bumps on the
to I  tatr  e  i t.   c :              Ce  t,  I  Jie  bail th coer iti  o E
intende reuts: abb ge, blow 2  red, and yo f  rythi i,netwen            road  perhaps echo  some  that Grace
dealt with - including how to turn
resources into effective services to ordinary people. That is
HOW IS KENYA DOING WITH OUTCOMES?                      an especially exciting challenge at a time when more and
more responsibilities and resources are being devolved to
Improvement
froment      Kenya's new 47 counties. This reform has teething problems,
from baseline
Incombut commands nationwide attention. As Grace explains,
Inom lete/l'
no"Devolution is a blessing for this county. People are getting
Abetter services in the hospitals because the people providing
LOOKthese services are from here. So services are being brought
10                       Rrs      closer to people:'
OUTCOMES    "-1     Regression
from baseline
So it's fair to maintain a scrutiny of the collective
development efforts in Kenya, including those that have
World Bank support. Many will hope that a year from now,
there will be renewed evidence and more stories of Kenyans
on their way to fulfilling their aspirations of a better life for
and modernizing power lines (the principal inputs),      their families in a  truly modern economy. E
are performing satisfactorily. Next, this should lead to
milestones - specifically, commencing construction of
330 km of transmission lines and substations to connect
Kenya's grid with Ethiopia.
Data shows progress. And such milestones should unlock
the output of 4000 MW of generation capacity being
installed and systems losses reduced to 16% by 2018. As
of mid-2015, generation capacity has risen to 400 MW
and the loss ratio is estimated at around 18%. Meeting
these milestones and outputs will help Kenya achieve a
more reliable and efficient energy supply for households
(outcome).
What does the broader picture look like beyond this example
of energy? Across the strategy, there are milestones that
correspond to 10 outcomes. Kenya has made good progress in
70% of them so far. (Figure 6) Examples include securing
public-private partnerships for ambulatory services, a
signed agreement for pooled procurement of essential
medicine, among others. But that still leaves several    Photo by Original Images.
milestones either not making progress or data simply not  This report was prepared by Thomas O'Brien and Hannah Kim in July 2015.
available.


