                                                       98329

Draft Keynote speech for H.E. PM Hailemariam Desalegn of
 Ethiopia for the Investing in Africa Forum – June 30, 2015



Excellencies,
Distinguished Participants
Ladies and Gentlemen


It gives me great pleasure to open this Investing in Africa forum and to

welcome you all, particularly to those who have travelled far to attend

this important forum on Partnering to Accelerate Investment,

Industrialization, and Results in Africa.



I would like to begin by recognizing the co-hosts of this event, namely;

the World Bank Group, China Development Bank; the China-Africa

Development Fund; and the United Nations Industrial Development

Organization. I think the spirit underlying this Forum is well

demonstrated by the cooperative and forward looking way in which

various organizations have collaborated in preparing the Forum.
Dear Participants

The Ethiopian Government sees this Forum as embodying three

important themes, which are:



 First,   Ethiopia’s,   and   Africa’s,   commitment     to   economic

  transformation;

 Second, the strong partnership between Africa and China; and,

 Third, the power of industrialization to deliver development results.




For Ethiopia, since 1991 successive administrations have shown their

commitment to transforming the country’s economy, in order to seize

the opportunity to move the country away from a history of poverty and

insecurity. This commitment has been further strengthened from the

early 2000s, since when the country has sustained growth rates of about

10% a year. This means that since 2003 the economy has tripled in size,

and we have seen impressive declines in poverty, with the national

poverty rate falling from 44 percent in 2000 to 29 percent in 2011.
Ethiopia has also made great strides to achieve most of the Millennium

Development Goals.



We are are aware that past progress in Ethiopia is one indication of what

the country and its people are capable of; but we also acknowledge that

it is only a beginning - a good beginning.



The Ethiopian Government is committed to ensuring that every and each

of the citizens has access to both the basic services and the opportunities

that they need for a fulfilling life. Delivering that commitment requires

sustained growth and transformation of our economy. Our vision is to

become a middle income country by 2025. This vision has been the

driver to propelling Ethiopia forward over the last five years, a vision

that was given tangible shape by the first phase of the country's Growth

and Transformation Plan.



Going forward, our second Growth and Transformation Plan is expected

to set out how this Government will square up to that vision. The plan,
among others, will set out the power of industrialization and the role of

the private sector--both multinationals and domestic firms--in delivering

development results. Securing the resources and enterprise to deliver

industrialization and a vibrant private sector will largely depend on the

energy and innovative spirit of the Ethiopian people. However, such an

effort can lead to enhanced results it is supported by foreign direct

investment.



I have been speaking of Ethiopia as a starting point, but I am aware that

there are many other countries in Africa which face the same challenges.

And we see that, increasingly, these countries are committed to taking

the appropriate actions that put their economies onto higher growth

paths.



Distinguished Participants



China and Africa have a long history of partnership and interchange. It is

a partnership which underpins this Forum, although of course we
welcome the many other partners gathered here. Over the last decade,

this partnership has expanded rapidly and taken on new momentum.

Across Africa we have seen many examples of how this partnership can

have mutually beneficial results, including in Ethiopia.



Chinese trade has been one of the key drivers of economic growth in

Africa. However, as China-Africa trade cooperation moves onto its next

phase, there will be significant scope for diversification of the economy

and exports, particularly into agriculture and manufactures. Chinese

investment can be instrumental in addressing structural and logistical

constraints that impact the competitiveness of African exports.



Chinese FDI now extends across the continent. It is estimated that

Chinese FDI to Africa over the past decade amounts to five percent of

global FDI. We also note that Chinese FDI is present in a broad range of

African countries, including non-resource-rich countries in East Africa.

Sizable inflows from China are going into manufacturing, construction,

and services, including financial services, ICT, and electricity. China’s
banks have supported large scale investments in infrastructure on the

continent, and more than 2,200 Chinese firms, mostly private, are

currently operating in African countries.



I am glad to say that Ethiopia has been a significant partner in this

process. In recent years China has emerged as the one of the top trading

partners of Ethiopia. In addition, the relationship has been crucially

underpinned by growing Chinese investment. FDI from China to

Ethiopia has increased from small beginnings to some $84 million a year

on average since 2010. Behind these figures there is also a growing and

vibrant Chinese business community in Ethiopia.



To cite one concrete example of Chinese investment in Ethiopia, the

Huajin Group invested some $10 million in Ethiopia to establish a shoe

factory. The factory opened in 2012 and made a profit in the first year. It

is now providing 3,500 jobs, and producing 2 million pairs of shoes

every year. We would welcome more Huajins! And they are indeed

coming, like George Shoes.
Ladies and Gentlemen


We should also ask ourselves, what has this engagement done for

Africa? I think we can highlight some key elements.



 Chinese investments in infrastructure, particularly energy and

  transportation, have helped to address the physical constraints faced

  by many African countries; and,

 Chinese investment has brought skills and technology to Africa.



 Chinese FDI has become a significant source of job creation in

  several countries, and continues to offer substantial opportunities to

  African countries.

These are some successful experiences to build on, and African

countries are interested to learn from China’s own experience of

generating growth and reducing poverty. Partnerships between Chinese

and African firms through joint ventures and upstream and downstream
linkages can provide that learning, but also help to expand the private

sector in African countries, creating employment opportunities.



Thus, if we can build the right partnerships, this is a process in which all

partners win.


Dear Participants



As I noted earlier, the Ethiopian Government sees industrialization as

critical to delivering the transformation that we all seek across the

African continent. That is why we welcome this Forum as the beginning

of a conversation. A conversation with many different partners about

how we can build on past successes, and take them to the next level in

future!



And we have some early successful cases to work from! Speaking for

Ethiopia, both private investment and employment in manufacturing

have been on the rise. Manufacturing firms have grown over the last

decade at almost 10 percent annually. Both food and beverages
industries as well as apparel and footwear grew from 2008 to 2012 in

terms of the number of exporters. Ethiopia has also made progress in

growing and diversifying processed exports. FDI inflows to Ethiopia

reached close to $ 1 billion or 2 percent of GDP in 2013, with players

like Ayka Textile and George Shoe expanding their operations, and new

global giants like PVH entering the market.



However, we need to act now to enhance our efforts to attract more

investment. We need to ensure we have a conducive climate for

investment, with a supportive policy framework; lower transport and

energy costs; reduced formal and informal barriers to trade; increased

labor markets flexibility; and effective competition policies.



These are policies that will also help domestic, African firms to increase

productivity and competitiveness.



To accelerate industrialization in Ethiopia we are therefore following an

inter-connected two track approach.
 One track is based on establishing industrial parks as a platform for

  catalyzing investment and job creation, with a focus on export-led

  manufacturing.

 The second track focuses on tackling cross-cutting constraints for

  private sector growth with a particular focus on small and medium

  sized enterprises.



Through the industrial parks program the Government will create greater

room for the private sector—both foreign direct and domestic

investment—and address constraints related to access to land,

infrastructure, trade logistics, customs regulations and skills. Such parks

can thus help address both policy and infrastructure constraints. And

they can facilitate agglomeration benefits from industrial clustering,

including the emergence of backward and forward linkages that will

over time boost domestic enterprise.
And I welcome the engagement of development partners which are

providing supports to realize this program, including the work of the

World Bank Group on competitiveness and job creation. This includes

World Bank’s financing support for infrastructure at the Bole Lemi and

Kilinto industrial parks on the edge of Addis Ababa.



As regards our second track, we are keen to identify and remove

operational constraints and entry barriers both domestic and FDI

companies. Issues we are looking at include:



 Ways to improve access to finance for firms especially “the missing

  middle,? small and medium sized enterprises, the majority of which

  are credit constrained.

 Addressing constraints relating to access to land and access to

  electricity.

 Improving and simplifying tax administration; business entry

  regulations; and processes to facilitate the entry and exit of firms.
Ladies and Gentlemen


Ethiopia has made initial inroads in industrial park development and is

keen to learn from global successes. So I welcome the focus on

industrial parks and investment climate in this Forum. I would also to

acknowledge the importance of other topics, including:



 The issue of trade logistic and trade facilitation is critical. The

  Ethiopian Government is making major capital investments in

  expressways and railways to better link our main urban and enterprise

  centers to the rest of the world. However, we are also very conscious

  of the complementary challenges and welcome the session addressing

  this topic.



 Vocational Education and skills development is an agenda in which

  the Ethiopian Government has invested substantially, since we

  recognize it is vital for increasing firm productivity. However, we

  need to go some way before we can reap the full benefits of these
  investments, as there are still challenges related to the mismatch

  between the demand and supply. This is again an area we believe

  China has extensive and remarkable achievements.



 And as a major producer of agricultural products the links between

  agriculture and manufacturing; the scope to build agro-industry, must

  play a major part in our efforts to build employment opportunities and

  exports.



I am therefore confident this Forum has an important and timely agenda

that can help all Africa and development partners take forward our

interests, both public and private, to achieve industrial progress.
Excellencies,
Distinguished Participants
Ladies and Gentlemen


Let me close by reiterating the importance the Ethiopian Government

attaches to the themes of this Forum, an importance demonstrated by our

enthusiasm to co-host the event.



Ministerial colleagues will be in attendance at this Forum throughout,

and I look forward to hearing from them on the thoughtful exchanges

that take place and the conclusions reached.



As I said earlier I see this event as launching an on-going conversation.

It is one in which I and my colleagues will remain engaged going

forward. I am confident it will help us further accelerate our industrial

development, and push forward the economic transformation we seek.



Thank you for your attention.
