                                                              98330
                     Investment in Africa Forum
                           Closing Remarks
                        By H.E. Ahmed Shide
        State Minister of Finance and Economic Development

- Ms. Liu Jianhua, Vice Minister, Ministry of Finance, People’s
  Republic of China
- Mr. Makhtar Diop, Vice President for Africa, the World Bank
  Group
- Mr. Yuan Li, Executive Vice President, China Development
  Bank, People’s Republic of China
- Mr. Xu Shaohua, Executive Vice Governor of Guangdong
  Province, People’s Republic of China
- Mr.    Philippe   Scholtès,   Managing      Director   of   Program
  Development and Technical Cooperation, the United Nations
  Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
- Excellencies
- Distinguished Participants,
- Ladies and Gentlemen


Let me begin by thanking you all for your active participation in this
Forum. The Government of Ethiopia has been honored to host it, and
we appreciate how far some of you have come, in order to join us here in
Addis Ababa.
We have been rewarded with some stimulating and thoughtful ideas to
reflect on going forward. I think I speak on behalf of everyone here
when I say that this has been enormously helpful. It is by openly

                                                                       1
discussing our efforts, successes, and setbacks that we can learn from
each other and move forward successfully. This Forum has allowed us to
do just that and I have no doubt that we have all gained in understanding
from our two days of deliberations.
I thank Ms. Liu Jianhua, Vice Minister of Finance of China for leading
the Chinese delegation and for making the long journey to be with us
and to help make this Forum a success.
I would also like to appreciate the support of the World Bank Group,
China Development Bank and the other co-organizers, for working with
us to organize the Forum, and for the excellent cooperation.
In particular, I must thank Mr. Xu Shaohua, Executive Vice Governor of
Guangdong Province, both for joining us yesterday and for generously
offering to host the next Forum on Investing in Africa in Guangdong in
September 2016.


Excellencies,
Ladies and Gentlemen


Coming into this forum it was clear to the Government of Ethiopia that
the time for economic transformation is now, and that industrialization
has to be central to this effort. Our discussions over the last two days
have reinforced this message that Ethiop and Africa at large must
accelerate investment and industrialization in order to deliver good
quality jobs and sustainable growth. This Forum has given us many
ideas on ways to deliver this transformation.
From Chinese colleagues we have heard about their own development
experiences, and I thank them for sharing the lessons and their ideas
with us. We have also reflected on China Africa cooperation and the
benefits that it has already brought, for example in helping Africa
                                                                        2
economies to weather the immediate impacts from the global financial
crisis of 2008; investments in infrastructure, particularly energy and
transportation, and, application of Chinese skills and technology in
Africa.


The Forum has also allowed representatives of African governments and
private sector to learn from each other. The Government of Ethiopia has
been pleased to participate and to share our experiences.
The Forum has been helpful in underscoring that action is needed on a
variety of fronts in order to attract investment and accelerate
industrialization. We need to ensure we have a conducive climate for
investment, with a supportive policy framework; lower transport and
energy costs; reduced formal and informal barriers to trade; increased
labor markets flexibility; and effective competition policies. If we move
forward on some of these issues, but lag behind on others, our success
will be at best limited.
We also also noted that African countries have made significant
advances on many of these challenges, in recent years, but obviously we
need to do more. For Ethiopia I would pick out three points that I
particularly welcome:
First, is the emphasis on infrastructure and trade logistics, and the need
for a holistic approach to address the constraints.
Second, is the role of Industrial Parks and Special Economic Zones
(SEZs) and what it takes for them to be successful; we are beginning to
develop our own experiences, but are confident this Forum’s discussions
will help us accelerate and improve that. Related to this point is the
imperative of developing a skilled workforce that matches the needs of
investors. Education is crucial for development, but it is clear that we
need to make sure that the education we provide also equips young
people for the world of work.
                                                                         3
Third, reaffirming the importance of agriculture to most of our countries,
and especially the poorest people within them; the ideas on fostering
agriculture through agribusiness were especially useful. There is
obviously huge potential on the continent, but we need to make sure that
all segments of the agricultural sector share in its transformation.


Dear Participants


To conclude, I would like to note that, in order to address the challenges
we identified, we Africans have to take the lead, but we need the support
of our friends and partners. I am therefore heartened by the strong
messages of support that we have all received from the Government of
China and the CDB, as well as from the World Bank Group and
UNIDO.
It is good to know that our partners share our aspirations and are ready
to support our efforts.
I am confident that we all leave here with a greater sense of what we
must do to accelerate investment and industrialization in Africa with a
renewed sense of purpose.
I thank you for your attention and I wish you a safe travel back home.




                                                                         4
