                                                                98331
                                                                   1


                        Welcoming remark by
        H.E. Sufian Ahmed, Minister of Finance and Economic
           Development, on the Investing in Africa Forum
                            June 30, 2015


- H.E. Ato Hailemariam Desalegn, Prime Minister of the Federal
  Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
- Ms. Liu Jianhua, Vice Minister, Ministry of Finance, People’s
  Republic of China
- Mr. Makhtar Diop, Vice President for Africa, the World Bank Group
- Mr. Yuan Li, Executive Vice President, China Development Bank,
  People’s Republic of China
- Mr. Xu Shaohua, Executive Vice Governor of Guangdong Province,
  People’s Republic of China
- Mr. Philippe Scholtès, Managing Director of Program Development
  and    Technical    Cooperation,   the   United   Nations   Industrial
  Development Organization (UNIDO)
- Distinguished Participants,
- Ladies and Gentlemen

We are delighted to have you here in Addis Ababa to participate and
share your experiences in the Investing in Africa Forum. Thank you for
coming. That many of you traveled long distances to join us today is
testimony to how important this forum is. It is an honor and privilege
                                                                          2


for the Government and the people of the Federal Democratic Republic
of Ethiopia to host this important forum. As the seat of the African
Union and UNECA, Addis is the right venue to host this inaugural
Investing in Africa Forum. I do hope that you have the opportunity to
discover what Ethiopia has to offer, not only in term of investment and
business opportunities, but also the culture and tourism part of the
country.


This ‘Investing in Africa Forum’ is the result of collective efforts of the
Governments of Ethiopia and China, the World Bank Group, the China
Development Bank (CDB), the China-Africa Development Fund (CAD-
Fund) and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization
(UNIDO). It is an illustration of the conviction that if the right kind of
partnership could be built, it will benefit all the stakeholders involved.
Such conviction can mobilize the support of governments and
organizations across continents, as we are witnessing today.        Multi-
stakeholder partnerships such as this forum are crucial in leveraging the
experience, knowledge and comparative advantages of different
partners.


More crucially, creating such partnerships will be instrumental in
tackling existing and new challenges, as well as taking advantage of the
opportunities that exist in Africa.
                                                                           3


Distinguished Participants,


China is currently both Africa’s largest single bilateral investor as well
as its largest trading partner. We Africans can learn important lessons
from China's rapid economic transformation from an underdeveloped
agrarian society to an industrial superpower and the second largest
economy in the world within a few decades. In concert with the lessons
to be learned from China’s experience, we African's can also share the
experiences and challenges of our development efforts. Through this
forum, we could also take advantage of the World Bank Groups’
knowledge and analytical products as well as expertise and accumulated
experiences of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization.



The government of Ethiopia believes that increased investment and
industrialization will help unlock the potential for sustainable and
inclusive growth, job creation and poverty reduction in Africa. Ethiopia
is currently at a very early stage of industrialization and it would benefit
a lot to learn from experiences and expertise of those who have done it
successfully. Therefore I am happy to see so many different stakeholders
among us, because one of the objectives of this forum is to promote
informed dialogue among stakeholders—policy makers, development
partners, foreign and local private investors—on how investment could
be encouraged and industrialization accelerated.
                                                                         4




As one major focus of this forum, the discussion during the next two
days is expected to provide us with the opportunity to learn how to make
special economic zones and industrial parks work; address infrastructure
and trade logistics, including regional integration; create the conditions
to accelerate development-oriented private sector investment, develop
skills required for competitiveness and job creation, and improve
agricultural productivity and expand agribusiness opportunities. All of
these play a vital role in accelerating investment in developing countries
such as in our continent.


Before I close my welcoming remark, I would like to thank all of those
involved in the organization of this forum particularly the Chinese
Government and the World Bank Group and UNIDO. Once again, on
behalf of the Government and the people of the Federal Democratic
Republic of Ethiopia, I would like to thank you all for joining us. It is
my hope and sincere wish that we have productive deliberations and use
this forum to identify challenges and opportunities and find collective
approaches to help us accelerate industrialization in Africa.


I thank you for your attention.
