                            98370




Doing Business Reform Memorandum

             Croatia


             May 2015




                1
Introduction
Croatia’s business environment has been identified as a priority area for reform by the
Croatian Government. Under the Government Working Group for Business Climate and
Private Investments, the Agency for Investment and Competitiveness has been designated
to lead the dialogue with the private sector and coordinate the consultations with
stakeholders, including international organizations on the design of a new wave of
business environment reforms. This reform memorandum is prepared at the request of
the Agency for Investment and Competitiveness and aims to provide a concrete set of
short and medium term reform recommendations that will address some of the business
environment challenges currently faced by the private sector in Croatia. The World Bank
team is grateful for the coordination and technical assistance provided by the Agency
during the preparation of this reform memorandum.
Croatia suffers from a number of shortcomings that entrepreneurs experience in the day-
to-day running of their business operations. Some of the most burdensome challenges in
the business environment are highlighted in the 2015 Country Report on Croatia,
prepared by the European Commission. Key challenges include regulatory instability;
high administrative burden; low transparency and predictability in the working of
administrative bodies; and long judicial proceedings.
Weak legislative planning has weighed down the quality of new regulations. In 2014, half
of the laws passed were not planned. Although there is a Regulatory Impact Assessment
(RIA) mechanism in place, in practice most legislations go through a fast track legislative
process and circumvent RIA altogether. Even when performed, RIA is not properly done,
due to weak quality control and lack of high level commitment. Poor legislative quality in
turn leads to frequent amendments to address shortcomings and complications for SMEs.
There is a plan in place to introduce the “two out, one in? check for new regulations and
specific measures are being planned to improve the overall quality of impact assessment.1
The administrative burden in Croatia is higher than in most EU member states. Despite a
public wage bill close to 12% of GDP, Croatia scores low on the EU Public
Administration Scoreboard, particularly on indicators on effective implementation, cost
and time to export, and irregular payments and bribes. Businesses find that
inconsistencies in decision making at the local level, as well as lack of strict timeframes
for issuing opinions on tax issues are a key source of concern. These implementation
gaps are often caused by high turnover rates, nonexistence of performance-based wage
system, limited training opportunities, and lack of transparency in staff recruitment in
public administration. Improving the efficiency and quality of the justice system also
remains a challenge. In 2014, the length of trials was comparatively long at first instance
both in civil and commercial cases (378 days) and in administrative cases (427 days). At
first instance administrative courts, backlog increased by 17%, despite more cases being




1
 Republic of Croatia, National Reform Programme, April 2015. The English version of the document can
be found at: http://ec.europa.eu/europe2020/pdf/csr2015/nrp2015_croatia_en.pdf


                                                  2
resolved. At the High Commercial Court, backlog increased by 16% and disposition time
reached 1234 days in 2014, up from 1142 days the previous year.2
Croatia’s business environment shortcomings are reflected in Croatia’s performance on a
number of international indices, including Doing Business and the World Economic
Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report. The 2014-15 Global Competitiveness Report
ranks Croatia 87th as regards institutional quality overall and 141st (out of 144) in terms
of the burden of government regulation. The value of the institutional quality index
remained unchanged as compared with the 2013-14 report but the rank improved by six
places. Croatia is the worst performing EU Member State in the OECD Product Market
Regulation Index, which is largely due to a high degree of public ownership and
government involvement in network sectors and in general business operations.3
In the Doing Business 2015 report, Croatia ranks 65th out of 189 economies worldwide
and 15th amongst the 26 economies in Europe and Central Asia and 27th in the EU-28.
Compared with 2014, Croatia improved its global ranking by two places but its position
in the EU-28 context stayed the same. Relative to its neighbors, Croatia ranks ahead of
Albania (68), Serbia (91) and Bosnia and Herzegovina (107), but behind others, including
Italy (56), Hungary (54), Slovenia (51), Slovak Republic (37), Bulgaria (38), Montenegro
(36), Austria (21) and Germany (14). Overall, Croatia’s ranking in Doing Business is
below the average ranking of other economies in the region (figure 1.1). On the Distance
to the Frontier (DTF) metric which shows Croatia’s performance relative to global good
practice, Croatia scores 66.53 points in Doing Business 2015, 2.09 points higher than its
score in Doing Business 2014.
The World Bank Group’s Doing Business project provides a measure of the “ease of
doing business? in 189 countries through a set of objective indicators that focus on the
impact of laws, regulations and their enforcement on the ease of doing business for
domestic firms in 10 areas from starting a business, operations to insolvency. While the
overall business environment in a country depends on many factors, ranging from market
size to macroeconomic conditions, regulations that are efficiently implemented,
transparent, accessible, and strengthen property rights are important for growth and job
creation. The Doing Business indicators cover an important, albeit not comprehensive, set
of such regulations.




2
  “Country Report Croatia 2015, Including an In-Depth Review on the prevention and correction of
macroeconomic imbalances?, Commission Report Working Document, European Commission, Brussels,
February 2015.
3
  The measurement is not updated as of 2015 and, due to more recent acquis harmonization and
privatizations, may not reflect the current situation for Croatia. For more information, please visit:
http://www.oecd.org/eco/growth/indicatorsofproductmarketregulationhomepage.htm.


                                                   3
Figure 1.1. Croatia’s position in the Doing Business 2015 ranking




 Source: World Bank Doing Business 2015
Croatia’s comparative performance across the Doing Business indicators is uneven
(figure 1.2). The country performs relatively well on some indicators – paying taxes (36),
enforcing contracts (54), resolving insolvency (56), getting electricity (59), getting
credit (61), and protecting minority shareholders (62) - but lags behind in others, namely
dealing with construction permits (178), registering property (92), trading across borders
(86), and starting a business (88).
Figure 1.2. Business regulations in Croatia according to Doing Business 2015
(Scale: Rank 189 center, Rank 1 outer edge)




 Source: World Bank Doing Business 2015

Several concrete measures have been undertaken to improve the quality of the business
environment. The authorities have begun an audit of administrative burden, applying the
standard cost model to the Trade Act and the Mediation in Immovable Property
Transactions Act. The pilot phase has been completed in April 2015 and an action plan


                                            4
for the simplification of the administrative burden will be presented soon. The initiative is
led by the Ministry of Economy and is supported by the Agency for Investment and
Competitiveness. Furthermore, there is an ongoing effort to improve the online
communication between the public administration and citizens. Despite the introduction
of the e-citizen web portal and the online services for business provided by HITRO.HR,
the Chambers of Commerce, and the Financial Agency, challenges remain for the users
having to familiarize themselves with the different interfaces. The authorities are
planning the development of a new platform – a single contact point, which would
integrate all existing services. In the area of the judiciary, the implementation of the
reform of the judicial map could improve the efficiency of some courts. The reform aims
to increase specialization and balance out the uneven workload of judges by merging
courts. The reform also involves a change in the allocation of cases before second
instance civil courts.
Although Croatia has implemented business reforms every year since 2006, and was
among the global top ten improvers in Doing Business in 2008, the reform momentum in
some areas has been stronger and more sustained than in others. Starting a business
became easier with the introduction of HITRO.HR, a one-stop shop (OSS) for company
registration, and with the subsequent expansion of its functionality, which allowed
limited liability companies to file their registration applications with the court registries
electronically through the notary public and HITRO.HR. In 2013 a new form of simple
limited liability company with a lower minimum capital requirement was introduced,
which further simplified incorporation procedures and in 2014, some notary fees, related
to company incorporation, were reduced. The Dealing with Construction Permits
indicator captured a series of reforms since 2007. In 2008, a new building code was put in
place that eliminated several procedures for obtaining a building permit. In 2009, an OSS
for construction permits was set up, which enabled the enforcement of the new building
code. Further streamlining followed in 2010 and 2014, including the abolishment of the
location permit and project design confirmation, reducing the requirements and fees for
building permits, and speedier final building inspections. These improvements led to
further simplifying and speeding up the overall construction permitting process. On the
Trading Across Borders indicator, Croatia has considerably harmonized and streamlined
its export and import custom procedures in preparation for the July 1, 2013 accession to
the European Union. Important improvements were also introduced in its port
infrastructure, resulting in further reductions in the time for exporting and importing. As
reflected in the Resolving Insolvency indicator, Croatia made improvements in 2007
through amendments to its Insolvency Act regulating the profession of bankruptcy
administrators and in 2013, introduced an expedited out-of-court restructuring procedure.
Under Paying Taxes, in 2008, paying taxes became easier for companies through the
wider use of online filing. In 2012, the health insurance contribution rate was reduced,
followed by the introduction of an electronic system for social security contributions and
by the reduction of rates for the forest and Chamber of Economy contributions in 2013.
In 2014, the Chamber of Economy contribution was completely abolished. On the other
hand, in 2010, a tourist fee was introduced, which made paying taxes more costly for
companies and in 2014, Croatia made paying taxes more complicated by raising the
health insurance contribution rate and introducing more detailed filing requirements for
VAT.


                                             5
In other areas, several major reforms were implemented in 2007 and 2008 but reform
pace has slowed. The getting credit indicator captured the setting up of the new private
credit bureau, HROK, and the launching of a unified and geographically centralized
collateral registry in 2008. The time required to register property was reduced through
improvements at the land registry. Since 2011, litigation proceedings were streamlined
and enforcement procedures over cash assets transferred from the courts to state agency,
FINA, as captured by the enforcing contracts indicator.
While the Doing Business indicators only show some aspects of the regulatory
environment for firms in Croatia, they point to areas where the private sector could
benefit from simplification of the regulatory burden or stronger legal protections. Within
this context, it is advisable to identify concrete actions and policies for regulatory reform
that encourage entrepreneurship and impact firm behavior and performance.
Scope of the Reform Memorandum
This reform memorandum highlights potential reform opportunities in the areas covered
by the Doing Business project that would allow the Government to have a direct impact
on business conditions by addressing some of these shortcomings through legal,
regulatory or administrative reforms.4 The memorandum is based on Croatia’s results in
the Doing Business 2015 report. It does not provide a comprehensive overview of all the
issues relevant to improving the investment climate in Croatia. Table 1.1 provides a
summary of the short and medium-term reform recommendations which are described in
more detail in this memorandum.
The reform recommendations do not address all obstacles to private sector development,
but focus on:
   Easing business operations with a focus primarily on small and medium size domestic
    firms;
   Strengthening the regulatory and institutional framework and supporting easier access
    to credit (e.g. through a strong secured transactions framework, credit information
    sharing systems, and effective contractual enforcement mechanisms).
Some of the recommendations provided are actionable in the short term, without major
legal changes. Other recommendations are implementable in a longer time frame. The
suggested time frames are based on the experience in other countries and may be subject
to adjustment based on the particular context of Croatia. All actions require consultations
and coordination with different stakeholders. In this regard, the World Bank Group can
provide assistance to the Government of Croatia in order to support implementation of
regulatory reforms facilitating the ease of doing business.
It should be noted that it is difficult to predict whether or not the improvements in
investment climate topics highlighted in this memorandum will impact the Doing
Business rankings for Croatia (as this is relative to other countries’ performance too). For
these reforms to be captured by the Doing Business report it will be essential that they are

4
 The document uses Doing Business data as a baseline for its recommendations. For more information
about the Doing Business methodology please see Table 1 or visit http://doingbusiness.org/methodology.


                                                   6
fully implemented and enforced by the public sector and adopted by the private sector
and the practitioners. Please note that the Doing Business project records reforms which
are not only enacted into law but that are fully implemented. Rather than aiming at
specific advancements in the rankings, emphasis should be placed in implementing key
reforms to improve the investment climate. A rigorous reform effort will likely be
reflected in those areas and —more importantly— provide a better business environment
that is more conducive to private sector development and economic growth.
Consultation with the private sector is a crucial aspect of the reform process. Without
understanding the private sector’s concerns and the barriers that prevent them from
starting, operating and growing their businesses, no government can claim to set up a
comprehensive reform agenda that will bring a real difference to its businesses.
Finally, strong reformers measure and communicate their success. Monitoring the
implementation and impact of reforms highlights areas of success as well as areas where
further effort is needed. Communicating reforms effectively to implementing agencies,
the business and legal communities, and the general public ensures that changes are
accepted and put in practice consistently. Enhancing the regulatory environment to
facilitate the creation and growth of enterprises is a major undertaking, and the path is
different in each country. There is no “one size fits all? for regulatory reform.
Improvement to the business climate can, however, help set a foundation for the private
sector’s sustainable development and the creation of a competitive and diversified
economy.




                                           7
              Table 1.1: Croatia’s Performance on the Doing Business Indicators and Suggested Short and Medium-term Recommendations

Topics        Indicators (2015 DB Report)                             Short-term recommendations                                          Medium-term recommendations
Starting a    Procedures: 7                          Eliminate the requirement of obtaining a company seal and            Implement e-signatures for individuals and make all
Business      Days: 15                             ensure that it is not required in practice (this recommendation can   registration processes fully electronic with no need for submission
              Cost (% of income per capita): 3.5   be addressed in the short-term but the impact, i.e. the full          of physical documents or physical interactions;
              percent                              adoption by public and private sectors, might be medium-term);
              Paid-in min. capita (% of income                                                                             Eliminate the paid-in minimum capital requirement for
              per capita): 26.6 percent              Give HITRO.HR full powers to handle all transactions at the        Limited Liability Companies (DOO);
              Global rank: 88 out of 189           Commercial Court and undertake an information campaign to
              DTF (0-100): 85.43                   publicize the services provided by HITRO.HR;                            Make the notarization of the articles of association optional
                                                                                                                         and introduce clearer fee schedules for notary services;
                                                     Transfer the power to decide on company registration
                                                   applications to qualified Court administrative personnel.               Introduce single business identifier for interactions with all
                                                                                                                         government agencies;

                                                                                                                           Introduce a single platform for out-of-court business
                                                                                                                         registration by integrating the incorporation process with the
                                                                                                                         registration to (1) all taxes, the (2) the Croatian Bureau of Statistics,
                                                                                                                         the (3) Croatian Institute for Health Insurance, and the (4) Croatian
                                                                                                                         Institute for Pension Insurance.


Dealing       Procedures: 21                         Engage stakeholders and private sector practitioners in an           Further streamline construction-related approvals and
with          Days: 188                            information campaign aimed at explaining the benefits                 clearances by improving the e-permitting system and extend its
Constructio   Cost (% of warehouse value): 10.9    introduced by the new legislation;                                    usage to all municipalities;
n Permits     percent
              Global rank: 178 out of 189            Expedite integration of all the necessary IT systems and             Further enhance ISPU as to create a robust and fully functional
              DTF (0-100): 44.97                   databases into the ISPU;                                              GIS system.

                                                     Review the current statutory time limits for permit-related
                                                   approvals, introducing - where necessary – stricter deadlines;

                                                     Eliminate the requirement to stamp the copy of the cadastral
                                                   plan at the County Office before it can be submitted as part of the
                                                   application for the building permit.
Registering   Procedures: 5                          Complete the Land Registry and Cadaster data
Property      Days: 72                             harmonization.                                                         Consider institutional reform to:
              Cost (% of property value): 5                                                                              - Remove land registration from county courts as an
              percent                                Rollout the Joint Information System for Registry and                administrative function.
              Global rank: 92                      Cadaster to all registry and Cadaster offices.                        - Merge Land Registry and Cadaster functions into an
              DTF (0-100): 66.44                                                                                           administrative agency.
                                                     Eliminate the requirement for attaching a special
                                                   administrative duty stamp (biljeg) for any land registry requests;

                                                    Introduce fast-track registration procedures at the Land
                                                                                            8
Topics       Indicators (2015 DB Report)                          Short-term recommendations                                          Medium-term recommendations
                                                Registry Court;

                                                  Allow electronic Land Registry extracts to be considered as
                                                official documents and make them accessible through e-citizen
                                                government portal.

Getting      Legal Rights index: 5                Expand the sources of information to include retailers and         Introduce credit scores;
Credit       Credit Information index: 6        utility companies.
             Credit bureau coverage (% of                                                                              Allow businesses to grant a non possessory security right in a
             adults): 100 percent                                                                                    single category of movable assets, without requiring a specific
             Global rank: 61 out of 189                                                                              description of collateral;
             DTF (0-100): 55.00
                                                                                                                       Ensure that the priority scheme ranks secured creditors as high
                                                                                                                     as possible, while respecting other critical national policy
                                                                                                                     objectives;

                                                                                                                       Create an integrated or unified legal framework for secured
                                                                                                                     transactions that extends to the creation, publicity and enforcement
                                                                                                                     of 4 functional equivalents to security interests in movable assets:
                                                                                                                     fiduciary transfer of title; financial leases; assignment or transfer of
                                                                                                                     receivables; and sales with retention of title.
Protecting   Extent of conflict of interest       Increase disclosure requirements of related-party
Minority     regulation index: 5/10             transactions to the public and the market regulators;
Investors    Extent of shareholder governance
             index: 6.5/10                        Require an external auditor’s report before the approval of
             Strength of minority investor      transactions between interested parties;
             protection index: 5.8/10
             Global rank: 62 out of 189           Provide shareholders with rights to hold the directors liable
             DTF (0-100): 57.50                 for damages resulting from a related-party transaction;

                                                  Limit cross-shareholding between 2 independent companies
                                                to 10% of outstanding shares;

                                                  Require disclosure of information about board members'
                                                other directorships, as well as basic information on their primary
                                                employment;

                                                  Require disclosure of managerial compensation on an
                                                individual basis;

                                                  Facilitate shareholders suits by granting shareholders
                                                broader powers during a trial.
Paying       Number of payments per year: 19      Continue providing tax outreach--education and training--to
Taxes        Time (hours per year): 208         small and medium enterprises to ensure compliance and carry out
             Global rank: 36 out of 189         communications campaigns to further increase the use of

                                                                                        9
Topics         Indicators (2015 DB Report)                                                                Short-term recommendations                                                                                                                   Medium-term recommendations
               DTF (0-100): 82.92                                                      electronic filing.
Trading        Documents to export: 6                                                    Implement the Custom Agency’s e-surveillance project.                                                                           Establish an electronic single-window system for all trade
across         Days to export: 16                                                                                                                                                                                       related transactions.
Borders        Cost to export (USD per
               container): 1,335
               Documents to import: 7
               Days to import: 14
               Cost to import (USD per
               container): 1,185
               Global rank: 86 out of 189
               DTF (0-100): 74.25
Enforcing      Time (days): 572                                                          Assess court procedures to identify points of delay and                                                                         Continue improving the e-courts system by introducing e-
Contracts      Cost (% of claim): 13.8 %                                               formulate solutions;                                                                                                             filing and electronic service of process.
               Procedures: 38
               Global rank: 54 out of 189                                                Strengthen efforts to promote Alternative Dispute
               DTF (0-100) 64.81                                                       Resolution (ADR).
Resolving      Time (years): 3.1                                                         Introduce moratorium provisions and develop a culture of                                                                        Improve the institutional capacity of relevant institutions for
insolvency     Cost (% of estate): 14.5 percent                                        reorganization;                                                                                                                  handling insolvency cases;
               Outcome (0 as piecemeal sale and
               1 as going concern): 0                                                    Encourage the extension of post commencement financing                                                                          Establish a Chamber of Bankruptcy Managers;
               Recovery rate: 30.5 cents on the                                        to the debtor during the course of insolvency proceedings;
               dollar.                                                                                                                                                                                                    Make the relevant stakeholders more aware of the
               Strength of insolvency framework                                          Introduce a liability structure that holds managers                                                                           reorganization proceedings and thus more willing to consider them
               index (0-16): 12                                                        accountable for negligently engaging in transactions that result in                                                              as a viable option.
               Global rank: 56 out of 189                                              a loss to the company;
               DTF (0-100): 53.92
                                                                                         Do not allow closely-related parties to vote on a
                                                                                       reorganization plan.

             Indicators and suggested reform recommendations in detail:
             Starting a Business .................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. page 11
             Dealing with Construction Permits ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ page 177
             Registering Property .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. page 233
             Getting Credit ........................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ page 277
             Protecting Minority Investors ................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ page 354
             Paying Taxes ......................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... page 398
             Trading across Borders ............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................ page 39
             Enforcing Contracts............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................... page 432
             Resolving Insolvency .............................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................................. page 46




                                                                                                                                                                  10
Reform memo: Croatia
Starting a Business
Economies with the most efficient registration systems use simplified and standardized
laws and documents, operate a single electronic interface between the user and
authorities, a central database with interoperability between agencies involved, one single
company ID, and one flat fee. In Canada, UK, Singapore or Slovenia, for example, an
integrated IT system links the databases of relevant agencies (company registry, tax
administration, social security system, and statistics institute). The entrepreneur submits
the information and the payment electronically via the website through a single form and
the company is automatically registered with all agencies. Legal formalities for company
registration are embedded into the electronic system and if all requirements are met and
the payment is received, the system automatically processes the information and issues
the registration certificate instantly. Companies are issued a single ID number, which is
used across agencies. This facilitates compliance checks throughout the life of the
company and reduces the administrative burden of submitting information multiple times
with different forms to several agencies. Norway even took this a step further. Since
2005, all public registers and public authorities have a legal obligation to use the data
registered in the Central Coordinating Register for Legal Entities instead of requiring
businesses to resubmit this data to the concerned agency.5
To achieve measurable results in the short to medium term, the Government of Croatia
may want to continue reforming by focusing on eliminating outdated requirements
through legal amendments, merging and streamlining the registration processes of
multiple departments and agencies, and making all registration processes (including post-
incorporation) fully electronic without any need for physical paper trails or physical
interaction. For these reforms to be captured by the Doing Business report, it will be
essential that they are fully implemented and enforced by the public sector and adopted
by practitioners.6
The Doing Business ‘Starting a Business’ indicator measures the procedures, cost, time
and the paid-in minimum capital necessary for a domestic entrepreneur to register and
formally operate a new business. Doing Business 2015 reported that entrepreneurs must
go through 7 procedures, which take 15 days and cost on average 3.5 percent of income
per capita, to start a business in Zagreb. Globally, Croatia ranks 88th out of 189
economies in the ease of starting a business: ahead of Bosnia and Herzegovina (147), yet
behind Romania (38), Bulgaria (49), and Greece (52). While Croatia’s cost indicator is
below the average of the Europe and Central Asia, the number of procedures, time and
paid-in minimum capital required to start a business are above the regional average (table
2.1).




5
  Business Registration Reform Case Study Norway, Investment Climate, 2011, World Bank Group.
6
  The Doing Business project records changes that not only impact the areas measured by the indicators but
that are also fully implemented.


                                                   11
Table 2.1 Starting a Business in Croatia and best performers
Doing Business                              Regional best        Regional   Global best
                           Croatia
Indicator                                    performer           Average    performer
                                          Armenia; Georgia;                  1 (New
Procedures (number)                7      Kyrgyz Republic;          5        Zealand,
                                         Macedonia, FYR; (2)                 Canada)
                                         Georgia; Macedonia,                 0.5 (New
Time (days)                       15                               12.1
                                              FYR (2)                        Zealand)
Cost (percent of income
                                  3.5      Kazakhstan (0.5)        5.3      0 (Slovenia)
per capita)
                                          19 economies in the
Paid-in min. capital                      Europe and Central
                                                                              0 (135
(percent of income per            26.6   Asia region have zero     5.8
                                                                            economies)
capita)                                   paid-in min. capital
                                              requirement
Source: Doing Business database

Reforms efforts
Significant reform efforts have been implemented since 2005, when Croatia launched the
HITRO.HR (or “single access point?) project and reduced the statutory terms for business
registration. Later on, the country further eased business start-up by allowing limited
liability companies to file their registration application with the court registries
electronically. In 2012, the government of Croatia amended the Companies Act (see
Official Gazette No. 111/12) introducing a new corporate form of Limited Liability
Company (JDOO), with a reduced the minimum capital requirement of HRK 10. Due to
the improvement of the e-registration systems, notary costs were also reduced. More
recently, amendments to the Court Register Act (see Official Gazette n. 93/14) abolished
the requirement of publishing in the Official Gazette the registration of new Limited
Liability Companies (DOO) and Simple Limited Liability Companies (JDOO) with the
Court Registry.
Short-term recommendations
Eliminate the requirement of obtaining a company seal and ensure that it is not
required in practice (this recommendation can be addressed in the short-term but
the impact, i.e. the full adoption by public and private sectors, might be medium-
term). Entrepreneurs are faced with mixed messages regarding the need to obtain a
company seal. Whilst the Court Registry Act mandates companies to obtain it, a recent
ruling of the High Trade Court established that company seals are no longer needed to
run a business. To be on the safe side, most entrepreneurs obtain a seal before they start
operating. To fully implement the elimination of the company seal, the Government
could pursue a two-prong approach. First, the Court Registry Act should be amended in
order to eliminate references to the seal requirement. Second, the Government could
engage in an outreach campaign targeting relevant stakeholders (such as banks, lawyers



                                             12
and accountants associations) to ensure that a company seal is no longer a requirement to
conduct business transactions.
In other countries, modern legislation has replaced the company seal with provisions
under which a company validly executes a document—none of the top-ranking countries
on the Doing Business’ ease of starting a business indicator requires new companies to
get seals. In the United Kingdom, for example, the Companies Act provides that a
document is validly executed by a company if signed on behalf of the company by (i) two
‘authorized signatories’, or (ii) one director, in the presence of a witness who attests the
director’s signature. Further, the authentication of the person signing on behalf of the
company can easily be verified through the commercial registry. Eliminating the need to
use a common seal has been a popular reform in the region. In the past 4 years, countries
like Georgia and Slovenia have abolished the requirement of obtaining a company seal in
order to start a business and taken similar measures to ensure the reform’s full
implementation.
Give HITRO.HR full powers to handle all transactions at the Commercial Court
and undertake an information campaign to publicize the services provided by
HITRO.HR. HITRO.HR is an agency that has the mandate to help Croatian citizens and
businesses in dealing with the public administration. At the moment, HITRO.HR officials
can assist entrepreneurs in carrying out the steps necessary to complete a company
registration, but in certain transactions, their power is limited. For instance, they can
check whether the chosen company name is available and submit a name reservation
request through the e-Company Service (e-Tvrtka), but if the request is rejected by the
Court, HITRO.HR cannot retrieve the documents on their client’s behalf. These
limitations to HITRO’s ability to complete the business registration process, reduces
HITRO.HR’s appeal to entrepreneurs, who often choose more expensive – but effective -
intermediaries. HITRO.HR should be given the mandate to carry out the full business
registration process. Subsequently, the government should carry out a communication
campaign aimed at informing the general public about the services provided by the
agency.
Transfer the power to decide on company registration applications to qualified
Court administrative personnel. Currently company registration in Croatia is judicial
procedure. The Commercial Courts in Zagreb, for instance, effectively employs 55
judges, 7 of which are tasked with procedures related to company registration.7 Such
tasks could be performed by qualified court clerks (i.e. referendaries), with judges having
only a supervisory role. Relieving judges from company registration duties and
transferring such duties to (the more numerous) referendaries may decrease the time to
start a business. Not only, it could also speed up the resolution of litigation and
insolvency cases, since judges currently allocated to company registration could be used
elsewhere. The Croatian Ministry of Justice is currently drafting an ordinance on this
matter: it should be finalized and implemented as soon as possible.
In most countries around the world, company registration is a fully administrative
procedure. Examples of successful reform abound. In the late 1990s, for instance, Italy

7
 The remaining judges are mainly tasked with litigation cases and insolvency cases. The information was
collected by the team during a visit to the Commercial Court of Zagreb in March 2015.


                                                   13
had one of the most cumbersome regulation of any European economy, with the process
taking 4 months. When registration was taken out of the courts, the time to start a
business was reduced by 3 months altogether. Today, starting a business in Italy takes 5
days.
Medium-term recommendations
Implement e-signatures for individuals and make all registration processes fully
electronic with no need for submission of physical documents or physical
interactions. Croatian entrepreneurs have different options to register their companies:
they can use HITRO.HR, have a notary doing it on their behalf, or deal directly with the
Commercial Court Registry. No matter which option they choose, supporting documents
must still be submitted in paper format to the Court Registry.
At the moment, the biggest obstacle to the implementation of an efficient online
registration system is the lack of a functioning e-signature system for individuals. The
Ministry of Public Administration is working with the Ministry of Interior to create the
necessary legal framework and ITC infrastructure. Such efforts should have priority as
they will make electronic company registration possible.
In countries where fully-fledged online registration is available, physical interaction with
the authorities or submission of hard copies is not required. For example, in the UK
businesses can register online for VAT without visiting the HM Revenue and Customs
(HRMC) authority.8 Similarly, in Canada businesses can apply online and register for a
business number, as well as for four program accounts: corporation income tax,
GST/HST, payroll, and import/export.
Eliminate the paid-in minimum capital requirement for Limited Liability
Companies (DOO). Croatian entrepreneurs wishing to create a Limited Liability
Company, must deposit HRK 20,000 (EUR 2,630) as paid-in minimum capital
requirement – an amount equal to 26.6% of income per capita. Alternatively, they can
create a Simple Limited Liability Company, which have share capital of only HRK 10
payable in cash and with the lowest nominal value of a shareholding amounting HRK 1.
Simple Limited Liability Companies were introduced in October 2012 in order to avoid
the migration of potential investors to countries with more flexible business registration
rules. Although the registration costs of a Simple Limited Liability Company are much
lower than those incurred to register a (standard) Limited Liability Company, any change
in the company’s features is quite expensive. A simple change of a director’s name, for
example, costs around 2200 HRK (300 EUR). Croatian authorities reduce the costs
related to changes in the articles of association for simple LTDs and eliminate the
minimum capital requirement for all LTDs.
Studies have shown that paid-in minimum capital requirements can significantly slow
entrepreneurship,9 and can deter firm entry.10 The opportunity cost of tying up funds to
pay for capital requirements in countries where the amount is sizeable is significant, as
8
  For more information please visit: https://www.gov.uk/vat-registration/how-to-register.
9
  VanStel, Storey and Thurik (2007); Blanchflower, Oswald and Stutzer (2001); Klapper and Love (2011);
Dreher and Gassebner (2011).
10
   Cumbersome procedures and high levels of minimum capital are negatively associated with firm entry.
Stringent regulations go hand in hand with corruption (Dreher and Gassebner 2013).


                                                  14
companies need to limit other needs such as hiring, training, investing in equipment or
developing services.11 Research shows that high capital requirements can be distortive to
competition, as entrepreneurs with limited financial capacity are in a disadvantageous
position when they are required to pay up capital instead of invest it to their business, and
capital requirements may undermine a company’s growth in some cases.12
At the same time, a paid-in minimum capital requirement does not fulfill intended goals
such as creditor protection. Studies have shown that it does not provide effective
protection of creditors—regardless of the legal system.13 In practice, once the company is
registered, its owners can decide how much capital they want to invest and in what form.
When creditors make an investment decision, they look at a wide range of protection
instruments available through the company law, the insolvency law and/or clauses in
negotiated contracts to mitigate risks. Fixed amounts of capital requirements also do not
take into account differences in commercial risks. A small firm in the services industry
does not present the same risk as a large manufacturing company in a volatile market.
Some argue that minimum capital requirements protect creditors and investors from
insolvency.14 However, lenders tend to assess investment decisions based on commercial
risks and business opportunities rather than on government-imposed requirements.15
Accordingly, some countries have introduced other mechanisms to protect investors in
limited liability companies. For instance, Hong Kong outlines solvency safeguards in its
Companies Act and does not require a specific amount of paid-in minimum capital for
business incorporations.16
Make the notarization of the articles of association optional and introduce clearer
fee schedules for notary services. Presently, companies must notarize the articles of
association with a public notary. This is the most expensive step in the process of
company registration. Private sector practitioners state that the fee schedules used to
calculate the notary fees are not transparent. The Croatian government could lower the
cost of starting a business by developing standardized articles of incorporation that are
flexible enough to accommodate the majority of small businesses, thus allowing
entrepreneurs to draft and file deeds of incorporation themselves. Eliminating the
requirement to notarize incorporation documents would represent a significant cost-
saving measure, especially for small businesses. Larger companies, with more complex
structures, could still resort to notary services, if needed.
Introduce single business identifier for interactions with all government agencies. To
achieve greater integration of registration services, the Government of Croatia could

11
   Chan, 2009.
12
   Chan, 2009.
13
   Elkind G. 2007. “Minimum Capital Requirements, a Comparative Analysis,? USAID. Other relevant
studies include: Armour, J., “Legal Capital: An Outdated Concept??, European Business Organization Law
Review 7: 5-27 5 (2006); Kubler, F. “A Comparative Approach to Capital Maintenance: Germany?`
European Business Law Review 1031-1035 (2004); Simon, J. “A Comparative Approach to Capital
Maintenance: France?, European Business Law Review 1037 -1044 (2004); Mulbert, P. and Birke, M.
“Legal Capital-Is There a Case Against the European Legal Capital Rules??, 3 European Business
Organization Review 695-732 (2002).
14
   Miola 2005.
15
   Djankov 2009, Ewang 2007; Alonso Ledesma 2007.
16
   Doing Business report, 2014.


                                                 15
introduce a single business identification number, which businesses would use as unique
identifier for all interactions with government agencies. This would reduce the risk of
errors in identifying the same companies and facilitate enforcement.
Today, newly created companies receive three separate IDs: the O.I.B number from the
Tax Authority, the Statistical Number from the Croatian Bureau of Statistics, and a
registration number from the Commercial Court. While information-sharing across
agencies is also possible by mapping the various company IDs, a common ID can greatly
facilitate this task. Electronic solutions may facilitate the necessary mapping, but they
cannot exclude the duplication of entities. In New Zealand and Singapore, the business
registration authority generates a unique business number or ID on behalf of all relevant
government agencies.
In order to successfully implement the single ID, a common database and interoperable
ICT systems of relevant government agencies has to be developed, which would transmit
and share business information among all agencies. Such organization makes it easy for
businesses to deal with different regulations, and for different government agencies to
effectively monitor and regulate business activities and provide for government-to-
business (G2B) services. When Norway introduced a single ID, the Ministry of Finance
was a powerful supporter of the reform. The Ministry and the tax authorities aimed at a
more efficient tax reporting system and saw that they would benefit from the exchange of
business information by a common unique identifier.17 This kind of reform does not
necessarily require introducing an entirely new ID. The Belgian government, for
example, refrained from introducing a new number but rather changed the old VAT ID
number into an enterprise number.18
Two approaches to implementing of this reform are most common. In one case, business
registration is the initial step and includes the allocation of a unique ID, which is then
reused by other authorities, such as the tax authorities or social security agencies. In
Australia, for example, business registration is the first step in the process and includes
the allocation of the company ID. Norway takes another approach, as entrepreneurs are
allocated a unique ID before they proceed to register their business. The ID and the
identifying information are then made available and re-used by all agencies involved in
the registration process.19 Introducing a common ID for businesses requires mapping and
conversion of existing identifiers. It is a comparatively complex and cost-intensive
reform. Nonetheless, a growing number of countries have introduced such common IDs
to increase efficiency within the public sector and reduce the administrative burden on
businesses. In 2009, Singapore introduced a single identification number (SINGPASS)
for all business-to-government transactions.
Introduce a single platform for out-of-court business registration by integrating the
incorporation process with the registration to (1) all taxes, the (2) the Croatian
Bureau of Statistics, the (3) Croatian Institute for Health Insurance, and the (4)
Croatian Institute for Pension Insurance. Currently, entrepreneurs in Croatia have to
17
   Business registration case study: Norway, World Bank 2011.
18
   See
http://business.belgium.be/en/managing_your_business/setting_up_your_business/main_steps/company_nu
mber/
19
   See http://www.brreg.no/english/registers/entities/entities.html


                                                16
interact separately with several agencies or intermediaries. Depending on the type of
Limited Liability Company they choose to create, these may include the Commercial
Court Registry, Notaries, HITRO.HR, the Croatian Bureau of Statistics, the Croatian
Institute for Pension Insurance, the Croatian Institute for Health Insurance, and the Tax
Authority (for VAT registration). Some of these interactions can be conducted online;
others require that the entrepreneur appear in person before an agency as part of the
process.
After having streamlined and modernized the registration systems with different agencies
as recommended above, the Croatian government could create a single interface for all
registration formalities. As a first step, staff at HITRO.HR could be given the authority to
accept and process documents on behalf of other agencies. A single electronic
registration form could be introduced to capture information required by all involved
agencies. Other agencies could be given access to the registration database for the type of
information they need.
After the introduction of a single registration form for all agencies, it is recommended
that the systems and databases of multiple agencies be gradually linked to move towards
a “single interface? for business registration, which would allow an entrepreneur to
complete company creation in one interaction with the Government. Key to the success
of the reform is giving officials decision-making power for their respective agencies, and
ensuring a full interoperability among the databases of the different agencies involved.
Without it, delays will continue as the approvals would still be done at each agency’s
back-office. Countries that fail to do this see their one-stop shop become “one more stop?
in the company registration process.20
In Malaysia, after the introduction of the unique company identification number in 2010,
companies that registers at the Companies Commission of Malaysia (CCM) complete
company incorporation, and at the same time comply with registration to the Tax
authorities, Employment Provident Fund, Social Security Organization, and the Inland
Revenue Board. In addition, CCM provides now a post-incorporation package for sale,
which includes the statutory books and share certificates. In Portugal, the platform
“FastTrack? allows users to select a pre-approved name from the registry’s website, and
proceed to the one-stop website to register one’s company. The registry then
automatically processes the taxation, social security and labor registration, and publishes
the incorporation notice.
In Estonia and Norway, systems are interoperable and interlinked with six other agency
systems, namely e-procurement system for government agencies, and the land, labor, tax,
pledges and citizen’s registries. Slovenia’s system is also interoperable with six systems:
land, labor, tax, pledges and citizen’s registries and the trade database.

Dealing with Construction Permits
Reforms that make regulation of constructions more efficient and transparent can help
reduce corruption and informality, while encouraging construction companies to go
through formal channels and ensuring compliance with important standards, such as those
20
  For more information on international best practices on one-stop shops see
<https://www.wbginvestmentclimate.org/uploads/Howmanystopsinaonestopshop.pdf>.


                                              17
impacting safety or mitigating climate change. Good regulations, combined with sound
enforcement mechanisms, ensure safety standards that protect the public while making
the permitting process efficient, transparent and affordable for both building authorities
and the private professionals who use it. A recent study shows that long delays to obtain
permits could lead to higher transaction costs and less transactions.21 However, the payoff
of construction permitting reforms can be significant. In 2005, a
PriceWaterhouseCoopers study found that accelerating permit processes in the United
States could permanently increase government revenues.22 Examining the impact of
building permit reforms on new income generation, for every 10 jobs directly related to a
construction project, another 8 jobs are created locally.23 These impacts yield not only
additional income for the community, but also additional investments and tax revenues
for the Government. Beyond economic returns and the pay-off in attracting more
investment, the most important benefit of building permit reforms is to protect public
safety.
Efficient building permitting systems share key features. Clear building codes written
with a consultative process are at the core of well-designed construction permitting
systems, and countries like Canada and New Zealand are increasingly steering towards
performance-based codes.24 Germany, Singapore and Mauritius have incorporated risk-
management tools to streamline the issuing of permits and optimize the effectiveness of
inspections. Up-to-date land use and zoning plans improve transparency and
predictability for developers.25 Establishing sound licensing mechanisms for
practitioners, in addition to well-functioning liability regimes and compulsory insurance
systems, have become pivotal in order to introduce more efficient regulatory systems.
Many countries are outsourcing building control procedures to the private sector. For
example, France and the UK introduced inspections by accredited bodies, which in turn
required improvements in their private liability and insurance regimes.26
Doing Business records all procedures, time and cost required to build a warehouse and
connect to utilities in Zagreb following all the official requirements. Croatia ranks 178th
globally on the ease of dealing with construction permits and 24th out of 26 in the Eastern


21
   Sonia Hamman, “Housing matters, Volume 1,? Policy Research Working Paper 6876, 2014. In
particular, the paper mentions that “Mayer and Somerville’s (2000) study of U .S. regulations estimates that
a metropolitan area with a 4.5-month delay in approval and two different types of growth-control
restrictions would have about 45 percent less construction than a metropolitan area with a 1.5-month delay
and no growth management policy.?
22
   For a single building project, accelerating permit processes provides a temporary acceleration of property
tax collections. For a representative series of projects, the study shows that these revenue increases could
reach 16% over a period of 5 years. “Economic Impact of Accelerating Permit Processes on Local
Development and Government Revenues? PriceWaterhouseCoopers, December 2005.
23
   PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2005. “Economic Impact of Accelerating Permit Processes on Local
Development and Government Revenues.? Report prepared for the American Institute of Architects,
Washington, DC.
24
   Performance-based codes provide more flexibility and support innovation by focusing on outcomes to be
achieved rather than prescribing how the building must be constructed. The use of performance-based
codes, however, requires a higher level of technical competence to enforce than do other approaches.
25
   World Bank. 2013. “Urbanization beyond Municipal Boundaries: Nurturing Metropolitan Economies and
Connecting Peri-Urban Areas in India.? Directions in Development. Washington, DC: World Bank, p. 44.
26
   For example in France, the Spinetta Act of 1978, required broad-based insurance and warranty coverage.


                                                     18
Europe and Central Asia region. This is Croatia’s weakest ranking among all Doing
Business indicators (table 3.1).
Reform efforts
Croatia has passed three new laws in January 2014: a Building Act, a Physical Planning
Act, and an Inspection Act. The new Building Act introduced a new categorization of
buildings (5 building categories based on complexity) and established a single building
permit as the sole administrative act allowing construction, as opposed to the different
type of permits envisaged by the previous legislation. The Building Act also enabled the
building permit to directly reflect zoning maps, thus eliminating the need for a location
permit in the vast majority of cases.27 Furthermore, it introduced disciplinary proceedings
for non-performing municipal officials that resulted in more prompt processing of the
usage permit. The Physical Planning Act created a Croatian Institute for Spatial
Development, a national level body in charge of developing and implementing national
zoning plan, and a Physical Planning Information System (ISPU), which – once fully
implemented – will enable free and fast access to physical planning data for the whole
country. Finally, the Building Inspection Act increased the authority of local
governments to supervise in the construction of those buildings that do not require a
building permit, the removal of simple buildings and the correction of construction
deficiencies in existing buildings.
Table 3.1 Dealing with Construction Permits in Croatia and best performers
 Doing Business                              Regional         Regional best             Global Best
                             Croatia
 Indicator                                   average           performer                Performer
                                                               9 (Cyprus;
                                                                Georgia;            5 (Hong Kong SAR,
 Procedures (number)             21             16.1
                                                              Montenegro;                 China)
                                                                Ukraine)

 Time (days)                    188            176.8           64 (Ukraine)            26 (Singapore)

 Cost (percent of                                               0.2 percent           0 percent (Qatar,
                                10.9        5.0 percent
 warehouse value)                                               (Hungary)                Mongolia)
Source: Doing Business database

Short-term recommendations
Engage stakeholders and private sector practitioners in an information campaign
aimed at explaining the benefits introduced by the new legislation. Croatia is
undergoing a major overhaul of its physical planning, building permitting and inspection
processes. Three new laws – Building Act, Physical Planning Act, and Inspection Act -
came into force on January 1st, 2014. A large number of ordinances and bylaws came into




27
  The location permits is now required only for exceptional situations, such as the construction on
properties that have an unclear title or have to be expropriated.


                                                    19
force in the following 12 months, providing the implementing guidelines for the
provisions of the acts.28
These changes do not only affect the legal aspects of building permitting, inspections and
planning. They also introduce major technological upgrades, which have the potential to
greatly reduce the amount of paperwork for public administrations and private sector
practitioners. Art. 36 of the Physical Planning Act, for instance, introduced a physical
planning information system (ISPU) connecting the IT systems of several agencies,
among which the Cadaster, the Land Registry and the Ministry of Finance (OIB
database). An e-permitting facility connected to the ISPU system is also being
introduced. As of January 2015, it was operational in 107 municipalities out of 260. The
e-permitting facility allows entrepreneurs to access specific information online - such as
updated laws and regulations, lists of licensed practitioners, and standardized application
forms - and track the progress of their applications for building-related permits. Add-ons
to ISPU system, including e-archives and e-inspection solutions, are currently under
development and should be introduced by the end of 2016.


28
  According to the documents to submitted to the Doing Business Reform Advisory team, recently
implemented regulations include:
    1. Instructions regarding the preparation of drafts in the procedure of issuance of acts on the basis of
        the Physical Planning Act and the Construction Act and regarding the implementation of such
        procedures electronically (OG 56/14);
    2. Ordinance on the conditions and method of issuance of confirmation to Croatian citizens and legal
        entities for the fulfillment of the right to provide services of the regulated profession of energy
        certification and energy audit of buildings in parties to the Agreement on the European Economic
        Area (OG 47/14);
    3. Ordinance on energy audit and energy certification of buildings (OG 48/14);
    4. Ordinance on the content of written Statement of the contractor on performed works and
        maintenance conditions for buildings (OG 43/14);
    5. Ordinance on the conditions and benchmarks for the issuance of authorization for the control of
        projects (OG 32/14, 69/14);
    6. Ordinance on the compulsory content and equipping of construction projects (OG 64/14);
    7. Ordinance on the control of projects (OG 32/14);
    8. Ordinance on basic and other buildings and works (OG 79/14);
    9. Ordinance on the content and design of the signaling board for construction sites (OG 42/14);
    10. Ordinance on the method of implementation of construction surveillance activities, on the form,
        conditions and method of use of the construction log book, and on the content of the final report
        by the supervising engineer (OG 111/14);
    11. Ordinance on the maintenance of buildings (OG122/14);
    12. Amendments to the Administrative Fees and Tariffs Act (OG 40/14);
    13. Regulation on the definition of construction works, other projects and surfaces of state and
        regional significance (OG 37/14);
    14. Ordinance on surveying designs (OG 12/14, 56/14);
    15. Ordinance on the mandatory contents of conceptual designs (OG 55/14);
    16. Instruction regarding the preparation of drafts in the procedure of issuance of acts on the basis of
        the Physical Planning Act and the Construction Act and regarding the implementation of such
        procedures electronically (OG 56/14);
    17. Ordinance on the contents and required spatial indicators in reports on the spatial status
        (OG117/12);
    18. Regulation on the assessment of real estate value (OG 74/14);
    19. Ordinance on methods of assessment of real estate value (OG 79/14).



                                                    20
Croatian authorities should press ahead so that all ordinances and regulations are
consistently implemented across the country. In parallel, major efforts should be
undertaken to inform private sector practitioners on the opportunities presented by the
new legislation.
At the moment, not all the benefits of the new legislation are clear to the building sector
professionals operating in the country. For instance, many of them still visit the Cadaster
to obtain a list of neighbors that has then to be submitted to the Municipality together
with the application for the building permit (i.e. geodesic study annex). Given the
progress introduced by the ISPU, such procedure should no longer be necessary, since
such list can be retrieved online.
Expedite integration of all the necessary IT systems and databases into the ISPU.
The geographic information system (ISPU) represents a great leap ahead towards a fast
and efficient building permitting process. In order to fully reap the benefits of this
important reform, Croatian authorities should press ahead with the harmonization of all
the necessary databases that might contribute to its completeness. At the moment, the
Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning is working to harmonize the ISPU system
with the databases of Ministry of Maritime Affairs, Transport and Infrastructure and the
Ministry of Culture. Also, additional work will be necessary to harmonize Cadaster and
Land Registry entries, especially at the local level. Such measures should have priority.
Review the current statutory time limits for permit-related approvals, introducing -
where necessary – stricter deadlines. A study in the United States estimates that
accelerating permit approvals by 3 months in a 22-month project cycle could increase
construction spending by 5.7% and property-tax revenue for local governments by 16%.29
As the new ordinances and bylaws are finalized and implemented, and public officials
operating at the local level grow familiar with the new procedures, Croatian authorities
could consider monitoring processing times, and adjusting them to the new regulations
when necessary.
According to the Administrative Procedures Act of 2009 (OG 47/09), for instance, the
Municipality of Zagreb has 8 days to check whether the application for a building permit
is complete (i.e. all the necessary documents have been submitted) and in line with the
urban plan. This is only one of the first steps required for the issuance of a building
permit, and a lengthy one. Considering technological progress brought about by the
physical planning database, which allows a quick confirmation of the information
provided in the application, the deadline for first formal check performed by the
Municipality could be shortened to 48 or 24 hours. In order to make the new deadlines
effective, their implementation should be accompanied by tighter monitoring of the
performance of the municipal officials charged with document review.
Stricter deadlines could also be introduced in relation to issuance of the occupancy
permit. As per article 140 and 144 of the new Building Act, the final inspection and the
issuance of the occupancy permit should take 23 days altogether (15+8 days). In
Lithuania, where the application for the occupancy permit can be submitted online, the

29
 PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2005. “The Economic Impact of Accelerating Permit Processes on Local
Development and Government Revenues.? Report prepared for the American Institute of Architects,
Washington, D.C.


                                                 21
issuance of the permit takes only 14 days. With the introduction of the online building
permit platform, it would also be possible to issue the occupancy permit in a shorter time.
A new time limit can be set for completing this procedure.
Another procedure that could be implemented faster relates to amount of utility and water
fees that have to be paid by the investor after the building permit has been issued (as per
art. 122 of the Building Act, OG 153/13). In Zagreb, Municipal officers currently issue
their decision on the matter after 22 days. Processing times could be much shorter.
Eliminate the requirement to stamp the copy of the cadastral plan at the County
Office before it can be submitted as part of the application for the building permit.
Following the introduction of the Physical Planning Information System, cadastral maps
can now be found online. The online system eliminates the need for architects and
engineers to visit the Cadaster to finalize their projects.
The City of Zagreb, however, does not consider cadastral maps that have not been
stamped at the Cadaster as valid documents when processing building permit
applications. As a result, architects and engineers continue to visit the cadaster
unnecessarily to obtain a stamp on a map they have downloaded online.
The stamp requirement could be easily eliminated by mandating City of Zagreb officials
to check the cadastral map online in the Physical Planning Application System once the
building permit application is received. All municipalities in Croatia have access to the
ISPU.
Medium-term recommendations
Further streamline construction-related approvals and clearances by improving the
e-permitting system and extend its usage to all municipalities. The application for a
building permit is composed, among other documents, by a set of approvals that are a
necessary condition for the building permit application to be considered valid (and thus
processed by the Municipality). For a simple two-story warehouse, such approvals are
issued by the Inspectorate for Fire (Ministry of Internal Affairs), the National Croatian
Electric Grid, the Waste Collection Department, and the Water Authority.
Designers often consult with these agencies beforehand, in order to finalize their
drawings, but must undergo a final review once the drawings are finalized. The necessary
documents for such reviews must be submitted in paper format, as well as the
applications for the building and usage permit, at least in Zagreb.
Although applicants can currently track the status of such applications online, a further
degree of efficiency could be attained by turning the ISPU/e-permit platform into a
system where building permit applicants can apply for all initial clearances
simultaneously by submitting one online form along with the final drawings. This form
would then be accessed by the various agencies, which could review their project and
approve the designs electronically.
Several countries have already such computerized systems in place. Developers in
Austria, Denmark, Iceland, Norway and Portugal can complete their building permit
applications online. In Dubai, entrepreneurs can apply for pre-approvals and the building
permit at the same time though the Municipality’s online platform. In Singapore, the data
management system, established in 2001, provides on-line submission of all documents,


                                            22
an easy access to the information needed for obtaining a building permit and allows for
efficient permit processing. Today builders regularly receive updates on the status of their
application either by e-mail or text messaging. As a result, the time for dealing with
construction permits has been reduced by two-thirds. This reform saves time for builders
and government officials alike.
Further enhance ISPU as to create a robust and fully functional GIS system. A fully
functional Geographic Information System (GIS) is an integrated system of computer
hardware, software, and trained personnel capable of assembling, storing, manipulating,
and displaying topographic, demographic, utility, facility, image and other resource data
that is geographically referenced. When accessible maps contain all relevant zoning,
infrastructure and construction information, designers can be allowed to proceed with
their plans without having to contact authorities for further details (Box 1). If the
Ministry of Construction and Physical Planning developed the ISPU system into a fully-
fledged GIS system, applicants who produced their conceptual drawings electronically
with a CAD system may be in a position to overlay these plans with the zoning, planning
and utility requirements captured in the system. In certain circumstances, such as low risk
applications, this may be able to have the effect of pre-approving some elements before
being checked by City of Zagreb and the utility companies, thus saving time.
     Box 1. An example of the GIS system in North Shore City Council, Auckland New Zealand

     Key to the success of the NSCC GIS program has been their commitment to distribute access
     to the map data and associated council information to the various stakeholders. The online
     ‘GIS Viewer’ initiative has been especially well-received. Anyone with access to a standard
     web browser can create their own maps from available data including color aerial images,
     boundary lines, water pipes, manholes, hydrants and even property values and zoning
     information. North Shore City Council can have anywhere from 500 up to 10,000 maps being
     produced in a single day, typically from house hunters. Real estate agents, surveyors,
     designers, architects and lawyers are also high users.

     Source: North Shore City Council
     http://www.northshorecity.govt.nz/SERVICES/PROPERTYINFORMATION/GISVIEWER/Pages/defa
     ult.aspx

Registering    Property
 The North Shore GIS system is built using the Environmental Systems Research Institute (ESRI) as the
     platform. http://www.esri.com/
Registered property rights are important to support investment, productivity and
growth.30 Research suggests that property owners with secure ownership are more likely
to invest in private enterprises and transfer land to more efficient users. The ability to
easily access authoritative information on land ownership also reduces the transaction
cost in financial markets, making it easier to use property as collateral. 31 Land registries,
together with cadasters that identify the location of a property, are institutions used
around the world to map, prove and secure property rights. These institutions are part of
the land information system of an economy. With land and buildings accounting for

30
   Claessens, Stijn and Luc Laeven, Financial Development, Property Rights, and Growth, Journal of
Finance, 58 (6): 2401–36, 2003.
31
   Simon Johnson, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff, Property Rights and Finance, The American
Economic Review, Volume 92, Issue 5, Pages 1335-1356, December 2002.


                                                  23
between half and three-quarters of the wealth in most economies, having an up-to-date
land information system matters.32 The benefits of land registration go beyond the private
sector. For governments, having reliable, up-to-date information in cadasters and land
registries is essential to correctly assess and collect tax revenues. With up-to-date land
information, governments can map out the varying requirements of their cities and
strategically plan the provision of services and infrastructure in the areas of each city
where they are most needed.33
Doing Business records the full sequence of procedures necessary for a business (the
buyer) to purchase a property from another business (the seller) and to transfer the
property title to the buyer’s name so that the buyer can use the property for expanding its
business, use the property as collateral in taking new loans or, if necessary, sell the
property to another business. Croatia – represented by Zagreb - ranks 92 out of 189
economies in the ease of registering property and 22 out of 26 economies in the Eastern
Europe and Central Asia region. While Croatia’s indicators on the number of procedures
to register property is currently aligned to the regional average, the amount of time
required to register property is triple, while the cost is almost double (table 4.1).
Table 4.1 Registering Property in Croatia and best performers
 Doing Business                      Regional best       Regional                        Global best
                        Croatia
 Indicator                             performer         Average                         performer
 Procedures                                                                         1 (Georgia; Norway;
                           5           Georgia (1)         5.4
 (number)                                                                            Sweden; Portugal)
                                                                                      1 (Georgia; New
     Time (days)                72             Georgia (1)             23.1
                                                                                     Zealand; Portugal)
                                                                                    0 (Belarus, Kiribati;
     Cost (percent of
                                 5            Belarus (0.0)             2.7             Saudi Arabia;
     property value)
                                                                                      Slovak Republic)
Source: Doing Business database

Reform efforts
Since 2008, the time to register property in Croatia has decreased from 956 to 72 days.
Such an astonishing result is due to legislative improvements introduced by the Land
Registry Act of 2004 and the subsequent computerization efforts undertaken by the
Croatian government. Such efforts, which have displayed their potential effect over a
number of years, were accompanied by an empowerment of court’s clerks, who were
increased in number, given the authority to decide over transfer of title applications and
asked to work overtime to reduce the case backlog.
Short-term recommendations
Complete Land Registry and Cadaster data harmonization. The Land Registry is
under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice while the Cadaster is managed by the
State Geodetic Administration. Currently, the data contained in the two databases is not
fully integrated, though the process is ongoing as the Joint Information System is rolled
32
  World Bank. 1989. World Development Report 1989. New York: Oxford University Press.
33
  Property information held in cadasters and land registries is part of the land information available to
governments. Land information also includes other geographic, environmental and socioeconomic data
related to land that are useful for urban planning and development.


                                                     24
out and the data harmonized. The current lack of data harmonization contributes to delays
and inconsistencies in Government to Business services. To solve this problem and give
full implementation to the Land Registry Act, Croatian authorities should give priority to
finalizing the Real Estates Registration and Cadaster Joint Information System (JIS)
project – which will harmonize the two databases mentioned above.34
Complete the rollout of the Joint Information System (JIS) for Registry and
Cadaster to all Registry and Cadaster offices. While Croatia has had a digital land
registry for a long time, not all records have been digitized. The two most lagging courts
in the digitization process are the Zagreb court and the new Split courts.
In Zagreb, the Legal Basis Archive, which contains all the sale contracts deposited at the
Court and represents an essential source of information for Land Registry officials, has
been digitized to a limited extent. At the moment, the documents that are digitized are
scanned, which limits their searchability (i.e. they can be searched only though the case
numbers – the “Z? number). The archival books contained in the Legal Basis Archive are
paper based and have no duplicates. If a book is being used by one clerk, others may have
to wait for days before they can use it. To reduce delays to a minimum, Croatian
authorities should complete the rollout of the JIS system to all Registry and Cadaster
offices.
The completion of the JIS rollout will sensibly improve the digitization of records; will
allow property transfers to be completed online; will introduce re-engineered, joint
processes and standard forms; will make electronic extracts easily accessible; and will
allow e-conveyancing. The full implementation of the JIS platform will save resources
for businesses and increase transparency.
Other countries with fully electronic systems today have progressively worked towards
that goal over several years. As an example, in 2009 the Danish government began
modernizing its land registry by digitizing and automating property registration.
Processes had to be streamlined and reorganized. The centralized land registry initiated
its computerization and records were progressively digitized. Once digitization was
complete, the land registry introduced electronic lodgment of property transfers. By 2011
property transfer applications were only accepted online and the information technology
system started screening applications in a fast and efficient way. As a result, over 5 years
the time to transfer a property was reduced from 42 days to 4 days. With online access to
a single source of land registration data, citizens and businesses can transfer property on
their own, with no need for a third party. They can also get information on any property.
And to facilitate access to credit as well as information, the Danish financial sector
created a central hub allowing banks and the land registry to share land registration data.
New Zealand digitized its property records between 1997 and 2002 and subsequently
introduced electronic registration. However, by 2005 only about half of property
transactions were being submitted electronically. A final push was needed. In 2008 the
law made electronic registration mandatory. Registration can now be completed in just 2
steps, at a cost of 0.1 percent of the property value.



34
     For more information, please visit: http://www.uredjenazemlja.hr/default.aspx?id=22


                                                     25
Eliminate the requirement for attaching a special administrative duty stamp ( biljeg)
for any Land Registry requests. At the moment, applicants at the Land Registry are
requested to attach a special administrative stamp duty to their requests. In order to
reduce the burden on entrepreneurs and facilitate the introduction of improved e-
government services, such a requirement could be lifted.
Complete Land Registry and Cadaster data harmonization. The Land Registry is
under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Justice while the Cadaster is managed by the
State Geodetic Administration. Currently, the data contained in the two databases is not
fully integrated, though the process is ongoing as the Joint Information System is rolled
out and the data harmonized. The current lack of data harmonization contributes to delays
and inconsistencies in Government to Business services. To solve this problem and give
full implementation to the Land Registry Act, Croatian authorities should give priority to
finalizing the Real Estates Registration and Cadaster Joint Information System (JIS)
project – which will harmonize the two databases mentioned above.35
Introduce fast-track registration procedures at the Land Registry Court. Each year
the Land Registry Court sets its plan of activity. The plan distributes resources to each
task performed by the Court and sets priorities, for instance giving particular urgency to
the registration or cancellation of mortgages. When submitting their applications,
entrepreneurs can also demand their cases to be treated with urgency. A large number of
them do so, since the request has no extra cost. If the case is considered worthy of
urgency by the Land Registry Court, referents/clerks try to accelerate the registration
process as much as possible. Given the large number of requests, however, processing
times are not much different. In order to effectively reduce processing times for those
who really need it and help prioritize the work at the Land Registry Court, the Ministry of
Justice should consider setting a formal fast-track procedures for an extra fee. Other
European economies have introduced similar procedures with positive results. In
Lithuania, the registration with the Real Estate Register normally takes 10 business days
but entrepreneurs who wish to, can have their property registered in just 3 business days
by paying a 30% mark-up on the registration fee (2-business days registration has a 50%
mark-up, while 1-business day incurs in a 100% mark-up). In the Slovak Republic, the
standard registration procedure takes 30 days and EUR 66 but entrepreneurs can choose
to halve its time by paying EUR 266 instead. Similarly, Portuguese entrepreneurs can
register their property in just one day if they pay a 50% mark-up on the land registry fee.
Allow electronic Land Registry extracts to be considered as official documents and
make them accessible through e-citizen government portal. At the moment, only
extracts obtained in paper directly at the Land Registry (or stamped by a Land Registry
official) have legal standing. Considering the progress in the computerization of the Land
Registry over the past years, these restriction could soon be abolished to allow electronic
extracts to be used officially.36 Also, extracts should be accessible through the e-citizen
government portal.


35
  For more information, please visit: http://www.uredjenazemlja.hr/default.aspx?id=22
36
  Article 7 of the Land Registration Act (Official Gazette No. 91/96, 68/98, 137/99, 114/01, 100/04,
107/07, 152/08, 126/10, 55/13 and 60/13 ) currently says “Extracts from the main register and copies or
print-outs from the collection of deeds shall be issued by the land registries?. Additional information on


                                                     26
Medium-term recommendations
Consider institutional reform in the county courts, the Land Registry and the
Cadaster. Currently, the land registration function is carried out by the county courts.
The courts are often insufficiently staffed and do not have sufficient resources to manage
land transfers and registration efficiently. Authorities can consider removing the land
registration from the county courts as an administrative function. To supplement this
measure, they can merge the Land Registry and Cadaster functions into a single
administrative agency, which is operationally independent, government supervised, and
partially or fully fee-financed.
Getting Credit
Doing Business covers two aspects of the regulatory framework and infrastructure that
affect the availability of credit: the depth of credit information and the strength of the
legal rights of borrowers and lenders. The first aspect, measured by the depth of credit
information index, includes the coverage, scope and accessibility of credit information
available either through credit bureaus or registries. The second, measured by the strength
of legal rights index, evaluates the degree to which collateral and bankruptcy laws protect
the rights of borrowers and lenders and thus facilitate lending.
Both sets of measures have recently been expanded to cover more good practices. The
strength of legal rights index has been expanded from 10 points to 12. One of the new
points is awarded for having an integrated secured transactions system. Modern secured
transactions systems are aiming at ensuring that a prospective creditor can easily
determine not only whether an asset has already been pledged as collateral but also
whether there is some other type of right over that asset. Such rights might be established
by legal instruments that are functional equivalents to security interests. In an integrated
secured transactions system these instruments are regulated under the same law as
traditional security interests, an approach that provides greater transparency and
predictability. Points are also awarded for having a well-functioning collateral registry,
defined by several characteristics. One is them is the registry must cover any type of
secured transaction, regardless of the type of debtor, creditor or assets. Another is that the
registry must be a notice-based registry, a type of registry that has lower running costs
than a document-based registry. Finally, the registry must offer modern features. For
example, secured creditors (or their representatives) should be able to register, search,
amend and cancel security interests online.
The depth of credit information index has been expanded from 6 points to 8. One of the
new points is awarded to economies where credit information can be accessed through an
online platform or through a system-to-system connection between financial institutions
and the credit information system. Online access can improve data quality and security,
increase efficiency and transparency and ensure a high standard of service for users—and
thus might increase the number of reporting institutions that share credit information.




why electronic extracts are not considered official documents can be found here:
http://www.uredjenazemlja.hr/default.aspx?id=101


                                                    27
With the methodological improvements introduced by Doing Business 2015, Croatia
scored overall 61st on the Getting Credit indicator among the 189 countries measured by
the report and 17th out of 26 in Europe and Central Asia region.
A. Credit Information
A credit reporting system is an integral part of a well-functioning credit market. Credit
reporting systems help satisfy lenders’ need for accurate, credible information that
reduces the risk of lending and the cost of loan losses by providing a reliable indication of
whether an applicant will repay a loan. The lack of credit information makes checking
borrowers’ credit history an onerous and uncertain process. This raises transaction costs
for banks and, ultimately, increases the cost of credit to borrowers. Loans are made based
on personal connections, not necessarily the likelihood of repayment.
Research suggests that bank risk is lower, while profitability is higher in countries where
lenders share borrowers’ information through credit bureaus and registries.37 Well-
functioning credit reporting systems can help to reduce adverse selection and moral
hazard, and contribute to both an expansion of credit and a reduction in lending costs by
facilitating the adoption of lending technologies based on credit scoring models. The
development of credit registries and bureaus is particularly important for smaller firms,
given the more severe problems of information opacity and asymmetry in these cases.
Table 5.1 Credit information ranking and best performers
                              Croati Regional        Regional best                    Best global
 Doing Business Indicator
                                a      Average         performer                      performer
                                                            8
 Depth of credit information                                                               8
                                6         6        (Armenia, Georgia,
 index (0-8)                                                                        (26 economies)
                                                       Lithuania)
 Private credit bureau                   33.7         100 percent                    100 percent
                              100.0
 coverage (percent of adults)          percent      (Serbia; Croatia)               (26 countries)
 Public registry coverage                19.3         76.8 percent                   100 percent
                                0
 (percent of adults)                   percent          (Latvia)                      (Portugal)
Source: Doing Business database

Table 5.2 Depth of credit information index
Depth of credit information index (0–8)                                  Credit Credit Croatia’s
                                                                         bureau registry score:
Are data on both firms and individuals distributed?                       Yes     No       1
Are both positive and negative credit data distributed?                   Yes         No         1
Are data from retailers or utility companies - in addition to data
from banks and financial institutions - distributed?                       No         No         0
Are at least 2 years of historical data distributed? (Credit bureaus
and registries that distribute more than 10 years of negative data
or erase data on defaults as soon as they are repaid obtain a score       Yes         No         1
of 0 for this component.)



37
   Joel Houston, Chen Lin, Ping Lin, and Yue Ma, 2010. “Creditor rights, information sharing, and bank
risk taking,? Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 96, Issue 3, Pages 485–512, June.


                                                   28
Are data on loan amounts below 1% of income per capita                                Yes          No            1
distributed?
By law, do borrowers have the right to access their data in the
credit bureau or credit registry? (Credit bureaus and registries                      Yes          No            1
that charge more than 1% of income per capita for borrowers to
inspect their data obtain a score of 0 for this component.)
Can banks and financial institutions access borrowers’ credit
information online (for example, through an online platform, a       Yes      No                                 1
system-to-system connection or both)?
Are bureau or registry credit scores offered as a value- added
service to help banks and financial institutions assess the          No       No                                 0
creditworthiness of borrowers?
                                                     Score (Number of “Yes? answers)                              6

Note: Prior to Doing Business 2015, the depth of credit information index covered only the first 6 features listed above.
An economy receives a score of 1 if there is a "yes" to either bureau or registry. If the credit bureau or registry is not
operational or covers less than 5% of the adult population, the total score on the depth of credit information index is 0.


Doing Business indicators over time
In 2007, Croatia set up a new private credit bureau - the Croatian Credit Information
Registry (HROK) - that distributed positive and negative information only on individuals.
Starting from July 2010, HROK expanded its coverage to firms. In December 2010, the
bureau started distributing this information to financial institutions. Currently, the HROK
database counts more than 3 million individuals and over 130 thousands firms.
Short-term recommendations
Expand the sources of information to include retailers and utility companies. In
addition to the data provided by financial institutions, more advanced credit reporting
systems also collect credit information from retailers or utility companies (electricity,
water, and mobile phone providers) and include such data in the credit reports. This is the
case in 58 of 189 economies covered by Doing Business, including Denmark, Germany,
and the United Kingdom. Doing so is an effective way of expanding coverage by credit
bureaus.
Collecting and distributing information on the payment of electricity and phone bills, for
example, can help establish good credit histories for people without previous bank loans
and credit cards. A study in Italy found that more than 83% of water customers, who
lacked a credit history before the inclusion of repayment information from the utility
provider, were able to have a positive history after the inclusion, solely by paying their
utility bills.38
Utility companies may also benefit. For example, in August 2006, the United States-
based DTE Energy, an electricity and natural gas company, began full reporting of
customer payment data to credit bureaus. DTE customers with no prior credit history—
8.1% of the total —gained either a credit file or a credit score. And customers began to


38
     Preliminary findings of ongoing internal study at CRIF SpA, Italy.


                                                           29
make payments to DTE a priority. Within 6 months DTE had 80,000 fewer accounts in
arrears.39
Expanding the sources of information to incorporate non-regulated financial institutions,
however, can be challenging. For example, it may be necessary to amend the existing
legal and regulatory framework concerning consumer and data protection so that retailers
and utility companies may share consumer data with credit reporting service provider.
Measures should also be taken to ensure the quality of data submitted by retailers and
utility providers. Such companies may use different the consumer identification systems:
both system and human errors are possible when data are transmitted for the first time.
The Croatian Credit Information Registry (HROK) is currently evaluating the possibility
of expanding its sources of information to utility and telephone companies. A first round
of discussions between its founders and owners, a set of 20 Croatian banks, was held in
late March 2015. Another round of talks is planned for the end of April 2015, with a final
decision to be taken by June of the same year. Given its political clout, the National Bank
of Croatia may prove to be an important stakeholder in such matters. If the proposed
expansion is accepted by the HROK board and meets the interest of telephone companies
and utility providers, the Credit Registry will need to expand its handling data capabilities
and banks will need to improve their online services.
Medium-term recommendations
Introduce credit scores. Another important tool in expanding access to finance is credit
scoring, a statistical method of evaluating the probability that a prospective borrower will
fulfill the financial obligations associated with a loan. Credit scores based on credit
bureau or credit registry data pool information across many creditors as well as some
public information sources. They therefore include characteristics otherwise unavailable
to any individual creditor, such as total exposure, number of outstanding loans and
previous defaults within the system. Credit scoring models typically incorporate
historical data such as defaults, positive payment behavior and previous inquiries. To
sharpen the predictive value of credit scores, credit bureaus and registries are also
increasingly collecting data from a wider range of sources (such as bankruptcies and
court judgments). As a result, credit scores generally have a higher predictive value than
assessments derived from credit histories alone.40
Credit scores may improve market efficiency and provide borrowers with more
opportunities to obtain credit. The availability of credit scores allows lenders that would
otherwise not be capable of analyzing the raw credit data to extend credit to underserved
markets at lower cost. This value added product is most widely available in Latin
America and the Caribbean and the OECD high-income group, offered in 80% of
economies with a credit bureau or registry covering at least 5% of the adult population —
compared with 40% in Europe and Central Asia, 38% in the Middle East and North
Africa, 25% in East Asia and the Pacific and 24% in Sub-Saharan Africa.




39
     World Bank Conference. Financial Infrastructure Week. Brazil, March 15-17, 2010.
40
     World Bank 2011a.


                                                    30
Creating a credit score system involves large investments that Croatian Banks do not
seem presently interested to consider. Such costs may be scaled if telephone and utility
providers join HROK.
B. Legal Rights of Creditors and Borrowers in Secured Transactions
This section focuses on secured transactions and creditor’s rights. In many developing
countries, small and medium enterprises do not have access to land to use as collateral.
However, they have moveable assets—such as machinery, inventory, accounts
receivables, and equipment. The legal and institutional framework plays an important
role in facilitating the use of such movable assets as collateral. Having to give up the
possession of the asset pledged to a creditor would disable the debtor from using such
asset, which could hamper the business’s productivity and ability to operate. As a result,
it is important to develop a legal system that would allow businesses to use all their
moveable assets as collateral to secure loans without having to give up possession of
those assets. This in turn may increase firms’ likelihood of accessing credit and improve
the terms of the credit.
Research suggests that an improved legal framework for collateral could contribute to:


        Increasing the level of credit availability: In countries where security interests
         over collateral are enforceable against third-parties based on a predictable priority
         system in cases of loan default, credit to the private sector as a percentage of gross
         domestic product (GDP) averages 60 percent compared with only 30 percent to 32
         percent on average for countries without these creditor protections.41
        Decreasing the cost of credit: In industrial countries, borrowers with collateral
         get nine times the level of credit given their cash flow compared to borrowers
         without collateral. They also benefit from longer repayment periods (11 times
         longer) and significantly lower interest rates (50 percent lower).42
        Increased access to finance: Research found that in countries with registries for
         movable collaterals, the number of firms with access to bank finance increased on
         average by 8 percent and access to bank loans on average by 7 percent. These
         countries also showed lower interest rates and extension in loan maturity. The
         increase was even stronger for small firms, which often find it more difficult than
         bigger firms to access credit due to lack of fixed assets to be used as collateral.43
In the Doing Business report, Getting Credit – Legal Rights indicator, Croatia scores 5
out of 12 (12 = highest score for strongest protections) on the strength of legal right
index. Neighboring Montenegro is one of the 3 economies around the world that score 12
out of 12 in this index (table 5.3).


41
   Investment Climate Advisory Services, Secured Transactions Systems and Collateral Registries, World
Bank Group, January 2010.
42
   Ibidem
43
    Love, Inessa, María Soledad Martínez Pería and Sandeep Singh, 2013. “Collateral Registries for
Movable Assets. Does Their Introduction Spur Firms’ Access to Bank Finance? Policy Research Working
Paper n. 6477, The World Bank, June.


                                                  31
Table 5.3 Legal Rights of Creditors and Borrowers in Secured Transactions ranking and
best performers
                                         Regional    Regional best      Best global
 Doing Business Indicator    Croatia
                                         Average       performer        performer
                                                                       12 (Colombia;
 Strength of Legal Rights                                  12
                                5           6                          New Zealand);
 Index (0-12)                                        (Montenegro)
                                                                        Montenegro)

Table 5.4 Legal Rights of Creditors and Borrowers in Secured Transactions score
Strength of legal rights index (0-12)                                               Croatia’s score
Does an integrated or unified legal framework for secured transactions that
extends to the creation, publicity and enforcement of functional equivalents to           No
security interests in movable assets exist in the economy?
Does the law allow businesses to grant a non possessory security right in a
single category of movable assets, without requiring a specific description of            No
collateral?
Does the law allow businesses to grant a non possessory security right in
substantially all of its assets, without requiring a specific description of             Yes
collateral?
May a security right extend to future or after-acquired assets, and may it
extend automatically to the products, proceeds or replacements of the original            No
assets?
Is a general description of debts and obligations permitted in collateral
agreements; can all types of debts and obligations be secured between parties;
                                                                                         Yes
and can the collateral agreement include a maximum amount for which the
assets are encumbered?
Is a collateral registry in operation for both incorporated and non-incorporated
entities, that is unified geographically and by asset type, with an electronic           Yes
database indexed by debtor's name?
Does a notice-based collateral registry exist in which all functional
                                                                                          No
equivalents can be registered?
Does a modern collateral registry exist in which registrations, amendments,
cancellations and searches can be performed online by any interested third                No
party?
Are secured creditors paid first (i.e. before tax claims and employee claims)
                                                                                          No
when a debtor defaults outside an insolvency procedure?
Are secured creditors paid first (i.e. before tax claims and employee claims)
                                                                                         Yes
when a business is liquidated?
Are secured creditors subject to an automatic stay on enforcement when a
debtor enters a court-supervised reorganization procedure? Does the law
                                                                                          No
protect secured creditors’ rights by providing clear grounds for relief from the
stay and/or sets a time limit for it?
Does the law allow parties to agree on out of court enforcement at the time a
security interest is created? Does the law allow the secured creditor to sell the
                                                                                         Yes
collateral through public auction and private tender, as well as, for the secured
creditor to keep the asset in satisfaction of the debt?
                                              Score (Number of “Yes? answers)             5



                                                32
Source: Doing Business database
Reform efforts
Croatia considerably strengthened its secured transactions system in 2006 by launching a
unified and geographically centralized collateral registry (Law on Register of the Judicial
and Notary Public Insurance of Claims Over Movable Properties and Rights). Since then,
the Croatian Financial Agency (FINA) has been keeping a public registry on the
securities (pledge and fiduciary transfer of ownership) acquired over movables and rights.
There are some exceptions. Securities (stocks, bonds, etc.) are registered with the Central
Depository Agency. Planes and ships are treated as immovable property and have their
special registry.
Medium-term recommendations
Allow businesses to grant a non possessory security right in a single category of
movable assets, without requiring a specific description of collateral. In addition,
security rights should extend to future or after-acquired assets and extend automatically
to the products, proceeds or replacements of the original assets. In order for the security
interest to be effective, the debtor needs to have total freedom regarding how to use the
assets as long as he takes proper care to preserve their commercial value. In some
countries this is achieved through business charges, sometimes called enterprise charges
or even floating charges, making it easier for entrepreneurs to obtain credit by allowing
them to use the entirety of their assets as collateral. These arrangement offers flexibility
because it gives creditors both the incentive to extend credit, as well as the security of
knowing that they will be able to realize their security interest if the debtor defaults.
Ensure that the priority scheme ranks secured creditors as high as possible, while
respecting other critical national policy objectives. It is critical that creditors or
potential creditors of a business be able to determine, with a high degree of predictability,
where their claims against the business will rank. Given the important role that secured
creditors often play in providing credit to businesses, their claims should have the highest
priority reasonably possible, both within and outside of insolvency procedures, unless
other claims were registered before the secured creditor’s claim. Claims that rank ahead
of secured creditors are likely to increase the cost, or limit the availability of credit.
If secured creditors can predict their ranking vis-à-vis other types of creditors (including
statutory creditors) with confidence, they will make credit available more easily and at a
lower cost to the borrower. But when other types of creditors, such as the tax authority in
the case of state income taxes or labor claims, have priority over secured creditors—
especially if they came into existence after the registration of the security interest —
secured creditors will be less able to predict their level of risk. Providing secured
creditors with the highest level of priority possible based on the “first in time, first in
right? principle will encourage more credit to be available to entrepreneurs at a lower
rate.
There may be broader or more important policy objectives served by ranking certain
claims higher than those of secured creditors. If so, both the nature and the scope of these
priority claims should be very clearly defined. Many countries achieve this by narrowly
defining the class of claims that rank ahead of secured creditors and limiting the amount
of money that can be paid under these prior-ranking claims. Similarly, in bankruptcy,


                                             33
there may be the need to temporarily stay or, in some cases subordinate, the claim of
secured creditors to provide the borrower with the potential to restructure and continue as
a going concern. Secured creditors should have priority over other creditors when the
debtor is the subject of a collective procedure or bankruptcy.
Create an integrated or unified legal framework for secured transactions that
extends to the creation, publicity and enforcement of 4 functional equivalents to
security interests in movable assets: fiduciary transfer of title; financial leases;
assignment or transfer of receivables; and sales with retention of title. Such unified
legal framework may consist either of one law covering all types of security interest,
including functional equivalents (ideal scenario). Alternatively, it may encompass various
laws by linking them through the same requirement of registration of all type security
interests, including functional equivalents, in central, geographically unified, collateral
registry which would be noticed-based (no underlying security documents need to be
provided for registration) and accessible on-line for registration, searches and
modifications by interested parties.




                                            34
Protecting Minority Investors
Corporate governance matters in all types of economies. Its ability to build trust and raise
the attractiveness of firms to potential investors, whether domestic or foreign, is crucial in
both established and developing economies. In established economies, ill-conceived
corporate regulations can hamper the growth of the private sector. In developing
economies, confidence in the institutions is sorely needed to encourage the creation of a
strong flow of flourishing corporations.
Corporate governance is first and foremost an act of balancing. The immediate interests
of four parties are at play: company managers, company directors, shareholders and
public authorities. In an ideal setting, the seemingly contrary interests of one party
become beneficial in the long run to that of another. For instance, empowering
shareholders by granting them more control over major transactions and/or transactions
with a potentially harmful conflict of interest reduces the risk on their investment and
may allow managers and company directors to more easily raise the capital needed to
grow, innovate, diversify and compete on the market.
Without investor protections, equity markets fail to develop and banks become the only
source of finance. Economies that have dynamic capital markets tend to effectively
protect investors. In these economies investors receive financial information they can
trust, they participate in major decisions of the company, and directors are accountable
for their managerial decisions. If the laws do not provide such protections, investors may
be reluctant to invest, unless they become controlling shareholders.
Doing Business measures the strength of minority shareholder protections against
directors’ misuse of corporate assets for personal gain through one set of indicators and
the strength of shareholders’ rights in corporate governance through another.44 Such
protections are important because gaps in legislation may allow company owners and
directors to enter into transactions that are lawful and involve no fraud or deceit, but that
nevertheless are unfair to minority shareholders. The existence of disclosure, director
liability and shareholder suit provisions that prevent such unfair transactions is of concern
both to foreign and domestic shareholders, and would help companies in Croatia to raise
capital. The “protecting minority investors? overall index is computed by averaging two
other indices related to protecting minority investors: conflict of interest regulation and
the extent of shareholder governance. Each of these indices is comprised of an average of
three more relevant sub-indices (see table below). On an index range of 0-10, Croatia
scores 5.8, ranking 62 out of 189 worldwide and 17 out of 26 economies in the Europe
and Central Asia region.




44
   The company that is measured by Doing Business ‘Protecting minority investors’ indicators is a publicly
traded corporation on the economy’s most important stock exchange. If the number of publicly traded
companies listed on that exchange is less than 10, or if there is no stock exchange in the economy, it is
assumed that the company is a large private corporation with multiple shareholders.


                                                    35
Table 6.1 Protecting minority investors in Croatia and best performers
                                         Regional        Region’s best           Global best
 Doing Business Indicator      Croatia                                           performer
                                         average          performer
Minority Investor Protection
                                  5.8       5.9           7.3 (Albania)       8.2 (New Zealand)
(0-10)
Conflict     of     Interest                                 7.3 (Albania;    9.7 (New Zealand;
                                  5          6
Regulation (0-10)                                            Georgia)             Singapore)
  Disclosure Index (0-10)         3         6.4              10 (Bulgaria)    10 (11 economies)
                                                               8
  Director Liability Index                               (Albania; FYR
                                  6         4.8                                10 (Cambodia)
  (0-10)                                                  Macedonia;
                                                          Montenegro)
  Shareholder Suits Index
                                  6         6.7         8 (9 economies)       10 (Mozambique)
  (0-10)
Extent   of    Shareholder
                                  6.5       5.9          7.3 (Bulgaria)       7.8 (France; India)
Governance (0-10)
  Shareholder Rights Index                               10.5 (Armenia;
                                  7.5       7.8                               10.5 (8 economies)
  (0-10.5)                                                 Romania)
  Strength of Governance
                                  7         4.4            8 (Serbia)         8 (Serbia; France)
  Structure (0-10.5)
  Corporate Transparency                              8.5 (Bulgaria; Kyrgyz
                                  5         5.4                               8.5 (4 economies)
  Index (0-9)                                               Republic)
Source: Doing Business database

Short-term recommendations
Increase disclosure requirements of related-party transactions to the public and the
market regulators. Fifty-two of the 189 economies covered by Doing Business stand out
for the strictest rules on disclosure of related-party transactions (both before and after the
conclusion of the transaction). These include France, New Zealand, Singapore and
Albania. Corporate scandals, investor activism, the global financial crisis and unification
of accounting standards have prompted governments around the world to strengthen
disclosure requirements.
In Croatia, neither the Companies Act, the Securities Market Act nor related regulations
make any specific reference to the obligation of immediately disclosing information
concerning a potential conflict of interest to the board of directors and directly to the
public. A revised regulation should require detailed disclosure of the nature and the
extent of the conflict of interest and all the relevant information regarding the transaction.
This information should ideally be posted on the website of the company (if one exists)
and also on the website of the Zagreb Stock Exchange (http://zse.hr).
Require an external auditor’s report before the approval of transactions between
interested parties. Currently, regulations do not require the review of the terms of a
related-party transaction by an auditor before the authorization of the transaction by the
board of directors. The auditor’s report should evaluate the main terms of the transaction
and present an opinion on whether the transaction is being concluded at market terms. To
increase disclosure, such a review should be mandatory for large related-party



                                             36
transactions. In addition, a liability regime should be incorporated in the law in case the
independent auditor presents false or misleading information on the transaction.
To avoid being too cumbersome and costly, especially for smaller companies, this
requirement can be circumscribed to certain transactions only: for instance, to all
transactions representing 10% or more of the assets of the company. This measure
increases shareholder protections from self-dealing and allows them to take well-
informed decisions when voting on these deals.
Independent review of related-party transactions is required in France and in the United
Kingdom. Similarly, Kuwait recently strengthened its investor protection legal regime by
allowing minority shareholders to easily request the appointment of an auditor to review
the company’s activities.
Provide shareholders with rights to hold the directors liable for damages resulting
from a related-party transaction. Currently minority shareholders have to prove the
directors’ negligence before a court of law. This more demanding standard—which
requires shareholders to prove willful conduct, an intent to cause harm, or knowledge that
one’s conduct would be prejudicial, in addition to material damages—should be
complemented so that minority shareholders may also hold directors liable for unfair or
prejudicial related-party transactions solely because of the presence of a conflict of
interest, so long as the transaction at issue caused damages. In this case, the law would
require minority shareholders only to prove material damages and not the intention to
cause damages, thus increasing the likelihood of recovery and consequently the level of
protection.
In addition, in the case of a related-party transaction that is unfair, oppressive or
prejudicial to minority shareholders, or entails a conflict of interest (i.e., not only in cases
of fraud or bad faith), the law should offer the possibility of rescission of the transaction.
Moreover, the law should allow for fines to be used against a director who engaged in a
related-party transaction harmful to the company.
Thirty economies implemented rules which hold the directors liable when the transaction
is unfair or prejudicial to the other shareholders even if the transaction is not fraudulent.
In fact, economies such as Albania, Macedonia, FYR, Malta, Montenegro and New
Zealand hold directors liable for the damage caused by the related-party transaction if the
company's affairs are being or have been conducted in a manner which is unfairly
prejudicial or oppressive to the interests of its shareholders.
Limit cross-shareholding between 2 independent companies to 10% of outstanding
shares. Cross-shareholding can lead to double counting, whereby the equity of each
company is counted twice when determining value. It restricts the market for control and
discourages purchase of shares. Companies that have cross holdings are susceptible to
confusion and management holdout; the identity of controlling shareholders and the
extent of their ownership and control also becomes more difficult to ascertain. For
example, one shareholder could control significantly more voting rights than the shares
registered directly under his name might suggest, by also controlling indirect voting
rights through participations in another entity, which is itself also partly controlled by the
company. For those reasons, a recommended good practice is that independent
companies should not hold more than 10% of each other’s outstanding shares.


                                              37
Require disclosure of information about board members' other directorships, as
well as basic information on their primary employment. In order to promote better
corporate transparency, annual reports of listed companies could be required to include
details of all directorships held by their directors at any time in the 3 years immediately
before the end of the financial year, and the period for which each directorship has been
held. In addition, the filings should include their working experience and occupation(s)
during the past 10 years. Further, key information regarding directors, such as
directorships or chairmanships both present and those held over the preceding three years
in other listed companies, and other principal commitments, should be disclosed in the
company’s annual report.
Require disclosure of managerial compensation on an individual basis. Financial
reporting requirements for listed corporations could be broadened to include a
remuneration report with details on the remuneration of each member of the key
management personnel of the company. “Key management personnel? can be defined as
those persons having authority and responsibility for planning, directing and controlling
the activities of the entity, directly or indirectly, including and director of the entity,
whether executive or otherwise. The remuneration report should also include the
disclosure of primary benefits such as cash, salary and fees, cash profit-sharing and other
bonuses, non-monetary benefits, post-employment benefits including pension, and long-
term benefits such as incentive plans.
As best practice, companies are also encouraged to fully disclose the remuneration of the
said top five key management personnel. The annual remuneration report should disclose
the details of the remuneration of employees who are immediate family members of a
director or the CEO and whose remuneration exceeds a predetermined amount during the
year on a named basis with clear indication of the employee's relationship with the
relevant director or CEO.
Facilitate shareholders suits by granting shareholders broader powers during a
trial. Minority shareholders should be granted access to relevant company information
when bringing suits against directors and managers. The scope of documents that can be
requested during trial should be expanded to include any information that is relevant to
the subject matter of the claim. Currently, the Civil Procedure Act requires specific
identification of the evidence during trial (i.e. date, title, file number of the document,
etc.). In order to ease access to evidence that is not easily identifiable, for example
because the date of the record is unknown to the requesting party (e.g. how to determine
which board meeting minutes contains the relevant discussion), the civil procedure law
should allow parties to request categories of documents from the opposing party without
identifying specific ones. Several economies offer such protections to minority
shareholders, including New Zealand, Poland and Ireland.




                                            38
Paying Taxes
Research shows that complicated tax systems risk high evasion and are associated with
lower numbers of foreign direct investment.45 High tax compliance costs are also
associated with larger informal sectors, more corruption and less investment. In contrast,
economies with well-designed tax regimes are able to help the growth of businesses and,
ultimately, the growth of overall investment and employment.
The Doing Business “Paying taxes? indicators records the taxes and mandatory
contributions that a medium-size company must pay in a given year, as well as the time it
takes to meet the tax obligations of the 3 main taxes: corporate income tax, VAT or sales
tax and labor taxes and mandatory contributions. Croatia ranks 36 globally out of 189
economies on the ease of paying taxes and is 6 out of 26 in Europe and Central Asia
region (table 7.1).
Table 7.1 Paying Taxes in Croatia and best performers
 Doing Business                   Regional       Regional best                             Global best
                    Croatia
 indicator                         average        performer                                 performer
 Payments                                                                                 2 (Hong Kong
                                                  5 (Georgia;
 (number     per        19           20.5                                                  SAR, Saudi
                                                   Ukraine)
 year)                                                                                        Arabia)
 Time (hours per                                                                         12 (United Arab
                       208          234.3       52 (San Marino)
 year)                                                                                       Emirates)
 Total tax rate
 (%           of
                  18.8 percent 34.9 percent          N/A                                         N/A
 commercial
 profit)
Source: Doing Business database

Reform efforts
In 2012, Croatia made paying taxes easier for companies by successfully introducing an
electronic system for social security contributions that is used by the majority of
companies Also, it reduced the rates for the forest and Chamber of Commerce
contributions. The latter was subsequently abolished on January 2014.
Short-term recommendations
Continue providing tax outreach--education and training--to small and medium
enterprises to ensure compliance and carry out communications campaigns to
further increase the use of electronic filing. Often, the biggest obstacle in paying taxes
for small businesses is the lack of basic accounting skills. The government can fill this
gap by providing capacity building and training for small businesses. The benefits should
be mutual: if well-trained entrepreneurs are able to prepare and file tax returns and pay
taxes more efficiently, the government can ensure better compliance with the tax

45
   Complex tax systems are associated with lower numbers of foreign direct investment in an economy but
do not affect its level. A high corporate tax rate, on the other hand, is negatively related to both the number
and level of foreign direct investment. A 10% reduction in tax complexity is comparable to a 1% reduction
in effective corporate tax rates (Lawless 2013).


                                                      39
regulation. Tax education is particularly important following significant reforms of the
tax system (that is, the improvements of electronic filing and payment systems and
required software and increased rates of some taxes/contributions).
Trading across Borders
Customs performance, other trade-related technical control regulations, the quality of
infrastructure for trade, and the existence of trade barriers impact the ease of trading
among countries. Economies with the most efficient trade logistics share common
features. First, they allow electronic exchange of information with customs and other
control agencies. The use of electronic systems to transferring and processing customs
information has become widespread. Currently, 88% of economies around the world
allow traders to submit at least some export and imports declarations, manifests or other
trade-related documents to custom authorities electronically. Over the past 10 years, 127
economies – including Croatia - have introduced or improved such systems. Increasingly,
countries are introducing electronic single windows that connect traders not only to
customs, but also to other agencies involved in the import and export processes. The most
sophisticated of these systems are moving to ‘paperless’ trade. Traders can electronically
file through a single entry point information to fulfill all import and export requirements,
and share it with all parties involved in trade, including customs and other government
agencies, banks, freight forwarders, and insurance companies, among others. Second,
economies with efficient trading environments use risk-based assessments which limit
physical inspection to a small percentage of cargo, thus reducing customs clearance
delays.
The Doing Business’ Trading across borders indicator currently looks at the entire
process for import or export, from contractual agreement to getting the letter of credit to
arrival/departure of the goods from the port of entry/exit. On average, in Croatia it takes
16 days to export and 14 to import, with an associated cost of $1,335 for export and
$1,185 to import. At present, 6 documents are required for exports and 7 for imports
(table 8.1). While Croatia’s performance on this indicator is above the regional average in
Europe and Central Asia, it lags behind other nearby economies, such as Hungary,
Bulgaria, and Romania.
The Doing Business46 report measures the time, cost (excluding tariffs), and the number
of documents required to export and import a standardized cargo of goods by sea
transport, while the Logistics Performance Index47 (LPI), the Enterprise Survey48 (ES)
and the Global Competitiveness Index49 (GCI) report business leaders’ perceptions about
trade logistics, as well indicators on experience of firms while importing and exporting
(table 8.2). Recommendations in this section are based on the results for Croatia in the
Doing Business report, taking into account the results from other indices where
applicable.

46
   http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/croatia/#trading-across-borders
47
   The International LPI provides qualitative evaluations of a country in six areas by its trading partners—
logistics professionals working outside the country. See http://d21a6b425f3bbaf58824-
9ec594b5f9dc5376fe36450505ae1164.r12.cf2.rackcdn.com/LPI_Report_2014.pdf
48
   http://www.enterprisesurveys.org/data/exploreeconomies/2013/croatia
49
   http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GlobalCompetitivenessReport_2014-15.pdf


                                                     40
Table 8.1 Trading across Borders in Croatia and best performers

                                                        Regional       Regional best       Global best
Report     Indicator              Unit        Croatia
                                                        average         performer          performer

           Ease of Trading      Rank (1-                               21 (Lithuania)
                                                   86       -                               Singapore
           Across Borders        189)

                                                                       4 (Lithuania,
           Documents to                                                  Georgia,          2 (France;
                                Number             6       7
           export                                                      Bulgaria, San        Ireland)
                                                                          Marino)

                                                                                              6 (5
           Time to export         Days             16      24           7 (Cyprus)
                                                                                           economies)

                                  USD/                                                     410 (Timor
           Cost to export                      1,335     2,154         600 (Latvia)
                                container                                                    Leste)


           Documents to                                                4 (Georgia,         2 (France;
                                Number             7       8
           import                                                      San Marino)          Ireland)

                                                                                                4
           Time to import         Days             14      26           5 (Cyprus)
                                                                                           (Singapore)
                                  USD/                                                     415 (Timor
           Cost to import                      1,185     2,436         730 (Albania)
                                container                                                     Leste)

Table 8.2 Other trade indicators
                                                                                  Rank/Score
  Report                     Indicator                          Unit
                                                                                        Croatia
           Logistics Performance Index (general)          Rank (1-160)                    55
  LPI
           Logistics Performance Index (customs)          Rank (1-160)                    50

           Customs & trade regulations identified as     percent of firms
  ES                                                                                      3.2
           major constraint                                  trading

  GCI      Burden of customs procedures                   Rank (1-144)                    41


Reform efforts
Starting from 2005, Croatia has considerably improved its port infrastructure. In August
2011, the International Container Terminal Services Inc. (ICTSI) embarked on a €30M
investment program to revamp the Adriatic Gate Container Terminal (AGCT) of Rijeka.
As a result, significant infrastructure investments were made, including - but not limited
to - repairs in the container yard, new gantries, reconstruction of the rail yard and the
cleaning of the seabed in the southern pier. On the information system side, a switch was


                                                   41
made from Wi-Fi to 3G technology for mobile devices used in the field and. Another
important step ahead was the development of a NAVIS SPARCS N4 operating system
for the management of the movement of cargo through terminals. The system was
installed in January 2012 and rolled out gradually during 2012. The system has led to
important improvements in crane productivity, energy usage and idle truck times.


Since 2006, Croatia considerably harmonized and streamlined its export and import
custom procedures in preparation for the July 1, 2013 accession to the European Union.
Furthermore, the NAVIS system improved the transfer of orders and communication
between forwarding companies and local government agents. More recently, the country
made trading across borders easier by implementing a new electronic customs system -
CARINA.HR.
Short-term recommendations
Implement the Custom Agency’s e-surveillance project. At the moment, Croatian
customs officials note down inspection results on paper forms and, once inspections are
over, type their findings into the system. The Croatia custom agency is currently
considering the implementation of an “e-surveillance? project that will allow custom
officials to enter their findings directly into the system. This improvement will have a
number of efficiency benefits, including saving customs officials’ time by reducing the
volume of their paperwork; allowing the customs agency to monitor more efficiency the
performance of its employees through electronic tracking of their work; updating the
database in real time, enabling other customs officials to be alerted immediately in cases
of suspect goods, thus improving risk management and enabling customs to focus their
efforts where needed.
Medium-term recommendations
Establish an electronic single-window system for all trade related transactions.
Cross border trade involves controls by many agencies. A coordinated border
management and clearance process is therefore an essential element of trade facilitation
and may result in a sensible reduction in time and cost to trade across borders. Currently
there is no fully functioning system that allows importers, exporters and custom brokers
to make all the necessary applications for licenses or permissions electronically.
Since Croatia became a member of the European Union, Croatian customs operate in
seven EU border posts with inspection services– two with Bosnia and Herzegovina, one
with Serbia, one with Montenegro, the ports of Rjieka and Ploce, and the airport of
Zagreb.50 Arrivals to the border posts notify customs beforehand (1 hour prior if the
goods arrive by road, 2 hours if they arrive by train, and 24 hours if they arrive by
airplane). Customs then notifies other agencies involved in border control, such as the
Ministry of Agriculture (in charge of veterinary and phyto-sanitary inspections) and the
Ministry of Health (in charge of sanitary inspections). Unfortunately, since the IT
systems of these agencies do not communicate with each other, inter-agency
communication must take place in writing. As a result, delays may occur.

50
  Croatian customs are present at all border crossings for international traffic, not only the 7 mentioned
above. The 7 border posts mentioned above are BIP, or Border Inspection Posts.


                                                     42
An electronic single-window system would allow trade professionals to carry out all their
transactions through a single portal. The results of such applications could be fed
automatically into the clearance system to inform all control authorities, and also advise
the applicant. This would significantly speed up import and export processes, improve
accuracy, and reduce opportunities for corruption.
Although electronic single window systems vary in their functionality and complexity,
the best single windows systems link banks, licensing agencies and trade clearance
agencies into a unique platform, and allow exchange of information in real time, speeding
up approvals. Best practices require a paperless customs clearance system, which should
accompany the electronic data interchange system. The electronic single-window system
would allow traders to upload all documentation, pay the necessary fees and receive
approvals online. In order to make such changes really possible, the changes to the legal
framework and the improvements to the IT systems of all agencies involved must be
aligned with EU standards as to make the systems interoperable with other European
custom systems.
Singapore, through its TradeNet system has been a global leader in the implementation of
such a platform/single window. TradeNet handles 20-30,000 trade declarations per day
and links 35 government controlling units. Several economies have reported positive
results from the implementation of single-window systems. The Korea Customs Service
estimates that the introduction of its single-window system brought some $18 million in
benefits in 2010, part of the overall economic benefits that year of up to $3.47 billion
from the agency’s trade facilitation efforts.51

Enforcing Contracts
Research in various countries around the world suggests that, in the absence of efficient
courts, firms make fewer investments and business transactions while informal
transactions become more attractive. A study of 27 economies found that the informal
sector’s share in overall economic activity decreased with better contract enforcement
quality, evaluated by a country-wide measure of rule of law, as well as by the firm’s
perception of the fairness of courts.52 Improvements in court efficiency are associated
with a lower share of the informal sector in the overall economic activity, increased
investor confidence and with increased bank financing of firms for new investment.53 For
example, reforms in other areas, such as creditors’ rights, can increase bank lending only
if contracts can be enforced before the courts.54



51
   Korea Customs Service. 2011. The Embodiment of Business-Friendly Environment by KCS Challenges.
Seoul.
52
   Dabla-Norris and Inchauste Comboni 2008.
53
   Among other papers, see G.B. Ramello and S. Voigt, 2012. “The economics of efficiency and the judicial
system,? International Review of Law and Economics; Mehnaz Safavian and Siddharth Sharma, 2007.
“When Do Creditor Rights Work?? World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4296; John Ahlquist
and Aseem Prakash, 2010. “FDI and the costs of contract enforcement in developing countries,? Policy
Sciences, Springer, vol. 43(2), pages 181-200, June; Inessa Love, 2011. “Settling Out of Court: How
Effective is Alternative Dispute Resolution,? Viewpoint Note No. 329, The World Bank Group, October.
54
   Safavian and Sharma 2007.


                                                   43
Doing Business measures the efficiency (number of procedures, time and cost) of the
judicial system in resolving a standardized commercial dispute before the Zagreb
Commercial Court. Globally, Croatia ranks 54th in the ease of enforcing contracts in
among 189 economies, and 16th out of 26 in the Europe and Central Asia region. On
average, entrepreneurs in Croatia pay 13.8% of the claim value in attorneys, court and
enforcement fees and need 572 days to resolve a commercial dispute through the courts.
In Singapore, entrepreneurs need only 150 days to resolve the same dispute (Table 9.1).
Table 9.1 Enforcing Contracts in Croatia and best performers
 Doing         Business                    Regional       Regional best         Global best
                             Croatia
 indicator                                 average         performer            performer
                                                                                21 (Ireland,
 Procedures (number )             38         37.2          7 (Belarus)
                                                                                Singapore)
 Time (calendar days)          572           448.1       195 (Uzbekistan)     150 (Singapore)
                                                           12.7 percent
 Cost (percent of claim)   13.8 percent   25.2 percent                      9.0 percent (Iceland)
                                                            (Slovenia)
Source: Doing Business database
Reform efforts
A new Enforcement Act came into force in October 2012. Its aim was to reduce the time
needed for enforcement procedures by transferring certain procedures from the court to
other bodies, such as the Financial Agency (FINA). Under the new Enforcement Act,
FINA is competent to directly execute court judgments and court settlements on debtors’
bank accounts. As a result, creditors no longer need to obtain an enforcement decision
form the court in addition to the final judgment.
Moreover, Croatia approved significant amendments to the Civil Procedure Act (OG
25/2013) that entered into force on April 1, 2013. The amendments are designed to
streamline the way the litigation process is administered, including the way litigants
submit evidence. The new Law introduces time limitations and electronic submissions,
and abolishes multiple referrals from lower to higher instance courts.
Short-term recommendations
Assess court procedures to identify points of delay and formulate solutions. In
Zagreb, it takes almost 20 months on average to resolve a commercial dispute. During
this time, plaintiffs have to wait more than a month between the filing of a complaint and
serving of notice on the defendant. Going through the trial and obtaining a judgment
takes one year, a large part of which is spent waiting for the first hearing and the
subsequent adjournments. Once a judgment has been issued, it takes almost six more
months for the judgment to be enforced through the public auction of the loosing party’s
assets.
It is recommended to map out both the procedures required by the law and the steps
required in practice by the court to take a case from filing through enforcement. This
exercise would help identify unnecessary administrative tasks required by court staff,
judges and court users as well as opportunities for improvement with (and without)
legislative changes. It could also help identify needs for resource allocation to enhance
efficiency and cost effectiveness. Such an assessment can be conducted upon the




                                                 44
government’s request and may foster the ongoing efforts to simplify the court
proceedings undertaken by the Ministry of Justice.
Strengthen efforts to promote Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR). Alternative
dispute resolution has proven a valuable pillar in enhancing access to justice, bringing
rapid consent-based dispute resolution to businesses in many economies. Promoting ADR
measures could help reduce the current backlog in the Croatian courts. ADR, along with
other measures aimed at speeding up judicial proceedings and their enforcement, can not
only increase efficiency but also reduce the cost of legal fees entrepreneurs have to pay
for dispute resolution. Inefficient processes often result in repeated and unnecessary
appearances in court, and add up to the lawyers’ bill. Limiting the time attorneys spend in
court (or preparing for court) will lower the cost to clients but also free up their time to
serve more clients. The Croatian Ministry of Justice is currently considering the
promotion of ADR through court fees, following the example of other European
countries, such as the United Kingdom. Such efforts should be strengthened.
Medium-term recommendations
Continue improving the e-courts system by introducing e-filing and electronic
service of process. Since 2007, Croatia has achieved important progress towards the
establishment of an e-court system. Over the past years, all county, commercial, and
municipal courts have been connected to an Integrated Case Management System
(ICMS/eSpis).55 The data generated from the system may be tracked according to
different predefined parameters (e.g. received, solved and unsolved cases, by type of a
dispute, by judge, by efficiency of each judge, etc.). All courts connected to the ICMS
system have an automatic case allocation process. Since 2013, a new web service - e-
Predmet56 - allows parties and attorneys to access basic information about the evolution
of a case, thus relieving courts from inquiries relating to such matters. Starting from
January 2015, FINA supports online auctions of real estate and movable assets.
In spite of these efforts, the process of computerization is not yet completed. E-filing and
electronic service of process are not yet available. Similarly, the submission of evidence
by the parties (as well as witnesses’ opinions) must be carried out in paper format.
Because of this, court staff, judges and users have to cope with a dual system where only
a part of the information they are required to assess - e.g. minutes of the hearings and past
court decisions - can be found online. As a result, the courts’ premises are often cluttered
with paperwork and files, court clerks are swamped with work, and delays ensue.
Adequate measures should be taken to gradually introduce a paperless e-court system. In
Europe, countries with well-functioning e-court systems include Austria, Denmark,
Finland, Norway, the Netherlands, UK, and Portugal. In Austria, all filings from lawyers
in civil litigation and enforcement proceedings now go through an electronic data channel
operated by the Ministry of Justice. Judgments are delivered by e-mail rather than by the
old hard-copy notification process. The United Kingdom has successfully introduced
electronic case management in the courts. This is how it works: court officers in the
commercial courts set a timetable at the first case management conference for all the
activities between filing and trial. Then, within a few days of the case management
55
     The eSpis system was introduced starting from 2008, all courts were covered by August 2013.
56
     http://e-predmet.pravosudje.hr


                                                     45
conference, the parties fix a date for the trial within a range of dates specified at the case
management conference. Court officials actively monitor and manage each case in the
court docket from the moment the action is filed until the moment it is finally decided.
This allows them to track workload, predict trends and plan strategically. Another
country that successfully implemented an efficient case management system is Korea.
The introduction of a comprehensive e-court system enables Korean judges to adjudicate
up to 3,000 cases a year, manage up to 400 a month and hear up to 100 pleas a month
(box 2).




                                             46
 Box 2. Improving court efficiency: the Republic of Korea’s e-court experience

 Approaches to e-courts vary by economy depending on the capacities and priorities of the judiciary and the
 ability of court users to use such solutions. The tools available to court users in Korea have gradually expanded
 over time. Currently, the country ranks first in the world on the E-Government Readiness Index, a composite
 measure of the capacity and willingness of economies to use e-government for development.
 The first case management system, launched in the mid-1980s, enabled internal court users to search for civil
 cases in the database. Now the system encompasses many features, most of which are dedicated to help judges
 (case management system and judge support system), facilitate the filing of cases for litigants (e-filing) and
 inform the public (publication of cases).
 To further streamline procedures, a system facilitates payment of all submission fees electronically using credit
 card or wire transfers at the time of filing. In addition, users are notified by e-mail or text message of any
 submission of additional documents by the opposing party. And after the case allocation system assigns cases,
 the designated judge and the attorneys can view all their cases online, including PDFs of all documents filed in a
 given lawsuit.
 For judges, the support system includes four main features:
     •    The case management system, which allows judges to organize their work based on the status of
          procedures and to separately manage cases for which special measures are needed.
     •    “My case history,? which allows judges to track cases they have disposed and the final determination o f
          the cases.
     •    A scheduling system to organize cases by day, week or month that is integrated with the court registry.
     •    A writing support system with features such as automatic document formatting, multiple judgment
          editing in small cases and collaborative decision writing in panel cases. This system automatically
          creates a draft of the final judgment after the relevant case and desired template have been selected.
          Once completed, judges enter a digital signature and register the decision in a searchable database of
          judgments.
 Online help centers featuring frequently asked questions and tools for pro se litigants were also created to allow
 the public to get fast answers on questions about the Supreme Court and its processes. One of the most important
 components of these help centers is the self-represented litigants webpage, which provides information and
 templates needed to file a case and respond to claims of counterparties without the help of a certified lawyer. In
 the first two months after the launch of the e-filing system for civil cases approximately 5% were filed
 electronically. This number almost decupled in 18 months. In fact, two years later, in June 2013, that share had
 soared to more than 45%.
 According to Doing Business, in Seoul resolving a standard contract enforcement dispute takes 230 days, 32
 procedures and costs 10.3% of the claim—making Korea the runner-up in Doing Business’s ease of enforcing
 contracts ranking. In many countries, concerns about budget and technology limitations are among the most
 common reasons for not implementing e-court features. That should not prevent less developed economies from
 looking into e-court options. E-court options may provide for cost savings in the long run and up-front costs for
 development of such options can be implemented with donor assistance, supported by peer learning from courts
 in leading economies such as Korea.
 If implemented carefully, e-courts can improve court document security and decision making transparency. In the
 long run, they also help countries save money. The implementation of Korea’s e-court system, for example,
 resulted in savings of $221 per e-filing. These savings result from a reduction in the use of paper, the time spent
 in court, cheaper service of process, lower transportation costs, easier archiving of documents, and easier
 payment of fees.
 Source: Doing Business 2014.

Resolving Insolvency
The efficient regulation of business insolvency relates to the broader topic of access to
credit. Studies suggest that where insolvency regimes are most effective, creditors—


                                                    47
confident that they will be able to collect on loans—are more likely to lend, including to
borrowers with whom they have not had a long-standing relationship with. A well-
balanced insolvency system also functions as a filter, separating companies that are
financially distressed but economically viable from inefficient companies that should be
liquidated. By giving viable companies a chance at a fresh start to reorganize and
continue as going concerns, insolvency law may also help sustain a higher overall level
of entrepreneurship in a country, protect jobs and maintain suppliers’ networks, among
other benefits for the economy. Moreover, by facilitating the efficient business exit and
liquidation of unviable companies, a beneficial insolvency framework supports the
efficient reallocation of resources across the economy.57
The Doing Business report’s ‘Resolving insolvency’ indicators is composed by two
measures: the debt recovery in insolvency and the strength of insolvency framework
index. The first measures the time, cost, and outcome of insolvency proceedings for
domestic companies. The indicator does not deal with situations where a business owner
voluntarily winds up a company, but, rather, where businesses become “insolvent?
(typically under one of two definitions): (1) the business is unable to pay its debts as
these become due; or (2) the business has more liabilities than assets. The second index,
introduced by Doing Business this year, evaluates the adequacy and integrity of the legal
framework applicable to insolvency proceedings. Good practices are measured in
accordance to the World Bank’s Principle of Effective Insolvency and Creditor/Debtor
Regimes and the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law’s
(UNCITRAL) Legislative Guide on Insolvency Law.58 The data for the resolving
insolvency indicators are derived from questionnaire responses by local insolvency
practitioners and verified through the study of laws and regulations as well as public
information on bankruptcy systems.
Croatia currently ranks 56 out of 189 economies in the Resolving Insolvency indicator, as
measured by Doing Business. A secured creditor in Croatia - most typically a bank that
accepts real estate as collateral - will follow an individual enforcement procedure
(foreclosure) to collect on his debt upon default of the debtor. A foreclosure would be
applicable to the case study assumed by the indicator since neither the 1996 Bankruptcy
Law nor the 2012 Settlement Act impose a moratorium on secured creditors (see below),
who are entitled to proceed separately against the assets of the debtor. According to
Doing Business, an average foreclosure procedure in Croatia takes a bit more than three
years and costs 14.5 percent of the debtor’s estate, with the company being sold
piecemeal as a result of the procedure. Creditors recoup 30.5 cents on the dollar through
the foreclosure (table 10.1). The process is longer and more expensive than the Europe
and Central Asia region’s average and the OECD high-income economies’ averages
while the amount on the dollar recovered by the creditors is lower than the regional
average.

57
   See Djankov, Simeon. 2009. “Bankruptcy Regimes during Financial Distress.? Mimeo, World Bank
Group; Funchal, Bruno. 2008. “The Effects of the 2005 Bankruptcy Reform in Brazil.? Economics Letters,
101: 84–86; Klapper, Leora 2011. “Saving Viable Businesses.? Viewpoint 328, September 2011, The
World Bank Group; Visaria, Sujata. 2009. “Legal Reform and Loan Repayment: The Microeconomic
Impact of Debt Recovery Tribunals in India.? American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 1(3): 59-
81.
58
   World Bank 2011b; UNCITRAL 2004.


                                                  48
In the strength of insolvency framework index, Croatia scores 12 out of 16 points.59 The
country fare particularly well in the commencement of proceedings sub-index (3 out of 3
points) and in the reorganization proceedings sub-index (3 points out of 3) while the
score in the management of debtor’s assets sub-index (4 points out of 6) and in the
creditor participation sub-index (2 out of 4 points) could be improved. In particular, the
Croatian insolvency framework currently does not offer the possibility for the debtor to
obtain credit after the commencing of the insolvency proceedings. As a result, post-
commencement financing does not have priority over ordinary unsecured creditors during
distribution of assets. As for creditor participation, the insolvency framework does not
require approval by the creditors for sale of substantial assets of the debtor and individual
creditors do not have the right to request information from insolvency representatives.
The Croatian insolvency framework is considerably better than the regional average (9.2
points out of 16) and substantially aligned with insolvency framework of OECD high-
income economies (12.2 points out of 15) but worse than the insolvency framework of
Bulgaria that, with 15 point out of 16, ranks among the best practices at the global level.
Table 10.1 Resolving insolvency ranking and best performers
                                                    Regional        Regional best        Global best
 Doing Business Indicator             Croatia
                                                    Average         performer            performer
 Time (years)                         3.1           2.3             1.4 (Montenegro)     0.4 (Ireland)

 Cost (percent of estate)             14.5          13.3            5 (San Marino)       1 (Norway)

 Recovery rate (cents on the
                                      30.5          37.7            70.5 (Cyprus)        92.9 (Japan)
 dollar)
 Strength of insolvency
                                12                  9.2             15.0 (Bulgaria)      15.0 (5 economies)
 framework index (0-16)
Source: Doing Business database

Reform efforts
Insolvency regulations in Croatia are contained in two bodies of law: (i) the Bankruptcy
Law, which regulates fully court supervised proceedings, and (ii) the Court Financial
Operations and Pre-Bankruptcy Settlement Act, which regulates the Pre-Bankruptcy
Settlement Procedure (PBS).
The Bankruptcy Law, amended several times since its introduction in 199660, sets out a
detailed and modern system of corporate reorganization, allowing debtors to restructure
as a going concern while at the same time protecting the interests of creditors and
ensuring their full participation in proceedings.61 The Settlement Act, enacted in 2012,
introduced an additional proceeding: the Pre-Bankruptcy Settlement Procedure (or PBS).
Designed to allow debtors to address situations of financial distress at an early stage

59
  It is important to mention that in the case of Croatia the procedure analyzed under this index is not the
Pre-Bankruptcy Settlement Procedure (PBS) but the judicial bankruptcy procedure regulated in the
Bankruptcy Law (1997).
60
     The last amendment was approved in 2006.
61
  As mentioned in the previous section, provisions relating to this procedure are the ones considered under
the methodology of the Resolving Insolvency Indicator for the purposes of the scoring.


                                                     49
without having to resort to a formal court intervention, the PBS runs in parallel to court-
supervised insolvency and is administered by the Croatian Financial Agency (‘FINA’).
Among other features, the PBS allows debtors to propose and agree on a restructuring
plan with creditors through an expedited procedure with tight deadlines.
Since its introduction in 201262, some implementation issues regarding the PBS have
arisen, mainly due to the excessively tight deadlines contemplated in the Settlement Act
and issues of institutional coordination between FINA and the courts with jurisdiction
over insolvency cases. With the aim of addressing these issues and enhancing the PBS’s
effectiveness, the Government of Croatia decided in 2015 to merge all existing
insolvency procedures into a single body of law. Once approved, the draft law will repeal
the 2012 Settlement Act and will consolidate all insolvency regulations applicable in
Croatia.
The Government of Croatia is encouraged to take advantage of the upcoming insolvency
reform and consider the following recommendations in order to further improve the
insolvency regime in the country. In addition to the reforms already underway,
implementing the recommendations described earlier in the Enforcing contracts section,
targeted at improving efficiency of the court system will also benefit insolvency cases,
which are seen by the same court—the Zagreb Commercial Court.
Short-term recommendations
The draft law mentioned above, which should be passed before the end of 2015, is
focused on reforming the PBS procedure, leaving the judicial bankruptcy procedures
largely untouched. Improving the draft may represent a unique opportunity to amend the
provisions regulating fully court supervised proceedings (judicial reorganization and
liquidation), which have not changed since 2006. In this regard, the following
recommendations could be considered:
Introduce moratorium provisions and develop a culture of reorganization. The
current Croatian bankruptcy framework does not encourage reorganization. Under
Croatian law, there is no moratorium in case of bankruptcy. As a result, the debtor may
file for insolvency and propose reorganization but individual creditors can enforce their
claims outside the bankruptcy process. This strongly reduces the chances of having
successful reorganizations. Additional steps could be taken to increase the flexibility of
reorganization proceedings, for example by increasing the number of tools available to
creditors and debtors to make reorganization work. Slovenia is an interesting example. In
recent years, authorities in Ljubljana adopted several amendments to the Financial
Operations, Insolvency Proceedings and Compulsory Dissolution Act and the number of
companies opting for the reorganization proceedings is increasing.63

62
   The demand for PBS is evidenced by the fact that between October 2012 and January 2013, the Financial Agency,
the entity that administers the Settlement Act, received 3,000 requests for initiation of pre-bankruptcy settlement
procedures.
63
    A first set of amendments introduced special rules on increasing share capital of the debtor during insolvency
proceedings, including through debt-equity swaps. They introduced limitations on the powers of debtor’s corporate
governance bodies during insolvency proceedings and gave greater authority of the creditors to remove an insolvency
representative appointed by the court. Finally, they simplified reorganization procedures for micro enterprises and
individual entrepreneurs.




                                                       50
Encourage the extension of post commencement financing to the debtor during the
course of insolvency proceedings. For reorganization to be possible, the debtor will
generally need some type of financing to maintain liquidity and continue its operations
during the restructuring process. The law can facilitate the extension of post-
commencement credit by providing appropriate incentives to lenders such as
administrative priority of their claims or senior security interests on assets of the estate.
Introduce a liability structure that holds managers accountable for negligently
engaging in transactions that result in a loss to the company. Under the Bankruptcy
Law, the owners and managers of a company are not subject to liability for malfeasance
or negligible conduct of business that damages the estate and undermines creditors’
rights. Director and officer liability is a regular tool of modern insolvency regimes
preventing the unjust enrichment of managers at the expense of the estate and ensuring
that enough value remains in the insolvency estate for the collective benefit of creditors.
Do not allow closely-related parties to vote on a reorganization plan. The Bankruptcy
Law currently does not restrict the voting rights of closely related parties during the
voting process of a plan of reorganization. More specifically, the provisions specifying
the voting rights of creditors do not prevent insiders or other affiliated parties from voting
on the plan. By allowing such parties to vote on the reorganization plan, the law paves the
way for serious abuses of the process, such as the manipulation of the classification of
creditors in order to obtain the necessary votes for the plan approval.
Medium-term recommendations
Improve the institutional capacity of relevant institutions for handling insolvency
cases. Many of the barriers that cause bankruptcy systems to fail or that discourage their
usage are institutional. The courts and tribunals are the ones in charge of insolvency
proceedings, and are responsible for protecting the rights of creditors and debtors. The
efficient processing of cases is extremely important to insolvency proceedings, where
prolonged delays can cause business assets to lose their value and negatively affect
businesses’ ability to continue functioning as viable enterprises. To ensure proper
implementation of any initiative of this nature, the courts will need the knowledge and
ability to implement that law. Within the Zagreb Commercial Court, several judges could
be trained and designated to handle insolvency cases, allowing them to develop
specialized expertise in this area. This could lead to qualitative improvements in the court
rulings, in the administration of complex insolvency cases and in the management of
important issues such as relief from the stay of enforcement and interim financing.
Establish a Chamber of Bankruptcy Managers. In order to be included in the Ministry
of Justice Registry and practice their trade, Croatian bankruptcy managers must possess
certain minimum qualification requirements set by the Insolvency Act of 2007. Such

Later on, additional amendments made small companies eligible to apply for the simplified reorganization procedure
and introduced a new preventive restructuring procedure for large and medium-size enterprises that are likely to
become insolvent in the following 12-month period. Creditors, and especially banks, were given significant powers
during the preventive procedure. Creditors holding 20% of financial claims against the debtor were eligible to initiate
reorganization and propose a reorganization plan that would have priority over any plan proposed by the debtor.
Finally, the requirement that 50% of claims under reorganization plan must be repaid within a four-year period was
eliminated.




                                                         51
requirements are not enough in today’s economy. As a results, courts often have to
remove incompetent managers and appoint new ones, a process that increases the
duration of bankruptcy procedures. A Chamber of Bankruptcy Managers could be created
with the goal of enforcing standards of training and ethics in the profession.
Make the relevant stakeholders more aware of the reorganization proceedings and
thus more willing to consider them as a viable option. Judges, insolvency
representatives, creditors and debtors should know how reorganization proceedings work
and what value they bring to all participants. Creditors and debtors will undertake
reorganization only if they trust the process. Judicial workshops may be helpful in this
area. Because banks often act as creditors, raising awareness among banking institutions
is also important. Economies that reform successfully in this area often set up special
government agencies to supervise insolvency representatives and review reorganization
plans, ensuring that insolvency representatives are well trained, experiences and know all
the rules and regulations. This also helps ensure that the reorganization plans accepted by
court and creditors are truly workable.




                                            52
Acknowledgments
This memorandum was prepared by Alessio Zanelli (Private Sector Development
Specialist, World Bank Group) and Iva Hamel (Senior Private Sector Development
Specialist, World Bank Group), under the general supervision of Sylvia Solf (Global
Product Specialist, Trade and Competitiveness, World Bank Group) and Christine
Zhenwei Qiang (Manager, Trade and Competitiveness, World Bank Group).
Input was received from Erica Bosio, Maika Chiquier, Fernando Dancausa, Baria Nabil
Daye, Marie Delion, Heike Gramckow, Joyce Antone Ibrahim, Violane Konar-Leacy,
Jean Michel Lobet, Nan Jiang, Herve Kaddoura, Olena Koltko, Igor Matijevic, Sanja
Madzarevic-Sujster, Frederic Meunier, Joanna Nasr, Nadia Novik, Mika-Petteri
Torhonen, Hana Sahatqija, Valentina Saltane, Gunjan Sharma, Victoria Stanley, and
Richard Stern.

For questions or comments, please contact Iva Hamel:
ihamel@ifc.org
tel: + 39 333 4602506
Via Labicana 110
Rome, Italy 00184




                                         53
