                                                                 98388




                 Final Report
 State PIM Think Tank for strengthening of
     PIM in Uttar Pradesh Water Sector
           Restructuring Project
Development Support Centre, Ahmedabad and the Awadh Research Foundation,
                               Lucknow.




                     August 2013 to July 2014
[I]. Introduction
Background & Context
Uttar Pradesh is the most populous State in India with a population of over 19,95,81,477
(2011 census). The State is blessed with the fertile Indo-Gangetic Plain, which is well
known for its high natural soil fertility and good groundwater resources. Despite this,
the state, however, is often categorized as a lagging state because of its low per-capita
income (Rs 29,417 at current price in 2011-2012) which is much lower if compared to
the national average of Rs 46,117 per annum.
Agriculture is the major economic activity of the State – with the sector accounting for
about 25.01 percent of the State GDP in FY 2009-2010 and almost two-third of the
workforce being dependent upon it. The rural population of the State is especially
dependent on the sector as a major source of livelihood.
Irrigation System in Uttar Pradesh
About 70 percent of agriculture in Uttar Pradesh is dependent on irrigation with about
30 million hectares of crop-land currently irrigated – with around two-fifth dependant
on surface water sources – at cropping intensities greater than 100 percent. Out of this,
the canal system in the State is estimated to be approximately 71,781.97 km. long,
including – 4,261.59 km. of main canal, 7,106.52 km. of branch canal, 23,226.19 km. of
distributaries (rajwahaa), 35,615.43 km. of minors (alpikas) and 1,572.24 km field
water channels.

It is estimated that the current surface irrigated area is only around one-fifth of its actual
potential – including major, medium and minor schemes. Furthermore, water use
efficiency in most parts of the irrigation systems is also low – in the range of 30-40
percent. The major reasons attributed for this substantial gap include for such situation
is due to the lack of a need based operation and maintenance of surface irrigation
system, increasing expenditure on operations and management, improper management
of water distribution and exclusive control of the State government on the management
of the canal irrigation and non-construction of on-farm development works.
Furthermore, water use efficiency in most parts of the irrigation systems is low in t
he range of 30?40 percent.

In the year 1999, the Government of Uttar Pradesh adopted a progressive State Water
Policy (SWP) which was in line with the National Water Policy. The broad objectives of
the SWP were to — (i) ensure preservation of the scarce water resources and optimize
its utilization and bring about qualitative improvement in water resource management
which should include users' participation and decentralization of authority; (ii) maintain
water quality (both surface and underground), to established norms and standards; (iii)
promote formulation of projects on the concept of basin or sub-basin, treating both
surface and groundwater as a unitary resource and ensuring multi-purpose use of the
water resource; (iv) ensure ecological and environmental balance while developing
water resources; (v) promote equity and social justice among individuals and groups of
users in water resource allocation and management; (vi) ensure self-sustainability in
water resource development; (vii) provide a substantive legal framework for
management; (viii) develop an adequate information and knowledge base; (viii)
promote research and training facilities in the water sector; and (ix) provide
mechanisms for the resolution of conflicts between various users.


With the aim of implementing the SWP recommendations, the Government of Uttar
Pradesh introduced a long-term programmatic framework for initiating water sector
reforms. In doing so, Government introduced the World Bank sponsored U.P. Water
Sector Reforms Project (UPWSRP) in the State. The primary objective of the project was


                                            -2-
to ensure a paradigm shift by adopting a river-basin approach for development and
management of water resources. This program envisaged a State-wide policy and
institutional reforms, in addition to reforms in the development and management of
water resources in each of the five major river-basins of the State. Further, it also
recognized that cross-sectoral issues such as water scarcity, competing demands for
water, pollution and environmental sustainability must be resolved at a higher policy
level to provide an enabling environment for optimizing the productivity of water


Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project (UPWSRP) Phase-1
Recognizing the central role of the Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) concept,
the Irrigation Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh introduced the Uttar Pradesh
Water Sector Restructuring Project (UPWSRP) in the year 2004 with the support of the
World Bank. The UPWSRP Phase-1 – which closed formally in October-2011 – was the
first step towards the formalization of the PIM concept in the State. In doing so,
irrigation and drainage systems covering about 3 percent of the irrigated area (3,00,000
ha) were rehabilitated and modernized in the pilot Jaunpur Branch basin using modern
surveys & designs during the UPWSRP Phase-1.
Realizing the fact that farmers and water users associations (WUAs) are central to efforts
aimed at managing systems at the local level and to improve agricultural productivity
and water-use efficiency at the field level, the Government of Uttar Pradesh introduced
the seminal Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) Act in the year 2009 during the
UPWSRP Phase-1.

The vision of the PIM approach towards irrigation water delivery in the State was to –
(a). establish and build the capacity of these local institutions (WUAs) to take charge of
and monitor the current status of the irrigation system under their control; (b).
Participate actively in undertaking system design with the UPID (either by carrying out
the works themselves or through tripartite agreements with the UPID and the contractor
whereby they have a role of formal sign-off on design and quality of works); (c). Carry
out on-farm development (OFD) works (wherever required); (d). Manage the local water
distribution themselves; (e). Assess water charges; (f). Manage finances; (g). Operate
and maintain local infrastructure; (h). Resolve conflicts; (i). Plan and operate the
schedule of water; (j). Encourage conjunctive use of surface and ground water for
intensified and diversified agriculture production system; and (k). Promote greater
efficiency of water use.
Since the introduction of the 2009 PIM Act, a total of 8858 WUAs at the outlet levels, 805
WUAs at the minor levels and 28 WUAs at the distributory level have been formed
during the UPWSRP Phase-1 period.


Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project (UPWSRP) Phase-2
In the Approach Paper for the Twelfth Five Year Plan (2012-2017), the Government of
India identifies investments in the agriculture sector as effective means to reducing
poverty. In doing so, the policy paper for the 12th Plan recognizes that higher levels of
investments in agriculture, (both by the public and private sector), can yield much better
results if the reforms are undertaken to streamline not only the incentive structures for
the farmers, but also the institutional framework in which agriculture and related
activities take place. Seeds and irrigation are highlighted as priority assets, which can be
catalysts for raising productivity on the supply side. The overall management of water
resources (where agriculture is the largest consumer in India) is also highlighted as a
challenge requiring attention in the Twelfth Plan. Solutions through greater efficiency in
water use are recognized as critical with more focus given to better management of


                                           -3-
water in areas of large and medium irrigation projects. This also requires putting in
place more holistic aquifer management strategies. Finally, other key water management
activities identified in the Twelfth Plan include – (a). Steps to improve governance in
water management through Water User Associations (WUAs); (b). Focus on on-farm
works & the rehabilitation and physical modernization of existing major irrigation
systems; (c). Comprehensive aquifer mapping and extensive ground water recharge; and
(d) Integration of these activities with existing surface reservoir based canal irrigation.
The components and activities identified for the Uttar Pradesh Water Sector
Restructuring Project (UPWSRP) Phase-2 support specifically the planning objectives of
the Government of India elaborated previously.
The implementation of the PIM concept during the first phase, presented a myriad of
experiences and learning opportunities for the programme managers of UPWSRP and
the irrigation department. Based on these unique experiences and coupled with the aim
of taking the positives gained during the first phase of the project further, it is now
proposed to introduce the World Bank supported UPWSRP Phase-2 in the State.
The major objectives of the Uttar Pradesh Water Sector Restructuring Project (UPWSRP)
Phase 2 are –
      To strengthen the institutional and policy framework for integrated water
       resources management for the entire State; and
      Enable farmers in the targeted irrigated areas to increase their agricultural
       productivity and water productivity.
One of the most crucial components envisaged under the proposed UPWSRP Phase-2 is
to strengthen the Water Users Associations (WUAs) and implement the concept of
Participatory Irrigation Management (PIM) in the project areas in true spirit. In doing so,
it is estimated that the project (spanning a total of 16 districts) would provide benefit to
almost one million cultivator households and provide support, strength and direction to
more than 2000 water user associations (WUAs) at the minor level, along with 20,000
WUAs at the outlet level and another 200 WUAs at the distributory level.


[II]. Justification for Concept
Some of the major observations/learnings related to the implementation of the PIM
concept during Phase-1 of the project were are as follows –
        A total of 8858 WUAs at the outlet levels, 805 WUAs at the minor levels and
         28 WUAs at the distributary level were formed during the UPWSRP Phase-1
         period.
        Various agencies involved in promoting PIM lacked the finer skills for
         operationalizing the same.
        Limited resource material available for awareness creation and capacity
         building of various stakeholders.
        Lack of sustained capacity building inputs to WUAs.
        Felt need for sensitization of functionaries to adopt participatory approaches
         in irrigation management.
        Need for developing learning & performance monitoring systems.


   In light of the experiences of the first phase, it was proposed to institutionalize a
   system for implementation of the PIM Act under UPWSRP Phase-2 whereby a
   consortium of two institutions with adequate expertise in the field of Participatory

                                           -4-
   Irrigation Management (PIM) was identified for setting-up of a State PIM Think-Tank
   (SPT). In doing so, the two institutions identified for setting-up of the SPT are as
   follows ----
              Development Support Centre (DSC), Ahmedabad; and
              Awadh Research Foundation (ARF), Lucknow


   The SPT has been established at the level of the Project Activity Core Team (PACT) –
   for sensitizing, acclimatizing, supporting and capacity building of the UPID
   programme managers to make the Water User Associations (WUAs) self-reliant and
   sustainable entities.


[III]. Assignment Objectives
The primary objective envisaged for the proposed State PIM Think Tank (SPT) entails :
“Providing services for extension activities, capacity building, brain-storming, action
research, monitoring & evaluation and advice in the development of participatory
irrigation management in the State?.


[IV]. Human Resources Deployed and Systems Developed
The DSC and ARF have deployed following key personals for coordinating and
implementing the project. Currently a four member team of DSC and 10 member team of
ARF for capacity building has been deployed for capacity building and 12 member has
been deployed by ARF for developing model WUAs in Phase -1. The capacity building
team was deployed from August while the implementing team was deployed from
October 2013. Over and above this team, a four member core team consisting of senior
officers from DSC and ARF has been involved since design and inception of the project.
The list of the team members is given in the Annexure -1 The team members have been
involved in the following activities :
   •   Activity-1 : Diagnostic Study of PIM in Phase-1.
   •   Activity-2 : Development of Shared Vision for PIM & Capacity Building.
   •   Activity-3 : Exposure Visits of UPID officers and WUA representatives to
       Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh.
   •   Activity-4 : Development of Information, Education and Communication
       (IEC) Materials.
   •   Activity-5 : Development of Training Modules
   •   Activity-6 : Development of Model WUAs in Phase-1.




                                        -5-
[V]. Overview of Major Activities Undertaken

1. Diagnostic Study of PIM in Phase–1
The rationale for selecting the PIM approach as a tool for upgrading the management of
irrigation systems and thus, enhancing the chances for their long-term sustainability
derives from a broad-based international experience, which highlights the necessity &
demonstrates the feasibility of devolving responsibilities for irrigation systems
management (including funding of O&M) from public agencies to water users sharing a
hydraulic unit or a command area.
Numerous experts have, in recent times, stressed on the fact that sustainable WUAs
require an enabling environment, clear political will with clarity of objects, accountable
partnerships and incentives. Merely creating a legal framework or linking them with
rehabilitation projects alone, cannot ensure successful & strong WUAs. Nevertheless,
empowerment of water users, long-term capacity building, financial resources,
appropriate incentives with timely monitoring and remedial actions can go a long way in
strengthening the WUAs. The sustainability of a WUA clearly depends upon the
combination of a number of internal factors, such as – farm size, location, social
stratification & heterogeneity; and external factors, such as – the institutional
environment, legal framework, staffing, financial & technical assistance, agricultural
policies, markets, hydraulics and demography.
As mentioned previously, recognizing the central role of the Participatory Irrigation
Management (PIM) concept, the Government of Uttar Pradesh introduced the U.P. Water
Sector Restructuring Project (UPWSRP) in the year 2004 with the support of the World
Bank. The Phase-1 of the project (which closed formally in October-2011), was the first
step towards the formalization of the PIM concept in the State.
In order to accomplish the envisaged objectives of any programme, it is essential to
institutionalize a mechanism for regular monitoring and evaluation from time-to-time.
Regular monitoring and in-depth evaluation helps in the identification of the strengths
and weaknesses of a particular scheme and in earmarking the grey areas. Evaluating the
ultimate achievements and the impact of the various objectives planned and
implemented under the scheme not only helps in fine-tuning a given scheme/program
but also in identifying the possible innovations that can be introduced into the system.
Realizing the importance of this fact and especially in light of the fact that one now
stands at the threshold of the launch of the UPWSRP-2 in the State, it was decided to
undertake a Diagnostic Study of the Water User Associations (WUAs) from the U.P. Water
Sector Restructuring Project (UPWSRP), Phase-1 areas – with the aim of documenting
the evolution of the PIM process and the status of the WUAs with regard to various
issues envisioned under the U.P. PIM Act, 2009.
OBJECTIVES OF THE STUDY
The primary objective of the diagnostic study was to : “Assess the status of PIM – with
specific focus on the Water Users’ Associations (WUAs) in the U.P. Water Sector
Restructuring Project (UPWSRP), Phase-1 areas?. Specifically, the study focused on the
following key objectives, namely –
       1. To assess the level of awareness of the WUAs regarding the concept and
          importance of PIM.
       2. To assess the availability and quality of record-keeping being resorted to by
          the WUAs.




                                          -6-
       3. To study the role of WUAs in organising and managing the existing irrigation
          systems, with specific focus on the aspect of operation & maintenance
          (O&M).
       4. To examine the operational issues involved in fulfilling the expected role to
          be performed by the WUAs as organisational intermediary between the U.P.
          Irigation Department and the farmers.
       5. To explore the extent to which WUAs are able to ensure equitable and
          regular supply of water, including reduction in cases of water disputes.
       6. To identify the constraints faced by different entities in PIM and suggest
          suitable strategies for further improvement in operational and management
          aspects.
COVERAGE AND SCOPE
The study envisaged to cover all the stakeholder groups involved with the
implementation of the first phase of the U.P. Water Sector Restructuring Project
(UPWSRP), as depicted below :
           Members of the Executive Committee/Management Committee of the Water
           User Associations (WUAs)
           General Body Members of the Water User Associations (WUAs)
           The Farmers/Cultivators within the catchment area of the Water User
           Associations (WUAs)
           Division-level Functionaries/Officers of the Irrigation Department, including
           members of the PIM Cells
SAMPLE FOR STUDY
The sample for the study was drawn in close consultation with the programme
managers at the Project Activity Core Team (PACT) institutionalized for the
implementation of the UPWSR Project. In doing so, a total of 33 WUAs, spread across 7
divisions of UPWSRP Phase-1 were covered during the course of the study.


STUDY PARAMETERS AND APPROACH
The study was essentially diagnostic in nature and the information with regard to the
study was collected with the help of a combination of research instruments, details of
which have been presented below ----

[A]. PRIMARY DATA COLLECTION
          Individual In-depth Interviews (IDIs) – IDIs were carried out to collect the
          requisite information from the members of the executive committees/
          management committees of the WUAs; general body members of the WUAs;
          and farmers/cultivators residing in the catchment areas of the WUAs selected
          for the study.
          Focus Group Discussions (FGDs) – The study also involved carrying out
          focus group discussions (FGDs) in each of the 33 minors selected for the
          purpose of the assessment. Thus a total of 33 FDGs were carried out during
          the course of the study.
          During the course of the FGDs, it was our endeavour to ensure the
          participation of various categories in adequate numbers, with special focus on
          the farmers from the head, middle and tail reaches.


                                         -7-
          Interaction with Various Stakeholder Groups – The study also involved
          detailed in-depth discussions with various functionaries responsible for the
          implementation of UPWSRP Phase-1 at the division levels, including –
          members of the PIM Cells institutionalized subsequent to the implementation
          of the U.P. PIM Act, 2009.
     [B]. SECONDARY DATA VERIFICATION/STUDY
     During the course of the study, it was our
     endeavour to study the overall status of
     progress of the UPWSR Project in the
     Phase-1 areas. In doing so, the study also
     involved the physical verification and
     review of all possible records supposed to
     be maintained by the WUAs, including
     records/registers pertaining to the
     following –

             Meetings Register (Baithak Karyavritt Register)
             General Body (Samanya Sabha) Register
             Executive/Management Committee (Prabandhan Samiti) Register
             General Communication (Baithak Sanbandhi Patrachar) Register
             Lists/Registers/Reports related to Repair & Maintenance
             Gauge Register
             Documents related to Water Management (Jal Prabandhan), including –
             copies of rosters, warabandi and irrigation recording (Seench Ankan)
             undertaken by the WUAs.
             Documents related to Financial Management, including – cash books,
             cheque books, pass books, audit reports, etc.
             Administrative expenses (Prashashnik Vyay) register
             Water Dispute (Sinchai Jal Apraadh) Register
             Documents related to Departmental Co-ordination, such as – details of
             recent communication between WUAs and Irrigation Department; details
             of records provided by the Irrigation Department to the WUAs and the like.

REFERENCE PERIOD
The reference period of the said study was from April 2011 to March 2013. The
activities assessed were beyond the period of Phase-1 and continuing up to the time of
commencement of the second phase of the project.

DIAGNOSIS OF MAJOR ISSUES
A snapshot of the major issues diagnosed during the course of the study have been
presented hereunder ----
       A large proportion of the farming community in the UPWSRP Phase-1 areas has
       little idea about the concept of PIM and its intricacies.
       Very few meetings of the Executive Committee or General body are actually being
       organized at the field level.




                                         -8-
       All decisions pertaining to the works/
       activities to be taken-up are decided by
       the UPID officials and the same is
       conveyed to the WUA executive
       committee members – largely to the
       President and/or Secretary.
       Joint walk throughs are not taking place,
       although isolated cases do exist in
       certain areas. Even here the estimates
       are being prepared by the department
       officials.
       There appears to be a palpable gap
       between the department and the WUAs regarding the sharing of information on
       the irrigation rosters. In majority of the cases, even the village-level functionaries
       (such as ‘seenchpals and amins’) are unaware about the roster.
       There is irregular release of funds to WUAs for O&M.
       There is tail-end deprivation across all the divisions
       There was lack of coordination amongst WUAs and UPID.
       However due to the functioning of WUAs, there was reduction in water related
       disputes amongst farmers at outlet and minor levels and reduction in wastage of
       water as perceived by the farmers.
SUGGESTIONS & RECOMMENDATIONS
In order to achieve the objectives and goals of any scheme/project, it is essential that its
strengths are sustained and consolidated and that the shortcomings are minimized by
way of appropriate and timely corrective actions and applying the lessons learned. The
recommendations derived from the study findings have been presented below and are to
be viewed in this context -----
   1. It is imperative for the UPWSRP programme managers (at both the State and
      division levels) to undertake urgent measures for promoting the use of the
      electronic and print media, with a view to disseminate information about the
      scheme among the masses in the Phase-1 areas. At the same time, it might also
      be useful to design and conduct information dissemination seminars and
      workshops for the WUAs, as well as, the department officials (and most
      importantly the PIM Cell members) – as these often serve as potent platforms for
      spreading awareness among the target groups.
       This is true especially with regard to issues such as the procedures and
       guidelines of the U.P. PIM Act and the intricate components associated with PIM
       – aspects that despite the obvious advantages of the print & electronic media –
       may not be easily internalized by the target audience.
   2. Given the present status of PIM in the UPWSRP Phase-1 areas and the evidently
      non-receptive attitude of the functionaries of the department, it might be
      advisable to design and conduct specific training & capacity building programs
      for them. This might be of great use in generating a certain amount of sensitivity
      among them regarding the intricacies of participatory irrigation management on
      one hand and their own role towards the society that they serve.
   3. Further, in light of the extremely low levels of enthusiasm and commitment on
      behalf of a large number of WUAs in the Phase-1 areas, it might be advisable to
      design a comprehensive plan of action for seeking the support of experienced
      local community based organizations for providing hand-holding and
      strengthening the capacities of the WUAs regarding various facets associated
      with PIM and specifically the U.P. PIM Act, 2009.


                                           -9-
- 10 -
2. Change Management Workshop (4th and 5th December 2013)

Rationale
It was observed that implementation of PIM in the State had been painfully slow and the
core cause had been the departmental reluctance and
resistance to this new idea. They fear this change might
dilute their control and authority and therefore are not
keen to promote the same. In light of the above and the
experiences drawn from UPWSRP phase-I, it was felt
that the launch of UPWRSP-II must be done with a
sensitization workshop on Attitudinal & Behavior
Change (ABC). This would motivate all senior officers in
the department (UPID) to own this new paradigm of
PIM and become supportive to much delayed irrigational reforms.

Workshop Objectives
The key objectives of this two day workshop were :
a. To orient senior officials of UPID about key features of PIM
b. To communicate urgency/importance/benefits of PIM for the state
c. To convince and motivate them to accept and facilitate this change
d. To generate a vision for future role of UPID in support of farmers cause


The workshop was facilitated by Dr Gyan Pandey and his team, of Always Alive. It was
Chaired by the Principal Secretary, UPID, Shri Suresh
Chandra and the key note address was given by Shri
V.B.Patel, Ex.Chairman of the Central Water Commission.
Dr. Anju Gaur and Mr. Shankar Narayanan from the World
Bank, New Delhi and Director, WALMI & Chief Engineer,
PACT Mr. D.K. Dudeja also provided guidance during the
workshop. More than 50 senior officers from UPID, PACT,
WALMI and SIRD participated in the workshop wherein there were sessions on overview
of PIM, philosophy of change, process of attitude and behavior change, transformational
leadership and actualizing and sustaining change.

The Workshop was successful in providing orientation to the senior officials of the Uttar
Pradesh Irrigation Department (UPID) about the key features of the PIM and Change
Management, facilitating a shared vision the concept of PIM and generating a certain
degree of appreciation among the senior officials/functionaries regarding the
importance of PIM in the State.


3. Exposure Visits of Stakeholders
It was felt that exposure visits to successful PIM projects in other states must be
conducted to sensitize the stakeholders towards PIM through farmer to farmer and
officer to officer interactions. Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are two pioneering states
that have developed PIM successfully in some major and medium irrigation projects.
Thus, a series of exposure visits were conducted for UPID officers as well as
representatives from WUAs of Phase-1 to these States.



                                           - 11 -
Exposure Visit for Water Users Associations of Phase–1 to Gujarat and Madhya
Pradesh



   Sr.                      No. of      No. of
             Date                                            Profile of Participants
   No.                   Participants   days.

                                                   Presidents, Secretaries, Treasurers and
          19th to 25th
                                                   members of WUAs from minors of Chanda,
    1     November,          26           7
                                                   Chilbila, Nagapur and Ateha distributory
          2013
                                                   and related AEs from UPID.
                                                   Presidents, Secretaries, Treasurers and
          19th to 26th
                                                   members of WUAs from minors of
          March
    2                        27           8        Bahrauli, Dharauli, Naseerabaad,
          2014 (only
                                                   Madfarpur, Chilbila, and Nagapur
          Gujarat)
                                                   distributory.

         Total               53          15        ******************************************




The first batch of WUA representatives visited the canal site and interacted with the
WUAs and canal officers of Man and Jobat projects in Madhya Pradesh. They were
particularly keen to know the role of WUAs in operation and maintenance of canals and
water distribution. They appreciated the fact that the WUAs had collected water charges
inspite of it being free. Both the batches of WUA representatives visited the Dharoi
project in Gujarat wherein they had an in-depth discussion on canal rehabilitation,
record keeping and water distribution at the WUA and distributory level. They also
studied the agriculture and dairy related activities carried out by the WUAs, Farmer
Clubs, SHGs and the Producer Company.
The sharing of the experiences by participants of the exposure visits has led to increase
in participation of farmers in WUAs, increase in confidence to carry out various activities
such as preparation of budget, increased motivation to participate in meetings and a
positive competitive spirit.




                                              - 12 -
Exposure visit for officers from UPID to Gujarat

    Sr.                            No. of
                  Date                             No of days    Profile of Participants
    No.                         Participants

                                                                Superintending
                                                                Engineers, Executive
           11th to 14th                                         Engineers, Assistant
     1                               27                4
           December, 2013                                       Engineers from UPID
                                                                and PIM Cell PACT and
                                                                Joint Director, SIRD.
                                                                Chief Engineers,
                                                                Superintending
           18th to 21                                           Engineers, Executive
     2                               33                4
           December, 2013                                       Engineers, Assistant
                                                                Engineers from UPID
                                                                and PIM Cell PACT
           17th to 22nd                                         Assistant Engineers and
   3&4     February, 2014            52                6        Junior Engineers from
           (Two batches)                                        UPID

             Total                  112               14




The officers visited the canal site and had intensive discussions with the WUAs and canal
officers of Dharoi project of Gujarat. They asked them several questions regarding the
role of WUAs in canal rehabilitation, O&M, water distribution, collection of water rates
and imposition of fines. During discussions with the canal officers they were keen to
know about how PIM had helped them in fulfilling their roles and responsibilities.
Besides they also had interactions with WUA office bearers and Executive Engineer from
Panam Irrigation Project in Gujarat, Man and Jobat project of M.P as well as Wagad
Project of Maharashtra. The DSC team shared its rich experiences of community
mobilizing and hand holding support to WUAs with the participants. During the
concluding session, the officers had discussions on policy issues with Shri V.B.Patel
retired Secretary, Water Resources Department, Government of Gujarat and Ex
Chairman Central Water Commission and Shri O.T.Gulati, Retd Chief Engineer and
Director, WALMI, Water Resources Department, Government of Gujarat .


4. Development of Information, Education & Communication (IEC)
   Materials
Print and audio visual material such as posters, stickers, pamphlets etc are necessary for
awareness generation, capacity building and training of the concerned stakeholders.
During the meeting with World Bank and PACT team on 18th and 19th September 2013,
it was decided that existing IEC material would be collected and reviewed and if

                                          - 13 -
necessary, would be developed further as standard and uniform material. The Water and
Land Management Institute (WALMI) and State Institute of Rural Development (SIRD)
would help the SPT in developing the IEC materials by providing existing materials and
technical support. The audio visual and print material developed by DSC over the years
in Hindi will be appropriately modified as per the UP context and put to use. The SPT
will be responsible for identifying the gaps and suggesting appropriate modifications
and feedback to SIRD and WALMI so that they develop the master copies. However, later
it was felt that the given the experience of the SPT, it would be advisable for it to develop
the master copies and submit the same to PACT. Accordingly DSC and ARF with guidance
from PACT developed the following IEC material in four colour and in simple, easy to
understand Hindi:


            ◦   Posters and Panels on PIM and Agriculture
            ◦   Slogans on PIM, water management etc.
            ◦   Appeal to letter to farmers and WUAs on benefits of PIM.
            ◦   Booklet on Frequently Asked Questions by farmers.
            ◦   Hindi booklet of Sequential steps for Empowering Communities by Anil C
                Shah, Founder Chairman, DSC.




The IEC material developed by the Think Tank will be widely disseminated by SIRD in
UPWSRP Phase -1 and Phase – 2 projects. These will also be prominently displayed in
the field offices of PIM Cell and WUA offices at the Distributory level.


5. Development of Training Modules
In order to standardize the capacity building inputs to the WUAs in Uttar Pradesh, there
was a need to develop training modules on various aspects of PIM. Accordingly, the
Think Tank developed the following training modules:
    1. Concept of PIM.
    2. Operation and Maintenance of Canals by WUAs.
    3. Irrigation Management by WUAs.
    4. Financial Management by WUAs.
    5. Agriculture and allied activities by WUAs.
    6. Good Governance by WUAs .
    7. Community mobilizing for WUAs.


                                           - 14 -
Each of the above modules developed in Hindi cover the basic principles, steps,
illustrations and do’s and don’ts. Each module contains instructor’s notes, power point
presentations and main text developed in user friendly language with use of pictures
and graphs for easy understanding. While the content is based on the UP PIM Act and
PIM Manual, it also draws extensively from the rich experiences gained in promoting
PIM and agriculture and allied activities in other states. These modules will be used by
SIRD as well as the Think Tank to build the capacities of the WUAs, field officers of UPID
as well as community mobilizers in Uttar Pradesh. Besides U.P these modules can be of
considerable value to other states as well. These could be translated into different
regional languages and somewhat modified as per the respective PIM Acts and Rules of
different States.


6. Development of Model WUAs in Phase–1




One of the major activities envisaged for the SPT initiative was to provide hand-holding
and capacity building support to select Water Users’ Associations (WUAs) from the
UPWSRP Phase-1 areas. The idea stemmed from the need to foster credibility among the
farmers and also with the programme managers of the irrigation department. In doing
so, efforts were made to build the capacities of the selected WUAs so as to enable them
in taking decisions that make the institution more sustainable and self-evolving around
a developed system.
Some of the basic parameters typifying a developed WUA were earmarked as follows ----

            Regular meetings of management committee, as well as the general body.
            Updated maintenance of canal.
            Performance of a more evolved level water management practices,
             including – water sharing arrangement/warabandi, rostering of outlets,
             rostering of minors, efficient & optimal use of water and conjunctive use of
             water.
            Attainment of financial autonomy, evident through the generation of non-
             government funds and generation of funds from the government.
            Evidence of equitable distribution of water.
            Evidence of autonomy in taking technical and financial decisions.
            Evidence of minimal canal offence.
            Implementation of activities through yearly budget of WUAs.

THE PROCESS ADOPTED
As a part of the process of developing model WUAs in UPWSRP Phase-1, it was initially
decided to select systems such as to include a Distributary along with its 3 Minors (one
each from Head, Middle and Tail reaches).

Accordingly, in close consultation with the Divisions as well as the PACT Office, one
system was selected from each of 6 Divisions – SSK-36 (Jaunpur), SSK-41 (Gauriganj),


                                          - 15 -
SSK-45 (Rae Bareli), SSK-49 (Sultanpur) and ID- Sultanpur. On the other hand, 3
Distributaries and 21 Minors were selected from SSK-51 (Pratapgarh). Overall, 9
Distributaries and 39 Minors have been selected to be developed as Models.

SELECTION OF CANAL SYSTEM FOR MODEL WUA
At the onset of the process of development of model WUAs, suitable canal systems were
identified for being developed as Models. The Community Resource Persons (CRPs)
were deployed by the DSC-ARF team – with the primary objective of establishing rapport
with the Division level officers. With the help of the division level officers, two
Distributary systems having better water supply were selected randomly.

The CRPs then contacted the respective WUA members of the Distributary to solicit their
eagerness to participate in the programme for developing the Distributary as a model for
the Project. The divisional officers of the UPID were contacted for selecting either of the
two. Subequently, one Distributary was selected from each of the six divisions and all the
three in SSK-51, Pratapgarh. Three minors were selected from each of these selected
Distributaries – one minor from head, middle and teal reaches.

FINALIZATION OF PARAMETERS FOR MODEL WUAs
In order to define the characteristics of a Model WUA, standards needed to be set up by
PACT. Draft parameters defining the Model WUA were discussed at a consultation of the
State PIM Think-Tank (SPT) and the Project Activity Core Team on November 13, 2013 at
the SPT office. Each of the parameters was deliberated upon and a final list was arrived
upon. An initial draft of the criteria for a model WUA was defined by the State PIM
Think-Tank and shared with PACT and subsequently, a joint exercise was carried out to
finalize the parameters for the same.

In addition, a comprehensive plan of action was designed for the team of Community
Resource Persons (CRPs) deployed by the SPT for facilitating the development of the
WUAs into models.

REGULARISING MEETINGS OF THE WUAs
Since the deployment of the 12-member field team, the first task delegated to them was
to compile a list of all the members of the members of the Distributary level WUA. In
close consultation with the Divisional Offices of UPID, a complete list of the members
was obtained. At several places the same could not be accessed as the details have
changed with time. This was the major activity of this period.

Also there had been changes in a few cases as well on account of the passing away of a
former member. By contacting these members a complete list of the executive members
was compiled. The contact details of each member was obtained from the concerned
Division offices, were cross-verified by the Community Resource Persons (CRPs)
deployed by the SPT.

One of the major facts that emerged during the course of the identification process was
that no formal communication process was in existence between the Division level
functionaries (including the PIM Cell members) and the WUA functionaries – leading
thereby to a completely ineffective functioning of many of the WUAs.

As an initial exercise, the CRPs focused upon motivating the WUA Presidents to conduct
regular meetings of the Management Committee, which must take place at least once a
month. One of the most disappointing features emanating from this initial (but equally
crucial) exercise was the fact that the WUAs were inactive in a large number of the cases.
In many cases, even the members themselves had little idea that they were members of
such a body and some did not know about the other members constituting the WUA.

                                          - 16 -
After considerable efforts, the CRPs managed to organize the first meeting of the WUA
Management Committees in the month of November-2013. The main issues that
emerged during the WUA meetings have been summarized below :

 a. Most of the discussions prevailed around the de-silting of the canals so that they
    may deliver water in an optimal manner.
 b. Cutting of jungles was another aspect which was discussed at most of the meetings.
 c. Many of the actions regarding the repair and maintenance of the canal are done by
    the department without the knowledge of the WUAs, leave aside discussing or
    taking their permission. Sometimes even the Assistant Engineers, Junior Engineers,
    or the Seenchpals are not aware about actions on the canal. The members have
    hence lost interest in the WUAs as an institution. They expect to be informed and be
    involved in the discussions at the General Body Meetings so that there is not only
    transparency in operations, but also that people’s participation in prioritizing the
    works.
 d. The status of Federated Minors is in a limbo, as there are no resources allocated for
    them. They are hence always in paucity of funds for Operation & Management.
 e. Payments for ‘Watch & ward of canals’ are not allocated in the budget. This role is
    assumed to be voluntary on the part of the WUAs, whereas previously, funds were
    allocated for this activity, when the works were carried out by the Division (UPID)
    and the Irrigation Department had paid on this account.
 f. The banks of the canal have been damaged at certain sections and needs immediate
    repair.
 g. The dates of meeting of the Executive Committee have been finalized and
    communicated to the respective Executive Engineers & respective Competent Canal
    Officers.
 h. Co-ordination between the Distributary level WUAs and the Minor level WUAs is
    poor. They feel that they are independent of each other. ARF is making efforts to
    bridge this gap through regularising the meetings and mobilizing the members to
    participate in the meetings.
 i. Gates of the some of the Minors are faulty (Jais, Ateha, Chhida, Kudaur, Naharpur
    heads). At some places there is a need for repair of culverts and embankments. The
    CCOs do not include these in works estimates. Even the damaged drops are not
    included in the estimates.
 j. At most of the places the members are not aware that the Office Bearers need to be
    re-elected after every 2 years. Most of the WUAs have completed 2 years and hence
    a re-elections of office bearers are required.
 k. Most of the members were not aware about the Walk-through along with the
    concerned Competent Canal Officer.

QUALITATIVE MONITORING OF MONTHLY MEETINGS
Qualitative monitoring of any system results in far reaching results from the same
amount of inputs. In light of this fact, it was decided to institutionalize a mechanism for
close monitoring of the work of the Community Resource Persons (CRPs) through a
panel of experts from DSC-ARF. Besides providing guidance to the field team on a case to
case basis, the panel of experts was also provided with a mandate of undertaking regular
visits for improving the quality of interventions at the field level.

Further, a regular follow-up mechanism was also developed with a view to facilitate a
swift and optimal response to the queries of the WUA members during their monthly
meetings.




                                          - 17 -
EXPOSURE VISITS OF WUAs MEMBERS
It is often said that ‘seeing is believing’. When there is an exchange of views between the
farmers of one place with another, they are likely to internalize the learning in a better
fashion. In light of this fact, it was decided that some representatives of the WUAs from
canals systems selected to be developed as models be sent on exposure visits to areas
where the Participatory Irrigation Management is functioning well.

The States of Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are acknowledged to be pioneers in
promoting and developing the concept of PIM successfully across many major and minor
irrigation projects. With consultation of PACT, it was decided that the participants of the
exposure visit for the WUAs should be from areas having good irrigation records and
also from areas which have been identified for development as model WUAs.
Subsequently, the participants (farmers) were selected in close consultation with the
respective UPID divisions on the basis of their ability to influence and sensitize other
farmers of the area towards PIM.

It was decided that there would be two groups of farmers who would be sent for the
exposure visits. The first batch of farmers was sent in the month of November 2013,
while the second batch was sent in the month of March-2014. Appropriate reading
reference materials were provided to the visiting participants in Hindi.

Upon their return, formal de-briefing session was conducted for both the groups at the
SPT office based at Lucknow and in the presence of representatives from PACT. The focus
of these sessions was to facilitate the participants to arrive at useful recommendations
regarding the activities that may be taken-up in the context of Uttar Pradesh and the
steps that warrant immediate action.

HOLDING REGULAR MEETINGS & PASSING OF RESOLUTIONS
Getting fixed the dates of management committee meetings, actual occurrence of these
meetings has been an achievement of the efforts of
the SPT. Meetings are now being held on pre-
decided dates and if there is any difficulty in
arranging a particular meeting on a due date, it is
rescheduled for another date with due
notification.

Meetings cancelled for want of quorum are now
postponed in accordance with the provisions
stipulated for the same. The participation of the
functionaries of the concerned divisions of the
irrigation department however, still remains
infrequent in most of these meetings. Inclusion of
representation from categories mentioned in the
U.P. PIM Act may be taken as a positive outcome of this exercise although a small number
of WUAs are still lacking in this area.

REGULAR MONTHLY MEETINGS OF EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
General body meetings have gathered momentum. During initial interactions, the WUAs,
especially at the Dy levels, raised an issue that the Dy’s being more than 20 km long,
many representatives often find it difficult to attend the general body meetings even if
they are held at a central location. As a solution to this problem, the WUAs were
encouraged to hold their respective general body meetings in three phases, that is –
Head, Middle and Tail reach and following the same agenda. The decisions and
subsequent actions may be taken keeping in mind the majority viewpoint. This



                                          - 18 -
mechanism appears to be a workable suggestion and is expected to be adopted by
majority of the WUAs in the near future.
Following the encouragement and support of the Community Resource Persons (CRPs),
General Body meetings were conducted at Chilbila, Madafarpur, Naseerabad, Ateha and
Bahrauly distributaries and at Alampur & Chhida minors.

WALK THROUGHS
Walk through is an exercise that allows the
WUAs to assess the quantum of work to be
carried out on the canals in a transparent
manner. Though the main clearance of canals is
carried out before Rabi (as water from rivers
during the monsoon season carries much silt)
and walk through during that period is crucial.
These walk-throughs also often serve as an
exercise to assess other damages such as
repair of pucca works, etc. and also act as a
kind of training exercise for the WUAs.

Walk throughs have been carried out by almost
all the WUAs selected to be developed as
models (with the exception of SSK -49).
However, most of these walk-throughs witnessed extremely irregular participation on
behalf of the irrigation department representatives. This absence of irrigation
department officials often acts as a dampener to the enthusiasm of the WUAs and
warrants immediate attention of the programme managers.

FORMATION OF SUB-COMMITTEES
The PIM Act-2009 envisages formation of sub-committees to assist the managing
committees mainly at the minor & distributary levels. During the course of our initial
interactions with the WUAs, it was found that these sub committees were absent in
majority of the divisions except SSK-51, Pratapgarh. Following sustained efforts of the
Community Resource Persons (CRPs), the sub-committees have now been formed at all
the minors selected to be developed as model WUAs.

BENCHMARKING OF WUAs
To gauge the outcome of the efforts, it is necessary to have the present status of WUAs
other than organizational view. For this purpose the following indicators have been
earmarked for the WUAs selected for being developed as models, namely ----
     i.   Running of canals according to rosters and in cases where the same is not
          conformed to, the proportion of divergence.
     ii. Increase or decrease in irrigation in ensuing period comparing to last ten
          years.
     iii. Increase or decrease in irrigation with respect to head, middle and tail of
          minors in comparison to last ten years.
     iv. Productivity per unit volume of water.

In order to establish a uniform system in light of the aforementioned indicators, the
Community Resource Persons (CRPs) deployed by the SPT are presently actively
engaged in facilitating the WUAs to procure the following essential documents, namely --
-
     a. Rosters of last 5-10 years;
     b. Actual running of canals in last 5-10 years;
     c. Irrigation recorded in last ten years;


                                         - 19 -
     d. Break up of irrigated area of last ten years in Head, Middle & Tail reaches;
     e. Productivity of main crops shall be taken from agriculture department; and
     f. Jinsewar/Shobewar irrigation.

Satisfactory progress is taking place with regard to most documents, however procuring
data of actual running of canal has been posing as the biggest challenge to both the CRPs
as well as the WUAs. In most cases, the divisional officers are hardly aware of any such
record and/or the location of such records. Wherever this information is available, it is
found to be maintained in the form of gauge reading. There are very few instances where
the record of actual running of discharge is being maintained. The gauges have to be
converted into discharge using Gauge-Discharge tables after procuring the same from
the divisions or from places where these are available.
Some divisions do not even have copy of the
rosters of all ten years. These are procured
from WUA offices or from the places where
these were available.

RECORDING OF IRRIGATION
The process of irrigation recording was
initiated across a number of WUAs selected
to be developed as models – with
Madafarpur Distributary, Chhida and Sarai
Jamuari minor and Kataria Federated Minor
taking the lead in this regard.

REDUCTION IN WASTAGES & DISPUTES
Once the process of WUA management committee meetings was streamlined, the next
logical step involved focusing on conducting walk-through. The platform of the WUA
management committee meetings was utilized by the CRPs deployed by the SPT to
facilitate a deeper understanding and appreciation of the concept of walk-throughs to
the committee members.

As a result of the persistent efforts of the CRPs, walk-throughs have been resumed by
majority of the WUAs selected for being developed as models – although there is still a
palpable
hesitation on                                                                   behalf
of        the
functionaries                                                                    from
the
concerning                                                                       UPID
divisions to
participate in                                                                     the
same.




                                         - 20 -
In addition to the aspect of walk-throughs, the importance of curbing wastages was also
conveyed to the WUAs and the results have indeed been worth mentioning – with a
discernable reduction in the quantum of water offences. In situations where canal
offences were reported, the WUAs have now started taking immediate action by
removing the obstructions to the flows of the canals.
PREPARATION OF ESTIMATES BY WUA EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
WUAs as an entity are conceived to be an independent & self sustained body. To achieve
this goal, capacity of WUA has to be built in the way that it can accomplish all the tasks
related to maintenance of canals. After ‘Walk Through’ Preparation of estimates is the
next step before undertaking the repair/maintenance of canals.

Keeping the above fact in mind, it was our endeavour during this period to try and
motivate the executive bodies of the WUAs to prepare their estimates on the basis of
‘data’ collected in walk throughs. The WUAs were assisted by the executives deployed in
field by State PIM Think-Tank. The executives were trained for the purpose and were
equipped with ‘performance aids’. The executives were directed to paste the copy of
performance aid in the register of WUAs. The effort succeeded and almost all the WUAs
have submitted their estimates to concerned divisions either direct or through their
respective distributary committee.

Where We Are ………
As mentioned previously, the task of selecting and facilitating certain WUAs in the
UPWSRP Phase-1 areas was initiated by the State PIM Think-Tank (SPT) in the month of
November, 2013. In doing so, a brief summary of the concrete achievements till July-
2014 have been presented in the matrix given below :

                 Formalization of the lists of WUA members and
                 internalization of the same by the concerned
                 stakeholders.
                 Representation of specific categories in the WUAs,
                 including – women and representatives from the SC/ST
                 category and the concerned Panchayati Raj Institution.
                 Updation of all relevant record books mandatory for the
                 WUAs.
                 Holding of regular meetings of the WUA Management
                 Committees on pre-scheduled dates.
                 Holding of General Body meetings at all distributaries
                 and one-fourth of WUAs.
                 Formation of WUA Sub-Committees.
                 Recording of Irrigation --- initiated by 3 WUAs.
                 Conducting of        Joint   Walk-Throughs        &   Estimate
                 Preparation.




                                          - 21 -
7. The Way Forward
Effective use of Information Education and Communication material
Considerable Information Education and Communication material has been
developed by the Think Tank it remains to be seen how it is used by SIRD and other
agencies for promoting PIM in the State.
As indicated by the Chairman PACT and Principal Secretary, these should be
disseminated on a large scale and prominently displayed in the field offices of the
PIM Cell, UPID offices as well as WUAs at the distributory level. These should also be
used for motivating farmers to effectively participate in the WUAs and maintenance
of the canals.

Pre-testing of Training Modules
The training modules with instructor’s notes, power point presentations and
reference material on seven major topics have been developed. These need to be pre-
tested by WALMI, SIRD and the Think-Tank for further refinement. A separate
training module for strengthening the PIM Cell also needs to be developed.

Given the large number of WUA functionaries as well as field officers that will be
need to be trained, it may be advisable to identify proportionate number of
competent and committed training institutes as well as resource persons that can
provide need based and timely training. The training programmes especially for the
office bearers of WUAs could be conducted at the field level training centres so as to
reduce to and fro travel time.

Development of Model WUAs in Phase–1
As indicated previously, while the hand-holding provided by the Community Mobilizers
for one year has yielded certain encouraging results, this needs to be continued for
another two-three years so that the WUAs can effectively manage the canals and also
carry out agriculture and allied activities. From the experiences so far in providing
handholding support to the WUAs in Phase -1, it is felt that there is need for timely
resolution of issues emerging from the field by UPID.

The WUAs need financial and technical support from the Irrigation Department for
repair and maintenance of canals and construction of field channels otherwise they
would lose their confidence and momentum in the near future.

The UPID staff, especially PIM Cell should also be strengthened by providing them
proper infrastructure and resources for communication and mobility so that they can
provide timely support to the WUAs on regular basis. A special policy and incentive
package for based on the learning from other States such as Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh
could be considered for model WUA development.




                                        * * * * *




                                         - 22 -
