                                                                                        98387

Impact of Social Accountability Interventions on Healthcare Delivery and Outcomes in
                          Uttar Pradesh, India (P150365)

                                    Impact Evaluation
                          Virtual Concept Review: Decision Note
                                     October 27, 2014


 1. A virtual review of the Concept Note for an impact evaluation "Impact of Social
 Accountability Interventions on Healthcare Delivery and Outcomes in Uttar Pradesh, India"
 was conducted during October 13-18, 2014. The concept note was originally reviewed by
 the panel of experts constituted by Strategic Impact Evaluation Fund (SIEF) and the process
 was managed by Joost de Laat (Program Manager, SIEF). The peer reviewers were kept
 confidential to allow for candid comments. The Concept note package was circulated
 amongst India county team, HNP GP India, India WBG Family, Martin Rama (Chief
 Economist, SAR) and Dhushyant Raju (Senior Economist, SARCE).
 2. The package consisted of the draft concept cote, final technical proposal submitted and
 cleared by SIEF incorporating peer reviewer comments, the comments from the peer
 reviewers, and the detailed team response to the peer reviewer comments by the team.
 3. The objective of the activity is to evaluate the impact of social accountability
 interventions in improving primary healthcare delivery and health outcomes in Uttar Pradesh,
 the most populous low income state in India. Results from this impact evaluation will
 influence better design of social accountability initiatives for large scale roll out under the
 ongoing World Bank UP health systems strengthening project and other national programs
 (National Health Mission). The intervention is focused on primary care services in the rural
 areas, which benefits the poor and women.
 4. The peer reviewers have obtained clarification on the following key areas:
       i.   administrative arrangement for gram panchayat as implementation units;
      ii.   clarification of the project intervention in terms of separating an “information
            only component” and an “information plus community action” component;
     iii.   evaluation design, data collection and outcome indicators, sampling and power
            analysis;
     iv.    composition of the research team;
      v.    dissemination plan and engagement strategy;
     vi.    budget and funding justification.
 5. The team has reviewed all the comments provided by the reviewers and provided detailed
 responses. The suggested changes in the intervention design and research methodology has
 been incorporated in the final concept note, which has been cleared by SIEF.


                                                1
6. On the first issue related to applicability of findings due to heterogeneity of gram
panchayats, the team clarified that, the proposed evaluation will carefully document the
mechanisms through which social accountability impacts health service delivery, which will
help us learn about the generalizability of the effects. Moreover, the findings from these two
districts will help state in scaling up evaluation across other districts.
7. On the second issue related to clarification sought on the components, The team
emphasized that the pilot project for social accountability intervention will test and
implement all the strategies before scale up. It was also clarified that the component I will
focus on information dissemination and awareness through communication, while the
component II is mainly to facilitation process that encourages community members to
participate in the discussion to identify solutions to health challenges.
8. On the third issue, there was concern about community participation through various
participatory process, need for baseline, use of outcome indicators that has multiple
determinants for health, and sampling method for selection of districts and households that
will represent UP. The team clarified on the use of existing government guidelines for
implementation of village health, nutrition, and sanitation committees (VSHNC) for the
intervention. Baseline data will be collected at the beginning of the impact evaluation, and
this data will be used to do the random assignment. The team also clarified involvement of
relevant stakeholders whose performance will be assessed and improved through the
intervention.
9. On the fourth issue related to dissemination, the team clarified on specific steps that will
be followed for reaching out to national and international experts and ensures wider
dissemination of learning among admissions and development professionals.
10. On the fifth issue of funding justification, the team has revised the budget and provided
further breakup to build clarity in the proposal. The revised budget and costing was justified
with specific activities and counterpart funding. The revised cost was approved by SIEF
team.
11. The Chair summarized the following decisions of the meeting:
       a. The chair provided a go ahead for the impact evaluation and emphasized the need
          for linkages with the ongoing project “Uttar Pradesh Health System Strengthening
          Project”.
       b. Although additional support should not be ruled out if requested by the client, the
          team should concentrate on the current set of activities to ensure their completion
          by activities planned under intervention before trust fund closing date.
       c. The team should ensure ongoing documentation of IE activities and outputs.




                                             2
