                                      98464




Learning Note: Additional Financing for
Transport and Information and Communication
Technology (ICT)




June 23, 2015
Contents
ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................................................... I 

SUMMARY .............................................................................................................................................. I 

BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT ........................................................................................................... 1 
            Bank’s Additional Financing policy ............................................................................................................................ 1 
            Bank-Wide Additional Financing Portfolio Overview ................................................................................................. 1 
            Rationale, Purpose, and Methodology ...................................................................................................................... 3 
            Additional Financing Portfolio of the Transport and ICT Global Practice .................................................................. 4 


MAIN FINDINGS AND LESSONS .......................................................................................................... 7 
            Main Findings ............................................................................................................................................................ 7 
            Main Lessons .......................................................................................................................................................... 12 
            Areas for Further Investigation ................................................................................................................................ 13 


ANNEX1: LIST OF THE 34 CLOSED PROJECTS .............................................................................. 14 

ANNEX 2: THE FOUR MU PROJECTS WITH MU OR BELOW OUTCOME RATINGS ...................... 16 


Boxes
Box 1: Examples of AF projects which had (highly) satisfactory outcomes despite significant cost
overruns                                                                                                                                                                             9 


Tables
Table 1: The Distribution of the AFs among GPs .................................................................................... 2 
Table 2: Performances of the projects with and without AF ................................................................... 7 
Table 3: Projects performance and the timing of the AFs..................................................................... 11 

Figures
Figure 1: The Trend of the Bank Wide AFs ............................................................................................ 3 
Figure 2: The Trend of the AFs in the Transport and ICT GP ................................................................ 6 
Abbreviations
AF           Additional Financing
CPS          Country Partnership Strategy
ECA          Europe and Central Asia
EIRR         Economic Internal Rate of Return
FY           Fiscal Year
GP           Global Practice
HDM          Highway Development and Management Modal
HU           Highly Satisfactory
ICR          Implementation Completion Report
ICRR         Implementation Completion Report Review
ICT          Information and Communication Technology
IEG          Independent Evaluation Group
ISR          Implementation Status and Results Report
M&E          Monitoring and evaluation
MS           Moderately Satisfactory
MU           Moderately Unsatisfactory
OP           Operation Policy
PAD          Project Appraisal Document
RED          Road Economic Decision
S            Satisfactory
WB           World Bank




Evaluation Managers
   Caroline Heider           Director-General, Evaluation
   Marvin Taylor-Dormond     Acting Director, IEG Public Sector Evaluation
   Marie Gaarder             Manager, IEG Public Sector Evaluation
   Fang Xu                   Task Manager
                                                                                                                     SUMMARY


Summary
In May 2005, the Bank adopted a new policy and new procedures on Additional Financing (OP/BP
13.20) for investment lending, replacing the previous policy on supplemental financing. This policy
was later revised in March 2012. This learning product assesses the performance of the Additional
Financing (AF) operations approved since then and draws lessons from their implementation
experience. The assessment focuses on AF in projects of the Transport and Information and
Communication Technology (ICT) Global Practice (GP). This was selected as the first batch of
operations to review because they represent a large share in lending volume, as well as the fact that
there is an existing AF study conducted by the former Transport Anchor which this review could
use to verify the AF portfolio.

The note first reviewed the 99 AF projects supporting 81 parent projects mapped to the Transport
and ICT GP, including their key assessments done at AF stage, such as the updated development
objectives, economic analysis, and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) framework. Secondly, a more
detailed review of the 32 closed AF operations1 was conducted to test the main
hypotheses/assumptions to be investigated, and to generate relevant findings and lessons.

This note is not intended to be an evaluation of the AF instrument or its effectiveness at the
corporate level, but rather aims to enhance the understanding of the way it has been used and how it
has affected the project outcomes, through reviewing a subset of the AF portfolio for which the
relevant data was readily available. The review notes the limitation of the small sample. More areas
could be investigated when the data of more projects become available.

The main findings from reviewing the 32 projects
1.      Projects with additional financing had better overall outcome ratings compared with
the rest of the portfolio. 87 percent of the 32 projects with additional financing in the Transport
and ICT GP were rated Moderately Satisfactory (MS) or above, indicating that these projects did not
have significant shortcomings in achieving their development objectives, in efficiency and in
relevance. In comparison, 73 percent of the 91 projects in T&I GP without additional financing but
closed in the same period as those 32 projects received an MS or above outcome rating. It was noted
that these two groups of projects are not really comparable as they might have different
characteristics. Therefore, even though such difference in outcome rating might be statistically
significant2 , it does not indicate any causal relationship between the project using additional
financing and the final project outcome.


1The list of the 32 projects is in Annex 1.
2The t-test shows that there might be a difference at the 10% significance level on the projects’ performance (measured by the
percentage of projects getting an MS rating) between the additional financing project and project without additional financing.

                                                                                                                                  i
SUMMARY


2.     Not all projects maintained their performance after getting the additional financing
resources; 13 percent (or four projects) had moderately unsatisfactory or below outcome
ratings at project closure. At the additional financing approval stage, all the 32 projects met the
“well-performing” criteria of having Implementation Progress (IP) and Development Objective
(DO) rating as being Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory with regards to the project progress and
the likely achievement of their development objectives. It was expected that these projects would
maintain their good performance after obtaining the additional financing resources. However, at
project closing, four (13%) had significant or major shortcomings in achieving their development
objectives so were rated as Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU) or below. More specifically,

        14 out of 15 projects which used additional financing for scale up substantially
         achieved their development objectives. Out of the 15 projects that requested additional
         financing for scaling up the project activities, one third updated their PDO statement while
         13 of them reflected the scale up activities in the output/intermediate outcome indicators
         with revised targets. A few of them updated the outcome indicators as well. At project
         closing, 14 of them had their development objectives substantially achieved and activities
         completed as against the revised output targets.
        16 out of 19 project which used additional financing to cover project cost overrun
         substantially achieved their development objectives. Two of the 19 projects used
         additional financing for scale up as well so had their project development objectives updated
         at the AF stage. The rest did not update the development objectives because they were
         supposed to achieve their original development objectives with the assistance of the
         additional financing resources. At the closing stage, three projects failed to achieve their
         development objectives.
3.     Out of the total of 32 projects, 20 of them achieved modest project efficiency at the
closing stage. It was noted that at the AF stage, the updated economic analyses indicated that all
the projects remained economically viable (above the 12 percent or the 10 percent threshold) even
with increased project cost. The low project efficiency was mainly due to project implementation
inefficiencies which usually included but were not limited to:

        A substantial cost increase. On average, the final project cost of the cost-overrun projects was
         about 163 percent of the original estimate. In comparison, for those 91 projects without
         additional financing, the final cost was 124% of the original estimated project cost. The
         review found that in the cost overrun cases, the project cost increase could sometimes be
         attributed to external factors such as fuel, labor, material cost increases and/or local currency
         fluctuation, however in many cases they were due to internal factors such as deficiency in
         engineering design and poor management of bidding process and contracts, which in turn
         translated into higher project costs and a lengthy project implementation period impairing
         the project’s efficiency.
        A prolonged project implementation period. On average, the project implementation period was
         about 8.6 years, 8.1 years and 6.5 years for scale up, cost overrun and for the 91 project
         without additional financing, respectively. While the longer implementation period for the
         scale up project was necessary to enable the completion of the additional activities, the


ii
                                                                                                         SUMMARY

         longer implementation period for the cost overrun projects to complete the original scope of
         work would inevitably affect the project efficiency negatively.
        The projects cost more but delivered less (qualitatively or quantitatively). There were cases in which the
         projects cost more but produced less outputs than planned, or the quality of the outputs was
         below standard. As a result, the benefits generated by the project interventions could not
         compensate for the cost increase, leading to lower project efficiency.

4.     Even the well performing additional financing projects are facing challenges
achieving their institutional objectives. As often observed in infrastructure projects in general,
the additional financing projects were doing well in improving the transport infrastructure but the
projects’ achievements on institutional development varied. This indicates that even the additional
time and resources are often not sufficient or efficiently used to address institutional strengthening
objectives.

5.      There was no strong correlation between the number or the timing of the AF and the
final outcome of the project. The performance of those projects with only one additional financing
during their life cycle was not statistically different from the performance of those projects with more
than one additional financing. Similarly, there was no detectable difference in performance pattern
between the ones that requested AF early and those who did this at a later stage. This does not imply
anything about causality, since the sample was small and furthermore the projects were unlikely to be
comparable due to selection bias.

6.      Not revising PDOs or project design in the face of implementation challenges can
represent a missed opportunity especially at the time of AF when such changes can be more
easily processed. All the six projects which revised their PDOs at the AF stage substantially achieved
their objectives and had moderately satisfactory or satisfactory outcomes at project closing. For those
26 projects which did not revise their PDOs, four of them had moderately unsatisfactory or
unsatisfactory outcomes. One of these four projects could have benefited from a revision of its PDOs;
the other three projects which suffered from implementation inefficiencies may have benefited from a
change in the design and/or implementation of the AF activities.

7.       27 projects had their M&E framework rated as “Modest”. Though almost all the scale up
projects and some of the cost overrun projects updated their M&E framework at the additional
financing stage, most of the revision was done at the output/intermediate outcome indicator level.
The modest M&E rating was mainly due to the fact that the project outcome indicators could not
sufficiently or accurately measure the achievement of project development objectives, or the
achievement of the indicator targets could not be attributed to the project. This suggested that the
additional financing stage is not fully utilized as an opportunity to improve the projects’ result-
frameworks.




                                                                                                                iii
SUMMARY


The main lessons drawn from the finding
1.     At the project preparation stage, focusing on the engineering design is important to
avoid substantial cost overrun at the implementation stage and the associated transaction
costs of processing the AF. Specific measures could include:

        Allocate sufficient time and budget for the pre-construction activities including preparation
         and detailed review of engineering designs, such as, the up to date design with current cost
         information, the more accurate projection of the civil work inputs cost variation trend, and a
         thorough engineering survey to make sure that there was no big omission or defect in the
         engineering design. All these measures could help avoid cost overruns and delays in
         implementation.
        Update the engineer's estimates at the market value at the time of appraisal and allow
         adequate premium to cover for the procurement delays.
        Try to avoid the time lag between the project preparation and implementation to reduce the
         likelihood of a financing gap due to higher bid prices.
2.     More caution is needed when using AF to scale up complex projects or projects
experiencing implementation issues. For complex projects, it would be helpful to assess whether
the implementing agency has the capacity to complete the additional activities and ensure that the
works financed by the AF can be effectively implemented within the remaining life of the project.
Carefully thinking through the rationale for AF when planning to scale up a project that is
experiencing implementation challenges can help to avoid later problems. Both options of either not
going ahead with the AF or designing the AF activities differently to respond to anticipated
challenges should be considered. As noted earlier, achievements on institutional development under
AF have varied; this would suggest the need to consider the extent to which AF can provide
sufficient time and resources for this objective and/or be designed and implemented in a way that
can support its efficient achievement.

3.    The additional financing stage is a good opportunity to refine the project result
framework and the project team should make good use of this opportunity. A good results
framework should link the project actions with outputs and the achievement of objectives. The
definition of the project development objectives should reflect all project components. If during
implementation it becomes clear that the framework needs revision, this should be done formally as
soon as possible. The additional activities to be financed by the additional financing should be fully
integrated into the monitoring and evaluation system so as to ensure adequate supervision of these
activities.




iv
Background and Context
Bank’s Additional Financing policy
In May 2005, the Bank adopted a new policy and new procedures on Additional
Financing (OP/BP 13.20) for investment lending, replacing the previous policy on
supplemental financing. The change in policy had three objectives: to (a) scale up the
impact and effectiveness of the Bank’s development assistance; (b) reduce transaction
costs to borrowers and the Bank; and (c) realign the Bank’s policies with borrower
needs, the results agenda, and the evolving design and programmatic focus of
investment lending.

In March 2012 this policy was revised. According to the revised OP/BP13.20, the Bank
may provide additional financing, beyond the amount specified in the Loan Agreement,
for an investment project under implementation to finance (a) completion of the
original project activities in the event of an unanticipated financing gap or a cost
overrun; (b) activities that scale up a project’s impact and development effectiveness;
and/or (c) modified project activities included as part of project restructuring when the
original loan amount is insufficient to cover such activities.

The Bank Policy OP10.00 set the requirements for using the additional financing.
Paragraph 29 of OP 10.00 states: “The Bank may provide additional financing to an
ongoing, well-performing Project…” and “well-performing” is defined as follows: ISR
ratings for implementation progress (IP) and development objectives (DO) have been
consistently rated as moderately satisfactory or better over the most recent 12 months.
The policy also requires the projects to have substantial compliance with key loan
covenants, including audit and financial management reporting requirements. For those
projects that do not meet the “well-performing” criteria, additional financing is
provided on a case by case base. OP/BP 13.20 also states that an economic justification
is required when requesting additional financing.

Bank-Wide Additional Financing Portfolio Overview

During FY2006-14, the Board approved 608 additional financing operations3 at the total
volume of US$32.7 billion, which represented 15 percent of the total commitment of all




3OP and BP 13.20, Additional Financing for Investment Lending apply to additional loans considered by the Executive Directors
on or after June 1, 2005
                                                                                                                            1
  BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT


  the investment projects approved during the same period4. The distribution of the AF
  operations broken down into the Global Practices (GPs) is shown in Table 1.

  Table 1: The Distribution of the AFs among GPs
                                                                                                          WB Investment
                                 Additional Financing             Percentage (%) 
                                                                                                            Lending
                                                              Number                 Active     Closed 
       Global Practice                      Commitment                   Commitment                      Number  Commitment 
                               Number                          of AF                 Project    Project 
                                              Amount                       Amount                          of      Amount 
                              of Project                      project 
                                               (M$)                          (%)                         Project    (M$) 
                                                                (%) 
Transport and ICT                 99               7,707        16%           24%       56        43      355           48,998
Agriculture                       59               2,254        10%           7%        33        26      228          15,827 
Energy and Extractives            67               4,380        11%           13%       37        30      254          34,148 
Education                         36               2,178        6%            7%        10        26      194          16,377 
Environment and Natural 
                                                                2%            1%                          74            4,428 
Resources                         15                 443                                 7        8 
Finance and Markets               21               1,835        3%            6%         9        12      90            8,718 
Governance                        21                 447        3%            1%        12        9       130           5,504 
Health, Nutrition, and 
                                                                10%           5%                          204          14,315 
Population                        58               1,772                                26        32 
Macroeconomic and Fiscal 
                                                                0%            0%                          13               419 
Management                         1                     5                               1          
Poverty                            2                     33     0%            0%         1        1       10               227 
Social Protection and 
                                                                9%            12%                         148          15,420 
Labor                             55               4,035                                22        33 
Trade and 
                                                                2%            3%                          63            5,114 
Competitiveness                   10                 941                                 5        5 
Social, Urban, Rural, and 
                                                                16%           11%                         343          26,003 
Resilience                        95               3,677                                37        58 
Water                             69               2,998        11%           9%        33       36       243          22,147 
Total                             608             32,705       100%          100%       289      319     2349         217,644 
  Information source: the Business Intelligence


  From the table, one can see that the Transport & ICT GP had the largest share of the AF
  operations both in terms of number and the commitment of the AF operations, followed
  by the Energy and Extractives GP. There was a spike of the AF commitment in FY10-11
  (Figure 1), which could possibly be explained by the Bank’s increased support to clients
  affected negatively by the global financial crisis.

  The information generated from the Bank Business Intelligence showed that the
  majority of the AF operations (75 percent) were for project scale up, followed by 49
  percent for cost overrun. In many cases, one AF operation was used for covering both
  scale up and cost overrun.



  4
      Information source: Business Intelligence

  2
                                                                                                                             BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT


           Figure 1: The Trend of the Bank Wide AFs
                                                                                                100
                                          8                                             94                                       100

              Commitment Amount (B US$)
                                          7




                                                                                                                                       Number of AF project
                                                                                80
                                                                                                                          72
                                                                                                                                 80
                                          6
                                                                 62     63                                 57
                                          5                                                                      59              60
                                          4




                                                                                                 7.1 
                                                                                         6.3 
                                          3                                                                                      40




                                                                                                          4.5 
                                                                                 4.1 
                                          2            16




                                                                                                                  3.1 


                                                                                                                          3.0 
                                                  5                                                                              20




                                                                         2.0 
                                                                 1.9 
                                          1
                                                       0.8 
                                               0.1 




                                          0                                                                                      0
                                              2005    2006      2007    2008    2009    2010    2011    2012     2013    2014

                                                              Commitment Amount (B $US)                 No. of AF projects

           Source: Business Intelligence



Rationale, Purpose, and Methodology
While a large portion of the Banks’ financial resources is being deployed every year
through the relatively quick and easy processing of the AF instrument, very few
reviews have been found on the performance of these AF operations.

This learning product was prepared to assess the performance of the AF operations and
draw lessons from their implementation experience. The AF operation in the Transport
and ICT GP was selected as the first batch of operations to review because of its large
share in lending volume, and because there is an existing AF study conducted by the
former Transport Anchor5 which the review could rely to verify the AF portfolio.

The assessment first involved a portfolio review of the 99 AF projects supporting 81
parent projects mapped to the Transport and ICT GP to understand their trends and
composition. The portfolio review also included the key assessments made at AF stage,
such as those related to the development objectives, economic analysis, and M&E
framework.

Secondly, a more detailed review of the 32 closed and rated (by IEG) AF operations was
conducted to test the main hypotheses/assumptions to be investigated, and to generate
findings and lessons from their implementation experiences. The three main
hypotheses/assumptions to be examined are:




5“Additional Financing Mechanism in Transport: Trends, structure, and recommendations on its use”, which reviewed the AF
portfolio in Transport Sector (FY2007-2013)

                                                                                                                                                              3
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT


#1. A project which met the “well-performing” criteria when the additional financing
was requested would maintain its good performance after getting the additional
financing resource.

#2. The projects requesting additional financing for scale up would achieve more
outputs and/or outcomes than the original projects.

#3. The project efficiency would be reduced as a result of higher project cost unless the
benefits were also higher.

The analysis will be based on the review of relevant documents, including the
Additional Financing Project Papers, as well as the Implementation Completion and
Results Reports (ICRs) and IEG’s ICR Reviews. The outcome rating of the closed
projects was used as a proxy for the projects’ performance. This study is not intended to
be an evaluation of the AF instrument or its effectiveness at the corporate level, but
rather aims to enhance the understanding of the way it has been used and how it has
affected the project outcomes, through reviewing a subset of the AF portfolio for which
the relevant data was readily available. The limitation of having only 32 projects from
which to infer is noted.

Additional Financing Portfolio of the Transport and ICT Global Practice

During FY2006-2014, in total 99 AF operations in the amount of US$7.8 billion were
approved to support the implementation of 81 parent projects which had an original
commitment of US$12.3 billion. The AF commitment in the Transport and ICT GP was
equivalent to about 63 percent of the total commitment of the parent projects, and 25
percent of the total investment lending approved during the same period.

The AF as a proportion of the parent projects’ commitment varies from 10 to 350
percent. 16 projects out of a total of 81 parent projects had more than one AF during
their life cycle.

AF in the Transport and ICT GP experienced an increase in FY2010- 2011, similar to the
Bank wide trend (Figure 2). The distribution of the 99 AF operations was 49 percent for
cost overrun, 61 percent for scale up and 12 percent for restructuring6.

Sector wise, AF was used mostly for Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways. Over
FY06- FY14, 52 percent of all AF commitment were made for the said sub-sector. The
urban transport sub-sector represented 14 percent of AF commitment, while 18 percent


6There were occasions where one AF served multiple purposes, which explains why the total percentage was more than 100
percent.

4
                                                               BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT


of AF commitment were requested for Railways projects. Ports and Aviation each
counted for about 3 percent of the total AF commitment.

The average timing of the 99 AFs approvals was about 4 years into implementation
with huge variation between projects, ranging from 0.35 years to 9.95 years into
implementation.




                                                                                   5
BACKGROUND AND CONTEXT


          Figure 2: The Trend of the AFs in the Transport and ICT GP
                                                                                       24

            Commitment Amount (MUS$)
                                        1,800                                                                         24




                                                                                                                           Number of AF project
                                        1,500                                                                         20

                                        1,200                                14                                       16
                                                        12




                                                                                       1,710 
                                                                      12
                                         900                                                                          12
                                                                                                          10




                                                                              1,224 
                                                               7                                                9
                                         600                                                        7                 8




                                                                                                        968 
                                                                      805 
                                                 4




                                                                                                               617 
                                                        601 




                                                                                                 890 
                                                               515 
                                                 377 

                                         300                                                                          4

                                           ‐                                                                          0
                                                2006    2007 2008 2009 2010 2011                2012 2013 2014
                                                          Commitment Amount (M$US)              No. of AF projects
          Source: Business Intelligence


The review of the AF project papers for the 99 AFs found that the updated Economic
Internal Rate of Returns (EIRRs) were all above the Bank’s threshold of 12 percent. The
most commonly used methodology/model for economic analysis was HDM47/RED
modal 8. Sometimes, cost effectiveness analysis was applied. However, in a few cases,
such as the Georgia Highway Improvement Project, the economic analysis was not
updated, instead, the project team used the sensitivity study for the original project to
estimate the EIRR. The review also found that not all projects had a detailed economic
analysis presented in the Annex of their Project Papers, thus making it difficult to
understand why some projects were still economically viable when the cost was much
higher than the one originally estimated, unless the benefits are high enough to
compensate for the increased cost.

The review also found that about 1/3 of the projects updated their project development
objectives at the additional financing stage to reflect the additional activities to be
financed or refine the original PDO statement. For the remaining projects which did not
formally revised the PDO statements, about a quarter of them updated the M&E
framework either by changing the targets of some indicators or adding the required
sector core indicators such as the percentage of roads in good or fair conditions, the
percentage of rural population with access to a whole season road, or similar.




7 Road Economic Decision (RED) modal performs an economic evaluation of road investments and maintenance alternatives for
low traffic roads such as rural roads.
8
  Highway Development and Management Modal (HDM)-4 is a software package and associated documentation which is used
as the primary tool for the analysis, planning, management and appraisal of road maintenance, improvements and investment
decisions.

6
Main Findings and Lessons
Main Findings
As of June 30, 2014, out of the 81 parent projects which utilized altogether 99 AFs, 34
had been closed (listed in Annex 1). Since the ICRs for two projects9 are not yet
available, this analysis is based on the 32 projects for which both ICRs and ICR reviews
have been completed. The performance of these 32 additional financing projects,
compared with those 91 T&I GP projects without additional financing but closed in the
same period as those 32 projects is summarized in the Table 2 below.

Table 2: Performances of the projects with and without AF
      IEG Outcome       Number of             Percentage as of         Number of              Percentage as
      rating            projects with AF      the total projects       projects without       of the total
                                                                       AF                     projects
      MU or below                4                    13%                     28                    27%
      MS                        19                    59%                     63                    48%
      S or HS                    9                    28%                     32                    25%
      Total                     32                    100%                    91                   100%
Data source: IEG ICRR Database

The comparison found that the projects with additional financing performed better
than those 91 projects without additional financing. 87 percent of the 32 projects with
additional financing in the Transport and ICT GP were rated Moderately Satisfactory
(MS) or above, indicating that these projects did not have significant shortcomings in
achieving their development objectives, in efficiency and in relevance. In comparison,
73 percent of the 91 projects in T&I GP without additional financing but closed in the
same period as those 32 projects received an MS or above outcome rating. It is
important to note that these two groups of projects are not really comparable as they
might have different characteristics. While such a difference in outcome rating might be
statistically significant, it does not indicate any causal relationship between a project
accessing additional financing and a better overall project performance.

Not all projects maintained their performance after getting the additional financing
resources; 13 percent (or four projects) had moderately unsatisfactory or below
outcome rating at project closure. At the additional financing approval stage, all the 32
projects met the “well-performing” criteria of having Development Objective (DO) and
Implementation Progress (IP) rating as being Satisfactory or Moderately Satisfactory
with regards to the project progress and the likely achievement of their development

9
    Liberia Emergency Infrastructure Project and Zambia Road Rehabilitation and Maintenance Project.

                                                                                                              7
MAIN FINDINGS AND LESSONS


objectives. It was expected that these projects should maintain their good performance
after getting additional financing resources. However, at project closing only nine
(28%) substantially achieved their development objectives in an efficient manner and
got Satisfactory (S) or above outcome rating; 19 (59%) projects had moderate
shortcoming in achieving their development objectives and/or in efficiency and got MS
rating, and four 10(13%) had significant or major shortcomings in achieving their
development objectives so were rated Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU) or below.
Hypothesis#1 does not appear to be fully supported by the evidence.

All the four MU or below projects self-rated their IP and DO progress as being
Satisfactory when the additional financing was requested. At project closing, all the
projects achieved Moderately Unsatisfactory or below outcome ratings as they had
significant shortcomings in achieving their project development objectives (the details
of these projects are presented in Annex 2). While there were project specific reasons for
such outcomes, one might also question whether the MS or above rating was a result of
an inflated performance assessment at the time of the AF request, especially when
there is no clear methodology for performance rating of the project while it is still
under implementation. More specifically,

    14 out of 15 projects which used additional financing for scale up substantially
     achieved their development objectives. Out of the 15 projects that requested
     additional financing for scaling up project activities, one third of them updated their
     PDO statement, 13 of them reflected the scale up activities in the
     output/intermediate outcome indicators with revised targets. A few of them
     updated the outcome indicators as well. At project closing, 14 of them had their
     development objectives rated as substantially achieved and the activities completed
     against the revised output targets. There is hence evidence in support of
     hypothesis#2 but more at the output/intermediate outcome level than at the
     outcome level.

    16 out of 19 project which used additional financing to cover project cost overrun
     substantially achieved their development objectives. The rational for requesting
     additional financing to cover the project cost overrun was that without the
     additional resources, the project could not complete its planned activities, thereby
     jeopardizing the achievement of the project development objectives. Therefore, it is
     reasonable to say that in the cost overrun cases, the AF played a critical role in
     ensuring that the projects had sufficient resources to substantially achieve their
     project development objectives. Out of a total 19 cost overrun cases, two of them

 These four projects are: Croatia Rijeka Gateway Project, Ethiopia Road project, Thailand
10

Highway Management Project and the Jordan Amman Development Corridor Project.

8
                                                                            MAIN FINDINGS AND LESSONS


    used additional financing for scale up as well (i.e. they had their project
    development objectives updated at the AF stage). The rest did not update the
    development objectives because they were supposed to achieve their original
    development objectives with the assistance of the additional financing resources.
    At closing, three projects were not successful in achieving the project development
    objectives. There were other projects that achieved (highly) satisfactory outcome
    ratings such as the two examples listed in the Box 1.



 Box 1: Examples of AF projects which had (highly) satisfactory outcomes despite
 significant cost overruns
 For Vietnam 3rd Rural Transport project, the actual cost was 78 percent higher than
 originally estimated. Using the same methodology at appraisal with updated costs and
 benefits conducted for all 482 appraised project roads (ICR, p.16, 36), the overall ex-post
 EIRR of all sub-project roads in 33 provinces is estimated at 43% as compared to the ex-
 ante EIRR above 28% in that scenario (ICR, 16; PAD p. 15). The higher than estimated
 EIRR was mainly due to the high savings in vehicle operating costs and travel time.
 For Egypt Airport Development Project, actual cost was 23 percent higher than
 originally budgeted. The project performed well after getting the additional financial
 resources and achieved Highly Satisfactory outcome rating. The project efficiency was
 also high. Because of the higher than expected traffic growth, the individual ERRs for
 Cairo International and Sharm El Sheikh airports were 17.2% and 37.8% at closure,
 exceeding the estimates of 16.2% and 28.0%.
 Source: The Additional Financing Study Team




Out of a total of 32 projects, 20 of them achieved modest project efficiency at the
closing stage. Poor project implementation efficiency was cited as the most common
reason for the low project efficiency. The implementation inefficiency usually included
but was not limited to:

        i) A substantial cost increase. On average, for the cost-overrun projects, the final cost was
           about 163 percent of the original estimated project cost. In comparison, for those 91
           projects without additional financing, the final cost was 124% of the original
           estimated project cost. The review found that in the cost overrun cases, the project
           cost increase sometimes could be attributed to external factors such as fuel, labor,
           material cost increases and/or local currency fluctuation. However, in many cases
           the cost increases were due to internal factors such as deficiency in engineering
           designs, and poor management of bidding processes and contracts, which in turn
           translated into higher project costs and lengthy project implementation period.


                                                                                                    9
MAIN FINDINGS AND LESSONS


       ii) A prolonged project implementation period. On average, the project implementation
            period was about 8.6 years, 8.1 years and 6.5 years for scale up, cost overrun and for
            the 91 project without additional financing, respectively. While the longer
            implementation period for the scale up projects was necessary to enable the
            completion of the additional activities, the longer implementation period for the cost
            overrun projects to complete the original scope of work would inevitably affect the
            project efficiency negatively.
       iii) Poor quality of work or reduced scope of output at higher cost. There were some cases
            where the project cost more but delivered less in terms of quantity and/or quality.
            For example, the final cost of the Pakistan Highway Rehabilitation Project was about
            double the original estimate, which seems high even after controlling for price
            increases in key inputs. Yet, the elevated costs at the end did not secure the quality of
            the works, as evident in localized distress and early need for repairs (ICR, p. 46-47,
            51).
       iv) Lower project benefit which could not compensate for the higher cost. There were some
            cases in which the benefits generated by the project were lower than those originally
            projected. The Cape Verde Road Sector Support Project had two additional financing
            agreements of a total of $15 million on top of the $15 million originally provided by
            the Bank. At project closure, the actual traffic volume was lower than that projected,
            and the lower traffic volume combined with higher actual project costs resulted in
            below the benchmark (12%) project EIRR, i.e, a 5% EIRR for the Ribeira Brava-
            Tarrafal road improvement as compared with the 16% EIRR estimate at the project
            appraisal stage. All the above issues would lead to reduced project benefits hence
            negatively affect the project efficiency.
Overall, it seems the evidence comes out in support of hypothesis#3.


Even the well performing Additional Financing projects are facing challenges
achieving their institutional objectives. The review found that all projects rated as
moderately satisfactory or above achieved their objectives related to the transport
infrastructure improvement which would consequently lead to improved accessibility
and mobility. There were however variations in the achievement of their institutional
development objectives. About eight projects had specific institutional development
sub-objectives, but five of them did not substantially achieve these objectives. Those
that involved private sector participation in operations and management experienced
issues as in the case of Brazil Rio De Janeiro Mass Transit Project which could not
realize the planned investment by the private sector, and consequently failed to achieve
the institutional objective.

Institutional integration agendas are difficult, political and often take longer than the
conventional project cycle suggests. Even the well performing projects which receive
10
                                                                           MAIN FINDINGS AND LESSONS


additional financing have often failed to set realistic institutional reform objectives, and
fail to achieve them within the extended implementation period. An example of this is
the Sierra Leone Infrastructure Development Project within which considerable efforts
went into drafting the reform bill for the creation of the new institutions. Even with
parliamentary approval, the low capacity in the country made it difficult to make the
new agencies function, long after project effectiveness.

The study did not find a strong correlation between the number or the timing of the
AF and the final outcome of the project. Six projects out of a total of 32 closed and
rated projects had more than one AF during their life cycle. Of these, five of them
achieved MS or above final outcome rating, as compared with the 88 percent of MS or
above outcome rating of those projects with only one additional financing during the
life cycle. Similarly, there was no detectable difference in performance pattern between
the ones that requested AF early and those who did this at a later stage. (Table 3 shows
the outcome ratings of the projects and the timing of the AFs). The timing of the AF did
not seem to have an implication on the project’s final outcome either. This does not
imply anything about causality however, since the sample was small and furthermore
the projects were unlikely to be comparable due to selection bias.

Table 3: Projects performance and the timing of the AFs
    Years into implementation            Outcome as MS or above   Outcome as MU or below
     when AF was approved                         (%)                      (%)
   Less than four years                           87%                      13%
   Between 4-6 years                              90%                      10%
   More than 6 years                              86%                      14%
Source: IEG ICRR database and project team’s estimate

Not revising PDOs or project design in the face of implementation challenges can
represent a missed opportunity especially at the time of AF when such changes can
be more easily processed. The study found that out of the 32 closed and rated projects,
six projects had their PDOs revised at the AF stage. All the six projects substantially
achieved their objectives and had moderately satisfactory or satisfactory outcomes at
project closing. For those 26 projects which did not revise their PDOs, four of them had
moderately unsatisfactory or unsatisfactory outcomes. Out of the four projects, the
Jordan Amman Development Corridor Project had PDOs that were too ambitious and
could have benefited from a revision of its PDOs; the other three projects were rated in
the unsatisfactory range mainly due to project implementation inefficiencies and may
have benefited from a change in the design and/or implementation of the AF activities.

27 projects had their M&E framework rated as “Modest”. Though almost all the scale
up projects and some of the cost overrun projects updated their M&E framework at the
additional financing stage, most of the revision was done at the output/intermediate

                                                                                                 11
MAIN FINDINGS AND LESSONS


outcome indicator level. Only five projects out of the total of 32 closed projects had their
M&E framework rated as “Substantial”. 27 projects had their M&E framework rated as
“Modest”, which suggests that the AF opportunity was not been sufficiently utilized by
teams to improve the project M&E frameworks. The shortcomings included: the
additional activities to be financed by AF were often not integrated into the M&E
system so as to ensure adequate monitoring of their results; and the project outcome
indicators could not sufficiently or accurately measure the achievement of project
development objectives, or the achievement of the targets could not be attributed to the
project. In a few cases, the overall M&E framework was rated as modest due to the poor
implementation or the low utilization of the M&E framework, such as for the Columbia
Integrated Mass Transit System Project, which had a well-designed M&E framework,
but for which implementation was not regular and the data were not very reliable.


Main Lessons
At project preparation stage, focusing on engineering design is important to avoid
substantial cost overrun at implementations stage and associated transaction cost of
processing the AF. Specific measures could include:

        Allocate sufficient time and budget for the pre-construction activities including
         preparation and detailed review of engineering designs, such as, the up to date
         design with current cost information, the more accurate projection of the civil
         work inputs cost variation trend, and thorough engineering survey to make sure
         that there was no big omission or defect in the engineering design. All these
         measures could help avoid cost overruns and delays in implementation.
        Update the engineer's estimates at the market value at the time of appraisal and
         allow adequate premium to cover for the procurement delays.
        Try to avoid the time lag between the project preparation and implementation
         to reduce the likelihood of financing gap due to higher bid prices.

More caution is needed when using AF to scale up complex projects or projects
experiencing implementation issues. For complex projects, it would be helpful to
assess whether the implementing agency has the capacity to complete the additional
activities and ensure that the works financed by the AF can be effectively implemented
within the remaining life of the project. Carefully thinking through the rationale for AF
when planning to scale up a project that is experiencing implementation challenges can
help to avoid later problems. Both options of either not going ahead with the AF or
designing the AF activities differently to respond to anticipated challenges should be
considered. As noted earlier, achievements on institutional development under AF have
varied; this would suggest the need to consider the extent to which AF can provide

12
                                                                     MAIN FINDINGS AND LESSONS


sufficient time and resources for this objective and/or be designed and implemented in
a way that can support its efficient achievement.

The additional financing stage is a good opportunity to refine the project result
framework and the project team should make good use of this opportunity. A good
results framework should link the project actions with outputs and the achievement of
objectives. The definition of the project development objectives should reflect all project
components. If during implementation, it becomes clear that the framework needs
revision this should be done formally as soon as possible. The additional activities to be
financed by the additional financing should be fully integrated into the monitoring and
evaluation system so as to ensure adequate supervision of these activities.


Areas for Further Investigation
The review also leads to some interesting questions that could be used to further
investigate the effectiveness of additional financing as an instrument, in a possible
follow on evaluation by IEG:

       What are the main contributors of the better outcome rating for those projects
        with additional financing? In addition to the additional financing resource
        provided to the project, were there other factors that contributed to the
        improved outcome ratings of additional financing operations?
       A large proportion (about 59%) of the projects with additional financing had
        Moderately Satisfactory outcome ratings, which indicated that that the projects
        achieved their objectives but at the cost of the project efficiency. A question to be
        asked is whether using the additional financing to support the existing project
        meets the best value for money principle for the Bank’s financial resources?
       As the study noted, there were cases in which the additional financing failed to
        achieve good outcome ratings, even though all these projects were assessed as in
        compliance with the Bank’s additional financing policy OP10.00 and were
        considered as being “well-performing” and “economically viable” at the
        additional financing approval stage. Are there perverse incentives to
        misrepresent the performance at the AF approval stage, and can this be
        mitigated? Should the Bank redefine the term, “well-performing” or
        “economically viable” projects and raise the bar to qualify for additional
        financing?




                                                                                           13
                                                                        ANNEX1: LIST OF THE 34 CLOSED PROJECTS


Annex1: List of the 34 Closed Projects

                                                                    Closing date                                         Lending 
          Par                                           Approval                              Approval 
No.                Proj ID      Project Name                         for parent     Region                  Country      Amount 
        Proj ID                                           Date                                  FY 
                                                                       Project                                           (M US$) 
 1                       LIFELINE ROADS 2nd Addl. 
       P115486  P121287  Fin.                      7/15/2010        12/31/2013       ECA       2011       Armenia          40 
 2   P115486  P116760  Lifeline Roads ‐ Add Fin        8/27/2009    12/31/2013       ECA       2010       Armenia          37 
 3                     PG‐ (Supplement) Road                                                              Papua New 
     P004397  P102792  Maint. and Rehab                4/26/2007    6/30/2012        EAP       2007       Guinea           37 
 4                     AF: National Emergency 
     P103343  P118828  Rural Access‐AF                 12/16/2010  12/31/2013        SAR       2011       Afghanistan      40 
 5                     LR: EIP ‐ Additional 
     P100160  P117005  Financing                       6/30/2009    12/31/2012       AFR       2009       Liberia          8 
 6                     LR‐EIP Supplemental ERL 
     P100160  P103276  (FY07)                          10/26/2006  12/31/2012        AFR       2007       Liberia          17 
 7                     HT (AF) Transport 
     P095523  P114059  Additional Financing            12/8/2009    7/30/2013        LCR       2010       Haiti            12 
 8                     HIGHWAY IMPROVEMENT 
     P094044  P107610  2 ADDL. FINANCING               10/30/2008  6/30/2012         ECA       2009       Georgia          20 
 9                     CV ‐ RSSP Second 
     P087004  P112767  Additional Financing            4/5/2011     6/30/2013        AFR       2011       Cabo Verde       10 
 10                    CV‐Road Sec. Sup. Proj. 
     P087004  P110773  Additional Finan                6/26/2008    6/30/2013        AFR       2008       Cabo Verde       5 
 11  P010556  P099040  PK: Highways Rehab              12/1/2005    6/30/2013        SAR       2006       Pakistan        100 
 12                      PK: Highways 
       P010556  P100155  Rehabilitation Project        3/29/2006    6/30/2013        SAR       2006       Pakistan         65 
 13                      PK: Highways 
       P010556  P123311  Rehabilitation Project‐AF     9/28/2010    6/30/2013        SAR       2011       Pakistan        130 
 14                      Secondary and Local 
       P086277  P114365  Roads Pr:  Ad.Fin             3/19/2009    6/30/2012        ECA       2009       Georgia          70 
 15                      NP:Rural Access (RAIDP) ‐ 
       P083923  P107853  AF                            12/17/2009  12/31/2013        SAR       2010       Nepal            45 
 16                      Emerg Customs & Trade 
       P083906  P114572  Faci Add Fina                 5/26/2009    12/31/2010       SAR       2009       Afghanistan      7 
 17                      First East West Highway ‐ 
       P083110  P117860  AF                            11/10/2009  6/30/2013         ECA       2010       Georgia          28 
 18                      AR BA Urb Transport Add'l 
       P039584  P104984  Financ                        3/27/2007    6/30/2011        LCR       2007       Argentina       100 
 19                      ET‐Road Sec. Dev. Prgm. 
       P082998  P117644  Ph.2 Add'l Fin.               5/27/2010    6/30/2012        AFR       2010       Ethiopia        100 
 20                      ET‐Road Sec Dev Pro II 
       P082998  P099480  Supl APL (FY06)               6/22/2006    6/30/2012        AFR       2006       Ethiopia         87 
 21                      EG‐AIRPORTS DEV                                                                  Egypt, Arab 
       P082914  P105750  ADDITIONAL FINANCING          4/24/2008    6/30/2009       MNA        2008       Republic of      40 
 22                      MG‐Transport Inf. Invst 
       P082806  P105044  APL ‐ AF (FY07)               5/22/2007    6/30/2012        AFR       2007       Madagascar       16 
 23                      CO (AF II) Integrated Mass 
       P082466  P114325  Transit Syst                  8/4/2009     12/31/2012       LCR       2010       Colombia        300 
 24                      CO (AF)Integrated Mass 
       P082466  P101356  Transit System                6/12/2007    12/31/2012       LCR       2007       Colombia        207 
 25                      JO ‐ Amman Dev Corridor 
       P081505  P110954  Add'l Financing               12/4/2008    12/31/2012      MNA        2009       Jordan           33 
 26                      VN ‐SUPP‐ Mkg Transp & 
       P042927  P105120  Flood Protection              6/20/2007    6/30/2011        EAP       2007       Vietnam          25 

14
ANNEX1: LIST OF THE 34 CLOSED PROJECTS

                                                                  Closing date                                         Lending 
          Par                                         Approval                              Approval 
 No.               Proj ID     Project Name                        for parent     Region                  Country      Amount 
        Proj ID                                         Date                                  FY 
                                                                     Project                                           (M US$) 
 27  P043195  P105238  GATEWAY(ADDTL FNCG)           5/30/2007    9/30/2012        ECA       2007       Croatia             48 
 28                    SL IDP Transport 
     P078389  P110968  Additional Financing          6/19/2008    9/13/2013        AFR       2008       Sierra Leone        11 
 29  P043421  P106427  BR (AF‐C)RJ Mass Transit      2/12/2008    6/30/2009        LCR       2008       Brazil              44 
 30                    WS‐Suppl Infra  Asset 
     P075523  P091025  Mgmt Additional Fi            6/19/2007    6/30/2013        EAP       2007       Samoa               8 
 31                    VN‐3rd Rural Transport‐
     P075407  P113498  Add Fin                       12/15/2011  6/30/2014         EAP       2012       Vietnam             97 
 32                    TRANSPORT REHAB ‐ 
     P075207  P096206  ADDITIONAL FINANCING          6/20/2007    9/30/2012        ECA       2007       Serbia              50 
 33                    TH: Highways 
     P075173  P112918  Management Project AF         3/18/2010    6/30/2013        EAP       2010       Thailand            79 
 34                    NG‐Lagos Urban Transp. 
     P074963  P102029  Add'l Fin  (FY07)             4/10/2007    12/31/2010       AFR       2007       Nigeria             50 
 35                    IN: TN Road  Add 
     P050649  P118981  Financing                     3/30/2010    3/31/2012        SAR       2010       India               51 
 36                    BF‐Transp. Sec. Additional 
     P074030  P121033  Financing                     9/30/2010    3/31/2013        AFR       2011       Burkina Faso        16 
 37                    ZM:Road Rehab 
                       Maintenance Add'l 
     P071985  P120723  Financin                      10/14/2010  6/30/2014         AFR       2011       Zambia              15 
 38                    ZM‐RRMP Additional 
     P071985  P093611  Financing (FY07)              3/29/2007    6/30/2014        AFR       2007       Zambia              25 
 39  P071435  P110281  BD: Rur Trans Improv ‐AF      1/10/2008    6/30/2012        SAR       2008       Bangladesh          20 
 40                    IN: Mizoram Roads AF II‐
     P069889  P122371  AF                            10/21/2010  12/31/2010        SAR       2011       India               13 
 41                    Mizoram Roads ‐ 
     P069889  P105775  Additional Financing          5/22/2007    12/31/2010       SAR       2007       India               18 
 42                                                                                                     Congo, 
                       DRC‐Emerg MS Rehab &                                                             Democratic 
     P057296  P096305  Recov Suppl. (FY06)           12/8/2005    5/15/2010        AFR       2006       Republic of     125 
 43                    BR (AF‐C)S.P. Metro Line 4 
     P051696  P105959  (Add'l Fin)                   4/8/2008     3/31/2011        LCR       2008       Brazil              95 




                                                                                                                       15
                              ANNEX 2: THE FOUR MU PROJECTS WITH MU OR BELOW OUTCOME RATINGS


Annex 2: The Four MU Projects with MU or below
outcome ratings
The Croatia Rijeka Gateway Project was approved in April 2003 and closed in
September 2012. The project development objectives were: (a) increase efficiency,
through private operators, and improve financial, social and environmental conditions
at Port of Rijeka, rehabilitate infrastructure and replace heavy cargo equipment; (b)
prepare redeveloping part of Port of Rijeka for urban purposes; and (c) improve
international road connections linked to the Rijeka gateway, and the administration of
the road sector. Additional finance of US $48 million-was approved in May 2007 to
finance the cost increase associated with: (i) cost overrun in completing the construction
of the main port component, the Zagrebacko Terminal; and (ii)financing gap in
technical services to prepare the concession arrangements for the Zagrebacko Terminal.

At the end of the project, the objective related to road improvement was substantially
achieved, however, the objective of increasing the port operation efficiency through
more private sector’ involvement was not achieved. More specifically, the target of
having private sector participating 80 percent operation of Rijeka port was achieved at
35 percent level in 2012. There has been a progressive reduction in government
subsidies to the port. The level of subsidy was 19 percent lower than the target
benchmark. The ratio of total operating expenses (including asset depreciation) of the
port authority to total operating revenues (excluding subsidies) was expected to decline
from a target of 240 percent to 150 percent. The target was not achieved. The third sub-
objective “Prepare for redevelopment of part of the Port of Rijeka for urban purposes”
was modestly achieved. The new Bradjika passenger terminal with waterfront facilities
was completed ahead of schedule and is operational. It has become a popular social
venue encouraged by better access from the city. However, the number of passengers
using the terminal declined following the removal of subsidies on the ferry services. At
the output level, the Becko berth was rehabilitated, the Brajdica Container Terminal was
constructed, heavy cranes were installed and various equipment and software systems
were procured. However, unanticipated difficult soil conditions prevented the
construction of a multipurpose terminal at the Zagreb pier. This design and build
contract was deferred to be constructed under a follow-on project, but as a container
terminal. Since the activity was not implemented, the additional financing funds were
unnecessarily tied up and not utilized efficiently, some US$30.5 million was cancelled.




16
ANNEX 2: THE FOUR MU PROJECTS WITH MU OR BELOW OUTCOME RATINGS


The Ethiopia Road Project was approved in September 2004 and closed in June 2012.
The project development objective was “to assist the borrower in increasing its road
transport infrastructure and improving the reliability thereof, strengthening the
capacity for road construction, management and maintenance and enhancing the
financing program in relation there to in order to ensure sustainability, and creating
conditions conducive to private sector participation in the road transport sector”.

Two packages of Additional Financing (AF) of about US$ 190 million were approved
during the life of the project to cover the project cost-overrun. In June 2006, the first AF
in the amount of US$87.3 million was approved to help finance the disparity between
the engineer’s estimate and the bids that was partly related to increased prices of fuel
and bitumen between project conception and project effectiveness. Other possible
factors could be the low level of contractor participation and reduced competition. In
May 2010, the second AF in the amount of US$100 million was approved to help finance
cost overruns, which were primarily due to changes in design/correction of design
errors and associated price adjustments.

At the end of the project, the sub-objective of “increased road transport infrastructure
and improved reliability” was substantially achieved. Not much has been achieved
under the other two sub-objectives. The project efficiency was modest. It had an
implementation delay of two years involving substantial cost overruns with the actual
costs 136% higher than the appraised estimates. The ex-post ERRs for the project roads
were much lower than the ERRs estimated at the appraisal. The ICR concluded that the
2nd AF could have been avoided if the project had been better managed.

The Thailand Highway Management Project was approved in December 2003 and
closed in June 2013. The project development objective was “enhancing the efficiency,
productive use, and management of the road network”. Prior to the request for the
additional financing, the original project implementation already experienced three
different closing date extensions of totaling 24 months. An additional financing of
US$79.30 million was approved in March 2010 to finance the widening of 216 km of
national highway sections and Public-Private Partnership transaction advisory services.
The purpose of the additional financing was to support the achievement of the project
development objective, however, those activities were never implemented because the
flood in Thailand in 2011 delayed the bidding process and finally led to the cancellation
of the civil work activities to be financed by the additional financing. As a result, the
achievement of the PDOs was compromised. More specifically, the project sub-
objectives of “strengthening of the institutional capacity and modernization of the
Department of Highways” and “enhancing sustainable road maintenance programs to
preserve road assets” were not fully achieved. The utilization of the project funds was
not efficient because the project implementation period was 10 years instead of the

                                                                                         17
                              ANNEX 2: THE FOUR MU PROJECTS WITH MU OR BELOW OUTCOME RATINGS


originally planned five years. At the end of the project, only US$ 0.24 million out of the
total US$79.30 million in additional financing was spent. The ICR (page 8) assessed that
there were some shortcomings with the project design including the too ambitious
project design with too many activities, the insufficient capacity of the implementation
agency and lengthy internal processes. This may also explain why the additional
financing was never utilized because the implementation agency may not have had the
capacity to finish the extra activities without further extending the project
implementation period.

The Jordan Amman Development Corridor Project was approved in June 2004 and
closed in December 2012. The project had the development objectives of “providing
access to affordable land for productive investment and urban development” which
were ambitious for the short time period and for the inputs provided through the
project. Due to unanticipated increases in the cost of key inputs and technical
modifications to the design during construction, actual total project costs ($456.24
million) were 2.8 times the appraisal estimates ($160.98million). The Bank together with
the other two financers provided additional financing of a total of $ 295.26 million in
2008 to cover the cost increase. At project closing, the project could only complete part
of the committed project activities. The project fell short of achieving the first sub-
objective “supporting more efficient transport and logistics services” with major
shortcomings in achieving efficiency in the logistics services. The achievement of the
second sub-objective of "providing access to affordable land for productive investment
and urban development purposes" was negligible because the ring road constructed
under the project provided access to newly cleared lands with minimal and limited
services, but those were far from ready for productive investments and urban
development. This project was prepared in a surprisingly short time of two months
with outdated engineering design and cost estimates. According to the team, the project
costs were not revised from their initial costs in 2000 to 2004 prices. The actual EIRR
was calculated at 12.71%, lower than the estimates at the appraisal and the AF stage. At
completion, some of project activities were not fully completed, the second component
(port and trucking industry) was dropped.




18
