                                                      98465

BURKINA FASO and COTE D’IVOIRE

Poverty and Social Impact Assessment (PSIA) of
Road Transport Reforms along the Abidjan-Ouagadougou Corridor

As supported under the

Regional Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness DPO (P129282)


June 2015




Global Practice: Macroeconomics & Fiscal Management
Africa Region




__________________________
Document of the World Bank
                              CURRENCY EQUIVALENT
                        Currency unit = CFA Franc (CFAF)
                         Exchange rate as of June 15, 2015
                               US$1 = 590 CFAF

                                     FISCAL YEAR
                              January 1 – December 31


                          ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AEO                    Authorized Economic Operator
AOC                    Abidjan-Ouagadougou Corridor
CBC                    Conseil Burkinabé des Chargeurs (Burkinabe Shippers’s Council)
CCI-BF                 Chamber of Commerce and Industry – Burkina Faso
CFAF                   Communauté Financière Africaine Franc
CIC                    Ivorian Shippers' Council
CPIA                   Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
DPO                    Development Policy Operations
ECOWAS                 Economic Community of West African States
GIE                    Groupement d’Intérêt Economique (Economic Interest Group)
HIPC                   Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
IMF                    International Monetary Fund
OIC                    Office Ivoirien des Chargeurs (Ivoirian Shippers’ Council)
OTRAF                  Organisation des Transporteurs Routiers du Burkina Faso
                       (National Union of Road Transporters of Burkina Faso)
PEA                    Political Economy Analysis
PFM                    Public Financial Management
PIA                    Policy and Institutional Assessment
PSIA                   Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
SCD                    Systematic Country Diagnostic
SNTRV-B                Syndicat National des Transporteurs Routiers de Voyageurs du
                       Burkina (Transportation Union)
SONATT                 Société Nationale des Transports Terrestres
TA                     Technical Assistance
TFF                    Trade Facilitation Facility
TIP                    Trade Information Portal
UEMOA                  West African Economic and Monetary Union
UNESCO                 United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
USAID                  United States Agency for International Development



                       Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                     Country Director:    Ousmane Diagana
          Sr. Global Practice Director:   Marcelo Giugale
             Global Practice Manager:     Seynabou Sakho
                   Task Team Leader:      David Cal MacWilliam



                                            i
                                                      TABLE OF CONTENTS




     A. Problem Definition..................................................................................................................... 2
     B. Macroeconomic and Poverty Context: Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso ................................... 5
     C. Overview of Cost Environment ................................................................................................. 6

     A. The Primary Players ................................................................................................................. 19
     B. Quantification and Characteristics of Trucking Operators ...................................................... 26
     C. Quantification and Characteristics of the Truck Fleet ............................................................. 29



     A. Broad Regional Impact of Road Transport Reform in West Africa ........................................ 41
     B. Detailed Macro Impact in Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso ..................................................... 42




List of Figures:

Figure 2.1: Comparative cost of transit to Burkina Faso .............................................................................. 6
Figure 2.2: Time and cost to trade across borders ........................................................................................ 7
Figure 2.3: Distribution of costs to import a 40-feet container ..................................................................... 8
Figure 2.4: Schematic decomposition of trucking costs and prices .............................................................. 9
Figure 2.5: Road Condition on West African Corridors ............................................................................. 11
Figure 2.6: Truck utilization for Burkina Faso’s external trade.................................................................. 13
Figure 2.7: Ownership Structure of the Truck Fleet (19t. and over) in Côte d'Ivoire ................................. 14
Figure 2.8: Age Profile of the Truck Fleet (19t. and over) ......................................................................... 14
Figure 2.9: Impact of Customs Declaration registration date on Port dwell time
           (transit cargo to Burkina Faso through the port of Abidjan - 2012) ......................................... 17
Figure 3.1: Type of Enterprises .................................................................................................................. 27
Figure 3.2: Distribution of transport companies (public vs private, registered vs unregistered) ................ 27
Figure 3.3: Distribution of Trucking Companies by Parking Facilities ...................................................... 29
Figure 3.4: Distribution of Trucking Companies by Warehouse Facilities ................................................ 29
Figure 3.5: Distribution of Vehicle types by firm type and nature of cargo
            (domestic or international) in Burkina Faso............................................................................. 31
Figure 3.6: Distribution of Vehicle types by firm type and nature of cargo
           (domestic or international) in Côte d’Ivoire.............................................................................. 32




                                                                         ii
List of Tables:

Table 3.1: Percentage of Companies having a secondary activity and the share of transport
           activities in total revenue. .......................................................................................................... 28
Table 3.2: Structure of the Truck Fleet (% of total fleet)............................................................................ 33
Table 3.3: Vehicle Financing Modalities .................................................................................................... 34
Table 4.1: Strategic Priorities of the Burkinabe Government for International Road Transport ................ 36
Table 4.2: Priorities of the Ivoirian Government for the Modernization of the Transport Sector .............. 37
Table 4.3: Policy Reform Matrix ................................................................................................................ 38
Table 5.1: Changes in the Structure of the Transit Trucking Industry, Scenarios 1 and 2 ......................... 43
Table 5.2: Estimated Average Annual Km for Transit Trucks with and without Reforms ........................ 44
Table 5.3: Changes in Operating Costs and Revenue for Transit Trucking ............................................... 44
Table 5.4: Estimated Transport Cost Savings per ton-km for Transit Truckers ......................................... 45
Table 5.5: Estimated Transport Price Savings per ton-km for Transit Truckers ........................................ 45
Table 5.6: Estimated Impacts on Government Expenditures (US$ million)............................................... 46
Table 5.7: Estimated Benefits to Shippers, Producers and Consumers per year ........................................ 46
Table 5.8: Estimated Increases in the Annual Value of Trade Induced by Transport Reforms .................. 47
Table 5.9: Indirect Employment Impact for Trucking and Trade Changes due to Reforms ....................... 47



List of Boxes:

Box 2.1: Rotations per Year and Truck Financing ....................................................................... 13




                                                                        iii
                                EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.      Transport costs in Africa are high. High transport and transit costs result in high prices
to the consumer and a loss of external competitiveness. This has an important impact on the
development prospects of the continent – it reduces economic growth, constrains employment
generation and makes poverty reduction more difficult.

2.      The situation is particularly acute in West Africa, where infrastructure is lacking;
distances to ports and markets are large, particularly for land-locked countries; and the transport-
logistics system is hobbled by market distortions. Lowering transport costs becomes all the more
important as African economies become more open, more externally focused, and increasingly
engaged in and reliant on international trade as a source of growth and increasing prosperity.
Efficient, safe and affordable transport services will be key to unleashing Africa’s productive
potential.

3.      The World Bank is developing a regional Development Policy Operation (DPO), the
Regional Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness DPO (P129282), as part of a strategy to
support road transport sector reforms in West Africa. Prior to a more region-wide initiative,
and given the complexities involved, the Abidjan-Ouagadougou Corridor (AOC) has been
prioritized as a suitable cross-border initiative for piloting such an approach in the region. The
objective of the DPO is to reduce trade and transport transaction costs in order to promote
development of the private sector and improve the business environment in the two countries,
with the aim of facilitating their integration with the global economy. Given the importance of
trade for the poor, both to create income opportunities and to reduce the cost of living, this
operation is fully consistent with the Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting
shared prosperity. By lowering currently high transport costs, facilitating trade and promoting
regional integration, the reforms supported by this program are expected to have broad-based
welfare gains in both countries, benefiting producers of exported products (including farmers),
consumers of imported goods and firms using imported inputs, among others.

4.      Significant reform programs always result in winners who benefit positively as well
as losers who will be impacted negatively. This is inherent in all processes involving economic
progress and structural transformation. In complex reform programs, there is a need to identify
stakeholders that may be most vulnerable to the changes brought about by the reform program –
and to better understand the scope and scale of the impact on these groups. This is the objective
of the present analysis.

Summary of the Main Findings

5.      Macro level impacts are estimated to be positive and large, with substantial poverty
reduction outcomes. Total benefits across both countries are on the order of US$140 million to
US$174 million annually. Approximately US$42 million annually in economic benefits will
accrue to regional consumers, with shippers and producers receiving an additional $34 million in
direct benefits annually. The two governments are expected to save up to US$100 million in
road maintenance expenses per year. Burkina Faso, being landlocked, benefits the most as it
enjoys greater trade and producer and consumer price savings from improved transit trade.

                                                 iv
6.     There will be direct positive impacts on most transport sector participants on
account of higher expected incomes. Net transport revenue after costs for transit truck
operators is estimated to increase by about US$15 to $60 million, where both countries are net
beneficiaries of the reforms. This net effect includes the combined effects of increased
productivity, lower unit operating costs and increased revenue from increased demand and
cabotage operations. Estimated cost savings in the neighborhood of 20 percent are envisaged,
which when combined with increased demand and increased utilization rates (due to the
expected decline in the number of trucks) should lead to significantly increased profits and
incomes for truckers and their families. Therefore, the reforms should have a significant impact
on lowering poverty levels among the significant number of operators remaining in the industry.

7.      Average transport prices should also fall. Shippers should benefit from increased
efficiency in the transport industry as reflected in price decreases of approximately 20 percent.
These price savings will also be accompanied by more intangible and more difficult to quantify
benefits such as improved reliability and predictability, faster delivery periods, reduced damage
to goods, etc. These additional benefits could be at least as significant to shippers and consumers
of transport services as the price reductions.

8.     However, some industry participants will be negatively impacted by the reforms as
the number of trucks in the total transit trucking fleets is expected to decline with reforms by 800
to 1,000 vehicles, or some 11 to 14 percent of the 7,100 transit vehicle fleet. This will lead to a
decrease in direct trucking industry employment of around 2,500 jobs,1 with the impact on land-
locked Burkina Faso being more severe than in coastal Côte d’Ivoire.

9.     Those who are most vulnerable to the negative impacts emanating from the reforms
will be mostly informal truckers -- often older and illiterate, who are unable to find
employment elsewhere in a more professional and modernized transport industry. As well, some
coxeurs and stevedores, who benefit from the heretofore informal structure of the trucking
business, will be negatively impacted.

10.    Nonetheless, benefits from reforms are orders of magnitude higher than the
potential negative impacts on specific actors in the industry:

       The trade effects are an order of magnitude larger than the trucking employment
        effects. Trade increases have a variety of employment impacts. For imports of consumer
        goods there are retail jobs, delivery and distribution jobs, import service jobs and their
        multipliers. For intermediate goods and exports there are distribution and logistics jobs,
        processing and related services with their multipliers. Even by these low estimates trade
        impacts on employment more than compensate for losses in trucking-related industries.
        The net employment effects of the proposed reforms are expected to be between 60,000
        and 220,000 new jobs in Burkina Faso, which is the country most negatively affected by
        the direct trucking employment losses.



1
  In the long run, a loss in employment will be more than compensated for by much larger job increases in other
sectors arising from increased trade.

                                                      v
      The impacts of road transport reform go far beyond the direct impact on truckers,
       shippers and governments. As noted, total annual benefits across both countries are on
       the order of US$140 million to US$174 million when net benefits to the trucking and
       government sectors are included.

      The potential increases in trade to landlocked Burkina Faso would amount to US$380
       million annually. This is related primarily to responses to price changes, which result in
       increased demand for imports and an increase in supply of exports. This is a conservative
       estimate since it does not take into account the general improvement in logistics service,
       which will result from these reforms. The improved logistics systems may be an equally
       effective catalyst for increased trade as the lower costs. Gains from more efficient and
       cost-effective road transport could be expected in Côte d’Ivoire as well.

11.    Therefore, the policy question is not whether to proceed with the reforms, but how
to mitigate the potential negative impacts. After careful analysis, including substantial
discussion with a broad cross-section of industry participants, the PSIA proposes the following
potential mitigation measures for negatively affected stakeholder groups:

      Measures to facilitate fleet renewal: Measures to facilitate access to finance in order to
       facilitate fleet renewal, including the purchase or upgrading of new trucks, trailers and
       equipment, will have to be appropriately structured so as to facilitate access from across
       the spectrum of truckers and companies, from large to small and from formal to informal.
       This will have to include a careful determination of collateral requirements, interest
       charges, amortization periods, down payment requirements, etc.

      Phasing and sequencing of reforms: First, given that a number of those unable to
       transition to a more modern and professional environment tend to be older operators, it
       may be useful to phase in some requirements or provide “grandfather? clauses to permit a
       logical phasing-out period and to permit natural attrition to take its course. Second, some
       adjustment will be required even among those willing and able to modernize.
       Appropriate timing and sequencing of reforms could facilitate and allow for a more
       gradual, less disruptive and more inclusive adjustment period.

      Scrappage schemes: As truck numbers are expected to fall, at least initially,
       appropriately designed mechanisms that provide incentives to scrap old trucks could be
       useful in modernizing the road transport sector and also in providing resources for those
       wanting to transition to other activities. Participation in scrappage schemes could also
       help identify those truckers leaving the sector and thus facilitate their access to and
       participation in other programs, such as re-training programs, that could further
       accommodate their transition.

      Re-group into groupement d’intérêts économiques (GIE): Small and artisanal operators
       could organize themselves into cooperatives to attain economies of scale -- potentially
       enabling them to share costs and assets as a means to attain a greater degree of
       professionalization. Several small operators expressed an interest in this avenue and
       some were planning such efforts.

                                               vi
   Partnerships with large operators: Small, informal, and artisanal operators could
    potentially partner with larger, formal operators, including through the sale of their
    trucks. Supporting measures may be necessary to organize and bring them together with
    potentially interested big operators, but this was noted as a possibility.

   Transition to other activities: If unable to professionalize, small/informal operators can
    transition to other activities based on their existing skill levels or asset endowment. For
    example, some have indicated the possibility of transitioning to passenger transport,
    which is less cumbersome in terms of investment requirements relative to the trucking
    business. Others could transition to trade in merchandise related to the trucking business,
    such as sale of truck tires, vehicle oil and lubricants, or logistics related activities.

   Supporting policy measures: As part of the reform process, operators intending to
    transition to other activities could benefit from supporting policy measures such as access
    to finance as well as training opportunities to transition to other activities. Training
    opportunities were noted as being very important, in particular for the small operators
    considering the fact that almost all drivers are illiterate.




                                            vii
   POVERTY AND SOCIAL IMPACT ASSESSMENT (PSIA) OF ROAD
   TRANSPORT REFORMS ALONG THE ABIDJAN-OUAGADOUGOU
                        CORRIDOR




1.1     The World Bank is developing a regional Development Policy Operation (DPO), the
Regional Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness DPO (P129282), as part of a strategy to
support road transport sector reforms in West Africa. Prior to a more region-wide initiative,
and given the complexities involved, the Abidjan-Ouagadougou Corridor (AOC) has been
prioritized as a suitable cross-border initiative for piloting such an approach in the region.

1.2     Two supporting studies are being undertaken, including a political economy
analysis and this poverty and social impact assessment (PSIA), in order to better inform
operational design and optimise the achievement of results. These background studies in support
of the operation should improve knowledge of the corridor specific and broader transport sector
reform challenges/opportunities, the prospects for success, and the implications of the planned
reforms.

1.3    The PSIA aims to assess the poverty and social impact of the proposed reforms in
the participating countries. Impact will vary between the in-transit country (Côte d’Ivoire) and
the land-locked country (Burkina Faso), and between various social/demographic groups within
the countries. It is expected that poverty and social impacts will arise at the macro, sectoral and
micro levels and the analysis will attempt to identify impacts arising at these various levels.

1.4      Macro, sectoral and micro level impacts will all be assessed. Macro level impacts will
largely arise from increased economic efficiency related to reduced transport costs, expanding
trade opportunities, increased economic competitiveness, and the resultant increased
employment, wages and incomes associated with improving economic conditions and increased
competitiveness. At the sectoral level, the supported reforms will lead to cost and price changes
in the sector with related effects on incomes, institutional changes, shifts in numbers employed in
various job categories across the sector, and in the creation of new employment opportunities
and the potential disappearance of some existing jobs. As such, there will be a distributional
impact on employment and incomes across the sector. At the micro level, particular attention
will be given to the impact on small independent truckers and those employed as intermediaries
in institutions that may no longer exist or will be subject to significant downsizing post-reform.
Impacts on their families and dependents, and the potential options open to these individuals in
light of the proposed reforms will be explored.

1.5     The exercise also identifies potential mitigating or compensatory measures that could
be instituted. Similarly, the analysis will identify, where possible, potential measures and
policies that could be undertaken by Governments to mitigate the impact, to allow those affected
by the reforms to benefit to a greater degree from the reforms – or alternatively, to transition into
other activities, trucking and trade-related or otherwise.

                                                 1
1.6      The report is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a background discussion of
issues and challenges within the road transport sector in the region; briefly reviews the
macroeconomic and poverty situation in Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso; and then more
specifically, focuses on road transport costs and the Abidjan-Ouagadougou corridor. Section 3
follows with a discussion of the organization of the industry in order to better understand the
various players and institutions involved in road transport along the corridor. This is important
to facilitate an appreciation of the various players, their roles and thus their potential exposure to
significant sector reform. Section 4 then summarizes the envisaged reform program and
introduces the various specific reform proposals. The macroeconomic impact of road transport
reforms are then discussed in Section 5 and the broad benefits of the proposed reform program
are summarized. Section 6 then recognizes that despite the significant macro and economy-wide
benefits, certain groups will be negatively impacted by the planned reforms and the impact on
these groups is identified. Finally, Section 7 concludes and summarizes the main findings.

                                         2. BACKGROUND

A. PROBLEM DEFINITION

 “One of the few things that African policy makers, development partners, civil society, and policy
 researchers agree on is that Africa has a serious infrastructure deficit. . . . Perhaps the most compelling
 problem is that of road infrastructure. There are fewer kilometers of roads in Africa today than there were
 30 years ago. Some 70 percent of Africa’s rural population lives more than 2 km from an all -season road.
 And the cost of transporting goods in Africa is the highest in the world. Not only have high transport costs
 raised the cost of doing business, impeding private investment, but they serve as an additional barrier to
 African countries’ benefiting from the rapid growth in world trade. Especially for Africa’s many
 landlocked countries, high transport costs mean that, even if they liberalize their trade regimes, they will
 remain effectively landlocked.?
                                                                          Teravaninthorn and Raballand, 2009

 “Sahelian landlocked countries – Mali, Burkina Faso and Niger – suffer from high costs of road haulage
 due to long distances to ports, poor roads, un-roadworthy trucks, poor logistics and corruption. High costs
 limit the competitiveness of their transit trade through West Africa’s ports. The resulting low volumes of
 trade limit their prospects for economic development and thus limit growth in employment and incomes.?
                                                          West Africa Trade Hub Technical Report #32, 2010

 “The road transport sector in West Africa has been described as:
    Higher priced, less efficient, and less reliable than transport in other regions of Africa and the world;
    Dominated by older vehicles and small informal operators; and
    Saddled with policies and regulations that provide no incentives to become more efficient.?
                                                                              Nathan Associates/USAID, 2012

 “One of the few things that African policy makers, development partners, civil society, and policy
 researchers agree on is that Africa has a serious infrastructure deficit. . . . Perhaps the most compelling
 problem is that of road infrastructure. There are fewer kilometers of roads in Africa today than there were
 30 years ago. Some 70 percent of Africa’s rural population lives more than 2 km from an all -season road.
 And the cost of transporting goods in Africa is the highest in the world. Not only have high transport costs
 raised the cost of doing business, impeding private investment, but they serve as an additional barrier to
 African countries’ benefiting from the rapid growth in world trade. Especially for Africa’s many
 landlocked countries, high transport costs mean that, even if they liberalize their trade regimes, they will
 remain effectively landlocked.?
                                                      2
2.1     Transport costs in Africa are high. High transport and transit costs result in high prices
to the consumer and a loss of external competitiveness. This has an important impact on the
development prospects of the continent – it reduces economic growth, constrains employment
generation and makes poverty reduction more difficult. Lowering transport costs becomes all the
more important as African economies become more open, more externally focused, and
increasingly engaged in and reliant on international trade as a source of growth and increasing
prosperity. Efficient, safe and affordable transport services will be key to unleashing Africa’s
productive potential.

2.2     The situation is particularly acute in West Africa, where infrastructure is lacking and
distances to ports and markets are large, particularly for land-locked countries. The state of the
region’s physical transport infrastructure is but one part of the story, and increased public and
private investment is unquestionably needed. However, if we have learned anything in
development economics over the past couple of decades it is that “institutions matter.?
Governance arrangements in the West African road transport sector are antiquated, highly
inefficient and distortionary. These policy, regulatory and institutional failures are widely
recognized.

2.3     Significant analysis has been undertaken on the high costs imposed on the
economies of the region by the structural distortions and constraints imposed by inefficient
regional trucking conventions (such as the tour de role system, quotas for national carriers,
non-market based freight allocation, over-weight loads, oligopolistic unions/structures,
inefficient institutions, a multitude of rent seeking opportunities, etc.) A considerable body of
evidence indicates that liberalization and professionalization of the trucking market would result
in important economic efficiencies, significantly lower costs, including costs to both import and
export, and improve economic efficiency.

2.4     The sub-region is characterized by strong market regulation (formal and informal),
primarily regulated by freight forwarders and shippers. There is also a multitude of existing
regional and bilateral arrangements in the sector that pose constraints and disincentives to the
efficient and effective provision of road transport services. This existing institutional and policy
environment has resulted in the provision of low quality transport services, small trucking
companies (indeed largely single truck owner-operator entities), and old, obsolete and unsafe
trucking fleets.

2.5      It is not that a trucking fleet consisting of small, old, independently operated trucks
in and of its self contributes to higher costs and reduced efficiency. Indeed, there are
numerous examples of such fleets elsewhere in the world that are fully capable of providing
competitive and low cost transport services. Modernization of the fleet is not the end goal.
Rather it is largely the regional regulatory and policy environment that results in the existing
fleet, old or otherwise, and sector organization, not meeting the necessary requirements for the
provision of effective transit services, with trucks being unreliable and poorly-maintained, more
often than not over-loaded, unable to meet safety standards, under-utilized, high cost, inefficient,
etc. In sum, the existing policy environment provides little incentive for the fleet to provide
effective and competitive transport services.



                                                 3
2.6     Available research finds that high transport costs in West Africa are the result of a
combination of dilapidated infrastructure and a number of market distortions.
Both the existing regulatory frameworks and shortcomings in their implementation limit
effective competition within the transport industry, increasing costs and leading to a gap between
prices and costs, as well as to an environment not conducive to investment. The lack of criteria
for access to the transport profession and transparent mechanisms to match supply and demand
for transport services has given rise to the emergence of a few dominant operators that allocate
freight to truckers with large rents, but at barely break-even rates to the operators carrying the
freight. The sector is divided between a large number of small informal and inefficient
transporters and a small number of larger and relatively efficient companies. Low profitability
creates strong incentives to resort to short-term rent-seeking behaviors, including overloading of
trucks beyond the legal axle load limit. Overloading adversely affects the durability and safety
of operations, damages the road network, and discourages containerization. In addition to the
market structure, a major problem affecting the profitability of the trucking industry and
increasing trade costs is the slow rotation time on the corridor, i.e. the small number of round
trips from Abidjan to Ouagadougou by the average truck, which also results from delays at the
port and at the border and the difficulty to find backhaul cargo. These conditions make it
difficult for the majority of transporters to finance new trucks.

2.7    Reducing transport prices is not only important to facilitate the much-needed
structural transformation, but also has direct poverty-reducing impacts by promoting
better regional integration. Notably, lower transport prices and more efficient logistics
services for the movement of food staples will enhance food security by preventing the loss of
crops during transport, while helping to strengthen the competitiveness of traditional exports
such as cattle from landlocked countries in the Sahel. Transit systems are vital for landlocked
countries and have been recognized as such in the 10-year Vienna Program of Action, which was
adopted in November 2014 by the United Nations General Assembly and is supported by the
Bank.

2.8     Therefore, a regional approach to reform is necessary. It is apparent that both
regional and simultaneous national level reforms are necessary to permit and facilitate efficient,
safe and affordable road transport in the region. Just as national reforms on their own, in areas
such as truck registration, mandatory technical standards and inspections, driver training (both
for initial driving licenses and for acquiring professional and specialized competencies),
insurance requirements, access to the profession and to the market, regulations on perishable
food stuffs and dangerous goods, etc., will accomplish little in the absence of a fundamental and
meaningful reform of the regional governance and regulatory framework, so will reform of
regional arrangements, such as freight sharing quotas, joint border procedures, containerization
measures, etc., accomplish little unless appropriate, coherent and compatible national
frameworks are in place. Reform at both levels is clearly required.

2.9     However, it must be recognized that meaningful reforms will entail significant
adjustment and that such adjustment will fall more heavily on certain countries (e.g. landlocked
countries) and on certain affected groups within countries (e.g. small trucking companies and
single truck operators). The provision of adequate financial resources to participating countries,
in addition to necessary analytic, TA and capacity building efforts, will be important in order to

                                                4
facilitate the necessary adjustment. This PSIA is intended to assist in effectively identifying
vulnerable groups, assessing the impact of reforms on affected populations, and potentially
identifying accompanying measures and programs to address those negatively affected.

B. MACROECONOMIC

2.10 In recent years, the economic performance of both Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso
has been characterized by relatively strong growth and macroeconomic stability. Following
the end of the crisis in 2011, Côte d’Ivoire has quickly rebounded. Investor confidence has
benefited from large-scale debt relief following the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC)
completion point and from satisfactory progress under an IMF program and Bank DPOs. Sharp
improvements in its Country Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) and its Cost of Doing
Business ranking are further testimony to the country’s rapid progress. 2 Burkina Faso has seen
equally rapid growth in recent years, on account of: a booming mining industry; improved
performance of the cotton industry, which employs the majority of the labor force; and
expansion of the services industry (e.g., banking, insurance, transport). In addition to strong
performance under IMF programs and Bank DPOs, Burkina’s progress in economic policy
reform is also demonstrated by one of the highest CPIA ratings in West Africa (3.8), driven by
improvements in public financial management (PFM) and the business environment, leading to
substantial increases in its Doing Business rating.

2.11 Notwithstanding these improvements, poverty reduction has remained elusive in
both countries. Partly due to the impact of Côte d’Ivoire’s political crises since the late 1990s,
the country’s poverty rate rose from a mere 18 percent in 1985 to over 50 percent in 2008.
Preliminary evidence suggests that the war exacerbated poverty rates even further, and that
progress since the end of the crisis has been limited (in 2013, the incidence of poverty is
estimated to have fallen back to 2008 levels). Over the past decade, in addition to an increase in
the incidence, depth and severity of poverty, the bottom 40 percent of the population lost more in
terms of mean consumption per capita than the total population. Poverty is overwhelmingly
concentrated in rural areas and it has been increasing in the North and the West, due in part to a
geographical concentration of social and infrastructure expenditure in Abidjan.3 This highlights
the importance of better connecting rural areas to more economically dynamic centers and to
markets, which requires both adequate transport infrastructure and efficient transport and
logistics services.

2.12 For Burkina Faso, national statistics measured a headcount poverty rate of 46.7
percent in 2009, down marginally from 51.0 percent in 2003. Preliminary results suggested
that it has continued to decline since then, to 40.1 percent in 2014. A rapidly growing population
and substantial income inequality have limited the anti-poverty effects of Burkina’s recent
growth performance, even if improvements have been observed in the area of human
development. Poverty incidence remains heavily concentrated in rural areas, where average

2
  Côte d’Ivoire’s CPIA score improved from 2.7 in 2011 to 3.2 in 2014. Its ranking on the Cost of Doing Business
index improved from 177th in 2011 to 147th in 2015, and Côte d’Ivoire was among the Top 10 reforming countries in
both the 2014 and 2015 editions of Doing Business.
3
  Information on poverty is taken from the recently completed Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) for Côte
d’Ivoire.

                                                       5
poverty rates are more than double those of urban centers, and the decrease of poverty in recent
years has been faster in urban areas. In order to increase the impact of accelerated growth on
poverty reduction, reforms are needed in key areas, including the reduction of transportation and
trade costs. In parallel, both countries have recorded persistently high underemployment, in
particular among youth and women.

2.13 The failure of Burkina Faso and Côte d’Ivoire to increase productivity in
agriculture and industrialize is related, in part, to shortcomings in their business
environments.4 Most importantly, case studies of companies in the two countries have
demonstrated that high transport costs are one of the key binding constraints to growth—in
addition to the cost of energy and access to finance. The available evidence suggests that the
Abidjan-Ouagadougou corridor is expensive, even by African standards. Reducing transport
costs would have large economic impacts beyond the corridor as is explored further in Section 5.



2.14 Trade transaction costs are critical for the competitiveness of any economy, and
Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso stand out even among other high -cost countries by their
logistics costs. With export competitiveness being one of the most important factors explaining
higher growth in emerging markets, high transport costs act as key factors adversely affecting the
development of the private sector, and hence incomes and growth.

2.15 A comparative analysis of the cost of transit freight for a container from the ports of
Abidjan, Lomé and Tema to Burkina Faso indicates that the Abidjan corridor is the most
costly. In fact, data shows that high transport prices and fees charged by port and transport
operators are among the main factors reducing the competitiveness of the Abidjan-Ouagadougou
corridor (Figure 2.1).


                                  3,500                                   Loading authorization,
                  Thousand FCFA




                                  3,000                                   escort
                                  2,500                                   Transport union fee
                                  2,000
                                  1,500                                   Customs
                                  1,000
                                    500                                   Road transport and
                                     -                                    charges en route
                                          Tema       Lomé       Abidjan   Handling, forwarding
                                                                          and customs brokerage
                                           Burkina Faso corridors via
                                                                          Port fees
                Source: World Bank (2011a)




4
  Despite improvements in the business environment, both Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso rank near the bottom of
this index.

                                                              6
2.16 A breakdown of transport costs shows that cargo handling and inland transport
seem to be the main drivers of trade costs in Burkina Faso and Côte d’Ivoire. According to
the most recent Doing Business data, handling and inland transportation costs per 20-feet
container add up to US$2,305 and 4,330 for exports and imports respectively in Burkina Faso,
and to US$1,390 and 1,960 in Côte d’Ivoire.5 This is well above the corresponding costs in other
West African countries except Mali. It is also significantly higher than costs in Mauritius and
Singapore, respectively the best African and global performers (Figure 2.2). While high transport
costs would be expected for landlocked countries given the distance to the port, cargo handling
and transportation represent a higher proportion of total costs between Ouagadougou and the port
of Abidjan (81% in the case of exports) than between Bamako and the port of Dakar (68%).
Likewise, cargo handling and transportation are significantly more expensive in Côte d’Ivoire
than in other coastal countries.



            a: Cost to export (USD / TEU)                         b: Cost to import (USD / TEU)
    2,500
                                                        4,000
    2,000
    1,500                                               3,000
    1,000                                               2,000
      500                                               1,000
       -                                                   -




               c: Time to export (days)                                 d: Time to import (days)
      40                                                   50
      30                                                   40
                                                           30
      20
                                                           20
      10                                                   10
       0                                                    0




5
  Doing Business measures the time and cost associated with exporting and importing a standardized cargo of goods,
based on information provided by local freight forwarders, shipping lines, customs brokers, port officials and banks.
For exporting goods, procedures range from packing the goods into the container at the warehouse to their departure
from the port of exit. For importing goods, procedures range from the vessel’s arrival at the port of entry to the
cargo’s delivery at the warehouse in the country’s largest business city. For landlocked economies, procedures and
costs at the inland border post are included, since the port is located in the transit economy. Only official costs are
recorded, including costs for documents, administrative fees for customs clearance and inspections, customs broker
fees, port-related charges and inland transport costs (sea transport and customs tariffs are not counted). For more
information, see http://www.doingbusiness.org/methodology/trading-across-borders

                                                          7
2.17 The priority areas of intervention for the reduction of trading costs are by
decreasing order of magnitude: the inland transport prices, mainly road transport,
followed by the terminal costs, mostly at the maritime gateway, and less importantly at
inland destination/origin. An analysis conducted in 2012 on the West Africa corridors assessed
the total logistics costs for importing goods, taking into account not only the financial cost of the
logistics services from the maritime gateway to the final destination, but also the economic
impact of delivery time and the uncertainties of that time (Nathan 2013). The results on the
Abidjan-Ouagadougou and Abidjan Bamako corridors, for a 40’ container, are illustrated in
Figure 2.3. The large uncertainties in the delivery time, as well as the excessive time taken by
some portions of the transfer of the goods along the corridors, are largely a consequence of the
inefficiencies along the corridors. Improving the documentation process and the physical
movement of the goods will have a strong positive impact on the costs associated with delays
and uncertainties borne by the shippers, but also on the direct cost of the logistics services, as
delays en route impact the efficiency of the inland transport operations.


                       4,500,000
                       4,000,000                                              Uncertainties cost
                       3,500,000
                                                                              Inventory cost
          CFA Francs




                       3,000,000
                       2,500,000                                              Terminal clearance
                       2,000,000                                              Border crossing
                       1,500,000
                       1,000,000                                              Road transport
                         500,000                                              Gateway costs
                              -
                                   Abidjan - Ouagadougou   Abidjan - Bamako
       Source: Nathan 2013

      Inland Transport Prices and Costs

2.18 How can high inland transport costs be explained? The trucking industry, at first
sight, is a highly competitive industry and meets the basic requirement for perfect competition:
many suppliers with none of them in an ostensibly dominant position, similar services (at least
for the dry freight segment of the market), open information on prices, and no barriers to entry
and exit for operators. While these characteristics would suggest that the industry is indeed
competitive, prices should equal marginal costs. Teravaninthorn & Raballand (2009) find that the
transport of freight between Sahelian countries and their ports, and thus the world market, is at
prices that significantly exceed underlying costs, suggesting large profits. They also find that
these high profits can be attributed to rent-seeking road-transport cartels benefiting from
oligopolies that exist as a result of existing governance and institutional structures. They argue

                                                           8
that, unless governments take steps to remove the structural distortions in the trucking market,
there is little point in investing in infrastructure improvements to reduce road-transport costs as
the cartels will capture the benefits from lowered costs: prices will remain the same and cartel
members will benefit from higher profits. This represents a fundamental constraint to the
economic development of the region and for three of the poorest countries in the world in
particular – landlocked Niger, Burkina Faso and Mali.

2.19 Among the components of the trucking cost structure, schematically illustrated in
Figure 2.4, mark-ups are to a large extent related to the market structure which is
substantially the result of the prevailing regulatory framework. Essentially, the lack of
criteria for access to the profession and transparent mechanisms has given rise to the emergence
of a few dominant operators that allocate freight to truckers at a large profit to themselves, but at
barely break-even rates to the operators physically carrying the freight. This market structure has
triggered the emergence of widely different business models depending on how they benefit
from or cope with an imperfect system. Examples of different business models include: small
informal operators that transport for their own account; those delivering goods within Abidjan;
relatively efficient trucking companies with direct contracts with carrying and forwarding agents;
and individual trucking companies that depend on several intermediaries.



                                    C&F agents /
                                   intermediaries              Cartels/competition

                                                               Cartels/competition
                               Trucking gross margin                                 Access to
                                                                                     transport market
                                                             ‘tracasseries’
                                    Other costs
                                                             Road blocks
       Transport price                                                                 Trade facilitation
       paid by the                                           Truck financing
       shipper/trader          Trucking company fixed
                                                             Operating conditions
                                        costs
                                                             Company structure             Access to
       Transport costs                                                                     trucking
                                                                                           profession
                                                             Fuel & tires costs
                                                             Maintenance
                               Vehicle operating costs                                 Infrastructure
                                                             Drivers




   -     Vehicle operating costs are typically fuel, lubricants, tires, drivers’ wages and routine
         maintenance;
   -     Trucking company fixed costs are typically headquarters costs, truck financing, and the
         costs associated with truck idle time, which in turn is itself linked to truck operating
         conditions;

                                                         9
    -   Other costs cover all payments and fees, whether formal or informal, linked to a truck
        shipment;
    -   The trucking gross margin is the difference between the price paid to the trucking
        operator and its costs;
    -   The cost of intermediaries corresponds to the difference between the price paid by the
        shipper—commonly used as a point of reference when price comparisons are made—and
        the actual price paid to the trucking operator that performs the trucking service. That
        difference corresponds to the margin captured by intermediaries.

2.20 In addition to the multiplicity of business models, a specificity of the trucking
industry in Côte d’Ivoire is that stevedoring companies in the port have granted themselves
a monopoly for road deliveries in the Abidjan metropolitan area. As a consequence of that
monopoly, the largest trucking companies in Côte d’Ivoire are the port cargo handling
companies, for which transport is an ancillary activity. This arrangement also leads to very high
costs of transport within Abidjan.

2.21 Cut-throat rates offered to small individual truckers by shippers that dominate the
market force these truckers to resort to short-term survivalist models of behavior aimed at
achieving higher profitability. These strategies include overloading the truck beyond the axle
load limit stipulated by law. Overloading trucks adversely affects the durability of trucks and
damages the road network. Yet, in view of the short-term advantage, these truckers prefer to
accept a load under these conditions rather than keeping the truck idle. In addition, overloading
of trucks discourages containerization, as containers tend to occupy more space than the stripped
cargo and two or more containers can be unpacked and loaded onto a single truck.6 Yet,
containerization tends to reduce transshipment costs and creates economies of scale, including as
a result of lower insurance rates (as containers are less subject to theft) and increased inventory
turnover and cash flow. Overloading and lack of containerization may help profitability in the
short term, but further depresses it in the long term. It also increases costs in the longer term, as
truck maintenance costs increase as a result of over-loading.

2.22 In addition to the market structure, a major problem affecting the profitability of
the trucking industry is the slow rotation time. Rotation time refers to the relatively small
number of roundtrips from Abidjan to Ouagadougou undertaken by the average truck. This is
partly a function of the long time it takes to transport cargo from the port to its destination (30 to
40 days) and the excess supply of trucks available for accepting shipments. The main factors
leading to slow rotation are:

       Long delays at the port in Abidjan: This is due to delays in unloading ships, the
        transfer of cargo to trucks, and clearance procedures at the port. Available statistics point
        to an average of 13 days for containers to leave the port including related clearance
        procedures (notably, exclusivity rights of certain clearing agents; the allocation of two-



6
 In 2011, one third of the port traffic was containerized in the port of Abidjan. This compares with a proportion of
50 percent for Cotonou. Furthermore, for transit trade, there is only a very small degree of containerization on the
Abidjan-Ouagadougou corridor.

                                                        10
         thirds of cargo to land-locked country truckers and one-third to coastal country truckers;
         and lengthy and cumbersome customs processes).

        The poor state of the road infrastructure: Available data point to conditions in the
         Abidjan-Ouagadougou corridor being substantially inferior to those in other competitor
         corridors (Figure 2.5).



                 100%
                  80%                                                                           Poor
                  60%                                                                           Fair
                  40%
                                                                                                Good
                  20%
                    0%




        Roadblocks: Roadblocks are created by law enforcement (police and other security
         forces), formally to enforce compliance with applicable rules for truckers and informally
         to collect rents. With overloading of trucks beyond the axle load limit a common
         occurrence, police argue for the need to enforce applicable rules through frequent
         roadblocks. However, available literature shows that roadblocks effectively serve as a
         means to extract bribes from truckers. Roadblocks create additional transport delays and
         increase rotation time.

2.23 Extremely slow rotation times and their pernicious effect on the profitability of the
trucking industry have been investigated in a number of studies looking at both transit
trade as well as domestic transport.7 Data from the Burkinabe Shippers’ Council (CBC) show
that truck utilization rates on regional corridors are extremely low. Out of the 15,956 trucks
having used the corridors between Burkina Faso and its neighbors in 2012, almost half did only
one trip, 80% did six trips or less and 95% did twelve trips or less (Figure 2.6). The trucks which
did twelve trips or less represented 75% of all the trips recorded on the corridor. Conversely,
only 196 trucks (1.2% of the total) were recorded as doing at least twenty trips per year. These
results confirm that transporting goods between countries is only an occasional activity for a vast
majority of truckers, who may also be active in domestic transport or have sources of revenue
other than transport. As explained in Box 2.1, the number of rotations per year is an important
factor determining transport services providers’ capacity to finance trucks.

7
  See notably ‘Note de politique sectorielle pour la Côte d’Ivoire: Facilitation des transports et du transit en vue de
stimuler la reprise économique en Côte d’Ivoire’, World Bank 2010, and more recently ‘Logistics Cost Study of
Transport Corridors in Central and West Africa’, SSATP 2013

                                                         11
12
                 100%
                  80%                                    95%

                  60%                      80%           75%                                  Trucks
                  40%                                                                         Trips

                  20%                      42%

                   0%
                        1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35
                  Source: CBC      Number of trips per year




Beyond transport time from Abidjan to Ouagadougou, assessing truck utilization rates with the number of roundtrips
per year is essential to understand trucking companies’ capacity to acquire better trucks.

Following Hartmann (2013), one can estimate the revenue available for truck financing as a function of the number
of roundtrips per year. Vehicle operating (variable) costs, such as driver, fuel and tires, are estimated to represent
55% of the price charged to transport a 40’ container between Abidjan and Ouagadougou (with an empty backhaul
to return the container to the port). The balance is considered the amount available to: (i) cover company overhead
(e.g. licenses, staff and offices), which are higher for large/formal operators than for small/informal ones; and (ii)
finance the acquisition of trucks. A new truck, costing for instance FCFA 90 million, financed at 50% under a bank
loan over 5 years and amortized over 7 years, requires around FCFA 15 million per year. As shown in Figure 2.7, it
is only beyond twenty roundtrips per year that operations start to be compatible with the acquisition of new trucks.
Even a second-hand truck, frequently costing FCFA 18 million for a 10-year old truck, requires FCFA 6 million per
year to finance over three years, which is only possible with at least eight roundtrips per year. These thresholds can
be considered lower-bound estimates, as the calculations do not include fixed costs.


                                  40
                   FCFA million




                                                                                    Revenue
                                  30
                                                                                    Variable costs
                                  20
                                  10                                                Residue

                                  0                                                 New truck
                                       4   6     8   10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24        Second hand truck
                                                     Rotations per year

Source: Hartmann 2013.

2.24 The evidence above suggests that, for most transporters, revenue from transport on
the corridors only is far from sufficient to allow for the financing of better quality trucks.
Operating new trucks is only affordable for transport companies having regular contracts with
large shippers or clearing and forwarding firms, and with transport containers between the port
terminal and the dry port. Others are likely to be excluded from that segment and to focus on
non-containerized freight, where overloading is seen as a quick-fix solution to improve revenue
per trip.




                                                                          13
2.25 The total fleet for large trucks (19 tons and over) in Côte d’Ivoire represents over
17,000 trucks.8 Vehicles registered under commercial transport represent 69%, but several
companies registered under private (or own-account) transport are actually public transport
companies. Individual operators dominate the commercial transport sector, with 62% of the fleet,
while companies dominate the own-account transport sector, with 86% of the fleet (Figure 2.8).


                     Individuals (private)
                     Companies (private)
                         Foreign (public)
                      Individuals (public)
                      Companies (public)
                                             0        2000        4000         6000            8000
                                                        Number of trucks over 19t.
             Source: Hartmann 2013.

2.26 Overall, a market structure dominated by a few operators, non-transparent
allocation of freight, slow rotation times and inefficient customs clearance procedures has
given rise to a suboptimal low-productivity equilibrium in transport characterized by a
large gap between prices and costs and little incentive for poorly compensated truckers to
invest, which explains the co-existence of exorbitant prices and poor service. In fact, with 71
percent of trucks in Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso older than 15 years, the quality of service is
low and the operating conditions of the majority of the trucks do not generate sufficient margins
capable of financing a more modern fleet (Figure 2.9).


                                                                   15%
                        Up to 5 years
                                                                       5%
                        6 to 10 years
                                                                         9%
                        11 to 15 years
                        Over 15 years              71%

                   Source: Hartmann 2013.

2.27 Reversing that situation implies shifting away from current opaque practices for access to
the transport market towards a situation in which transport operators are recognized based on
their ability to provide quality transport services in a professional manner, in view of their
compliance with a number of access criteria. If combined with measures to enhance the
transparency of the allocation of cargo to transporters, a more competitive market structure will
emerge that would lower costs and bring prices more in line with costs. Hence, the restructuring
of the road transport sector requires addressing at least these two core issues:

      -    Access to the profession of transport operator, for which regional regulations have
           been developed which cover most aspects, but with no or limited actual adoption by

8
    Data provided by SONATT (Côte d’Ivoire), extracted from the trucking licenses database in August 2013

                                                         14
       member states. As a result of the revision of access criteria, some informal operators with
       limited capacity to comply will no longer be able to operate, creating space for
       professional operators to operate at greater efficiency and profitability.

   -   Liberalization of access to the transport market, both domestic and international, to
       introduce competition so as to facilitate greater efficiency. A pivotal element in achieving
       this objective is the establishment of a ‘bourse de fret’, which will provide significantly
       greater transparency in allocating freight. Furthermore, the breakdown of the monopoly
       of stevedoring companies in Abidjan is of importance in creating a more competitive and
       level playing field.

      Gateway and inland terminal reform agenda

2.28 The gateway and inland terminals operational efficiency agenda comprises three
dimensions. One is associated with the physical movements of the goods, one is associated with
the documentation processes through the border management agencies, and a third comprises a
governance dimension which impacts the pricing of gateway and terminal logistics services.

2.29 In the documentation process, the border management agencies play a critical role
in international trade as they ensure the security of trade transactions, safeguarding
government revenue and protecting citizens from inadequate goods. However, in a context
of low compliance with trade regulations, there is a tendency to over-emphasize the security role
to the detriment of the trade facilitation role, as uniform approaches are applied to all
transactions, which multiplies controls for both legitimate and fraudulent transactions without
discrimination. This is compounded by low operational efficiency: logistics services depend on
the inefficient production, circulation and use of information among traders, logistics services
providers and regulatory agencies.

2.30 Improving the documentation process requires therefore a two-pronged approach,
focusing on the one hand on the facilitation of legitimate trade transactions through the
promotion of compliance and better risk management (notably with Authorized Economic
Operators schemes and the provision of adequate training to border management agencies and
clearing agents personnel) while ensuring adequate security, and on the other hand on
operational efficiency through automation and provision of advance information that will allow
the processing of documents prior to the arrival of goods at the gateway (in particular through
Single Windows and connection of border management agencies).

    Promotion of compliance

2.31 The main challenge of compliance and risk management is to attain a situation in
which compliant operators are adequately rewarded. At present, the generally low level of
compliance of trade or transport operators in the West Africa region leads to a reluctance of
control agencies to eliminate the multiple layers of control, which have accumulated over time,
which in turn hinder the smooth movement of goods and vehicles and reduce incentives for
operators to comply.


                                               15
2.32 With a view to achieving a higher level of compliance, countries in the region have
embarked on the establishment of an Authorized Economic Operator regime . A recently
conducted feasibility study concluded that countries on the Abidjan-Lagos corridor are ready for
such a program and a pilot is currently being prepared for Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana and Burkina
Faso.9

     Addressing fragmentation of information

2.33 Lack of coordination of information in West Africa increases transaction costs and
times. Three locations are key in the supply chains along the corridors: the maritime gateway,
the inland borders and at destination. Bridging the information gap across stakeholders will
require identifying for each key location what information processed by each type of logistics
operator or control agency is critical for the others and then ensuring timely availability and
access:

    -   To increase the certainty regarding the documentation process, it is important to make
        information widely available on the formalities that traders and logistics service providers
        have to comply with. This is the purpose of systems such as Trade Information Portals
        (TIP). The development of TIPs is currently supported for the UEMOA regional through
        the TFF funded UEMOA regional facilitation program.
    -   At the maritime gateway, advance preparation of the clearance/transit process (notably
        the advance submission of the ship’s manifest and the Customs declaration), reduces the
        duration of goods in the port. A combination of regulatory provisions for advance
        declaration and an enabling system such as Single Windows coordinating and organizing
        the exchange of information among parties are the two avenues for reducing port dwell
        time. Figure 2.10 shows the impact of advance declarations on port dwell time.




9
 In 2010, the World Bank, the governments of the Abidjan Lagos Corridor member countries, the ECOWAS
Secretariat and the Private Investors for Africa (PIA) 9, conducted a feasibility study for Authorized Economic
Operator (AEO) in Nigeria, Benin, Togo, and Ghana to determine their readiness for such a program. The feasibility
study covered the aspects of: political will, prerequisites, private public cooperation framework, legal basis,
integrity, potential participants, compliance measurement and post clearance audit, relationship with the other
government agencies, border operations, and truck transport under a grant from the Trade Facilitation Facility
(TFF), which paves the way for other countries, notably Burkina Faso, to join the pilot when pre-requisites are met.

                                                        16
                                100%       Median dwell time pre-
     Percentage of containers


                                           declared cargo: 9 days
                                80%
                                                                                                                     Declarations after
                                60%                                                                                  vessel arrival
                                                                                 Median dwell time
                                40%                                              post-declared cargo: 16
                                                                                 days                                Declarations
                                20%                                                                                  before Vessel
                                                                                                                     arrival
                                 0%
                                       0       5       10      15     20      25      30       35          40   45
                                                                Port dwell time in days


                  -              Interconnection of Customs and other border management agencies across countries
                                 along the corridors, with the active involvement of the logistics services providers, is
                                 essential to establish an effective transit system that can reduce delays and reduce
                                 transport costs (and prices, provided the right market structure is in place, as discussed
                                 earlier).

2.34 Regarding the physical clearing process, the critical issue concerns the interface
between the port and land transport, where the movement of trucks in urban areas is often
delayed by congestion caused by loaded trucks waiting immediately outside the port due to
limited storage capacity within the port, while in the opposite direction, the opaque allocation
practices described above around inland transport impose long waiting times for trucks before
obtaining a load, adding to the number of idle trucks in the port vicinity.

2.35 Part of the problem is currently being solved with the creation in Abidjan of a short
term parking yard for trucks due to enter the port to pick up or deliver goods. However,
this measure needs to be supplemented by additional parking space outside the metropolitan
areas for longer term parking. This additional space should also include warehousing facilities
(developed by the port authority, by private logistics service providers, or by public entities from
the hinterland countries) expanding the limited capacity at the port.10

2.36 The governance dimension of the gateway and inland terminals agenda has
consequences for the pricing of the services. Most logistics activities undertaken at the
gateways or at inland terminals are of a monopolistic nature, with very few companies providing
services. When a proper regulatory environment is in place, this does not create problems, but in
absence of oversight or with limited oversight capabilities within the public regulatory agencies,
this leaves the door open for market distortions. Countries usually address that risk by


10
   The rationale for the development of additional warehousing capacity has been developed in the World Bank
study ‘Why Does Cargo Spend Weeks in Sub-Sahara Africa Ports?’ One of the findings of the study was that long
port dwell times are often linked to the storage strategies of the shippers preferring to take advantage of lower
storage tariffs in ports rather than relying on third party or in-house facilities. In the case of Abidjan, where storage
is constrained, developing additional capacity has both economic and operational relevance.

                                                                                 17
establishing a regulator for port activities, in which stakeholders have consultative or decision
making status.

2.37 As summarized in Nathan (2013), and drawing from other sources, the primary
inefficiencies along the Abidjan-Ouagadougou road transport corridor can be summarized
as follows:

Gateway/Port Inefficiencies
    Lack of single window
    Low cargo storage costs at port encouraging lengthy dwell times
    Customs clearance is a mix of electronic and manual processes (physical submission of
     cargo invoices and packing lists)
    Lack of equipment for the GPS tracking system
    Lack of truck parking/staging facilities
    Monopoly on local Abidjan area deliveries from the port

Trucking Industry Inefficiencies
    Current incentives are to strip containers and overload trucks
    Powerful transporter unions where trucking freight rates are “black box? types of pricing,
      with predominant fixed costs and very limited variable costs
    Lack of market transparency in business practices
    Old and obsolete fleet operated by poorly qualified truckers
    Low annual mileage per truck due to long wait times for obtaining freight
    Unfair competition from nonprofessional truckers operating old vehicles leading to low
      freight rates that do not guarantee sufficient income for fleet renewal

Transport and Trade Facilitation Inefficiencies
    High port handling charges and shipping line charges
    Lack of professionalism of freight forwarders
    Unreliable Internet connection going down frequently delaying the clearing processes
    Trucks overloading increases load factors and reduces rates
    Too many checkpoints along Abidjan-Ouagadougou corridor, probably the highest
      number compared to other West Africa corridors assessed
    Informal payments and corruption

The proposed regional DPO supports a package of reforms, both regional and national, intended
to address these inefficiencies.



3.1     The road transport sector along the Abidjan-Ouagadougou corridor is marked by a
form of organization that hinders its development and that of the broader economy.
Regulatory failures and the multiplicity of actors and institutions, both formal and informal, are
the root cause of significant disorganization and distortion in the sector. Deteriorating transport
infrastructure, particularly road infrastructure, is an additional contributing factor to

                                                18
underperformance, itself a function of the suboptimal regulatory and institutional environment.
Furthermore, the lack of appropriate incentives and access to finance for funding the renewal of
rolling stock, solicitation of bribes and racketeering among law enforcement agencies through
roadblocks and selective enforcement, and unnecessary and low-value-added services imposed
by syndicates and other actors have further led to a vastly under-performing sector. In sum, the
road haulage sector operates in an informal and precarious environment leading to considerable
vulnerability among the various actors (CIRES, 2010). This vulnerability is further exacerbated
by the planned reform program, which seeks to directly address many of these issues.



3.2     The sector is comprised of various actors/agents whose roles are rather formalized
in a fairly well-established institutional sense, though not all are formal institutions or
actors. These actors can be categorized into two groups: first, those in charge of regulating and
organizing the various activities of the sector (largely government ministries and state or quasi-
state institutions); and second, those that are directly engaged in the provision of trucking
services (road transport companies, drivers, freight forwarders, coxeurs, shippers and
stevedores). This section describes these various actors.

      Regulatory Actors

3.3     Without getting into specific details of the various government agencies involved
and their individual responsibilities, suffice it to say that the government, as in most
economies, is integrally involved in the regulation of the sector. At the national level in both
Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso, this involves several state actors, including technical ministries
(Ministry of Transport, Ministry of State, Ministry of Interior and Security). These technical
ministries are responsible for regulation around issues such as: transport sector policy;
international transport agreements, conventions and treaties; laws and regulations on road
transport and road traffic, including issues such as axle load limits; infrastructure provision,
including road maintenance and rehabilitation; vehicle standards and licensing; driver standards
and licensing; etc.

3.4     In addition to technical ministries, other government agencies are also involved in
road transport, particularly policing entities, military and security agencies, and health, forest
and agricultural agencies. These entities are involved largely with enforcing regulations,
enhancing road safety, ensuring public safety and furthering national health, environmental and
security interests. In this respect, state institutions in Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso, while
admittedly having their own unique institutional characteristics and while there remains
considerable room for improvement, do not deviate too far from the norm in terms of the role of
official government ministries.

3.5     Unfortunately, while the state institutional structure is broadly appropriate,
application and implementation of many of these state functions deviates considerably
from good practice. This arises at both the level of the policy and regulatory environment,
which suffers from issues of regulatory transparency, state capture, inappropriate influence
peddling and corruption issues, and at the level of implementation and enforcement of existing
regulations and control mechanisms, as there is widespread inequitable and irregular

                                               19
enforcement, blatant rent seeking (corruption) within enforcement and oversight agencies, and
frequent disregard of existing rules and regulations and broad non-compliance across the sector.

      Quasi-State Actors

Office Ivorien des Chargers (OIC) – Côte d’Ivoire

3.6      The Office Ivorien des Chargers (OIC) is by definition a shippers’ council. It is an
organization that represents and defends the interests of importers, exporters, shippers, and the
users of transport services in the context of the delivery of their goods. The Ivorian Shippers'
Council (CIC) was created in 1969, and became the OIC in 1975. The overall vision of the OIC
is to contribute to the competitiveness of transport services and to facilitate foreign trade in Côte
d’Ivoire. To do this, it has a mission to provide: direct assistance to shippers; collection and
analysis of relevant data and information on trade flows; negotiation of transport costs;
facilitating and contributing to efficient traffic flows; the provision of supporting infrastructure
for shippers; serving as an interface between government and private sector transport interests
and transport services users.
3.7      A decade or so ago, the allocation of freight to freight carriers was very formalized
and the OIC played a key role. The OIC, on behalf of shippers, provided to the Ministry of
Transportation information on the tonnage of goods requiring transportation within or through
Côte d’Ivoire. The Ministry then provided this information to carriers unions (syndicats) and
these in turn were responsible for informing carriers and finding vehicles capable of transporting
the goods. This was particularly the case for transit traffic that was subject to the 1/3, 2/3 rule,
whereby 1/3 of the goods were to be transported on Ivorien trucks.

3.8      This mode of operation is no longer in effect today, largely because the Ivorien truck
fleet is aging and incapable of hauling its 1/3 quota. Therefore, other ECOWAS carriers carry
the bulk of the merchandise. Nonetheless, there continues to be substantial collaboration between
the OIC and their counterpart shippers’ councils in other countries of the sub-region and with
some syndicats.

3.9     The OIC also provides parking areas in cooperation with several town councils and
manages a two hectare truck parking area outside the port at Vridi and a 1.5 hectares parking
area at the Port of San Pedro. These spaces are designed to decongest roads around the port.
These parking areas are of two types: areas under Customs control and oversight; and “free?
parking areas. The parking areas under Customs control are provided at the port of Abidjan and
San Pedro and at border crossings, and are primarily used for trucks containing goods in transit.
These goods are exempt from customs duties and taxes and oversight must be provided to ensure
goods are not off-loaded in Côte d’Ivoire. The “free? parking areas provide somewhat secure
parking for trucks and rest areas for truck drivers near regional capitals and major areas of
production and distribution. Vehicles parked in these car parks pay a fee of 2,500 CFA francs
daily. Nonetheless, truckers complain of a lack of parking and rest facilities both around the port
and along the corridor, including a lack of security.




                                                 20
Conseil Burkinabè des Chargeurs (CBC) – Burkina Faso

3.10 The CBC was established in 1978 to address challenges in transport related to the
country's landlocked status by minimizing international transport costs and streamlining supply
conditions. The CBC's tasks include: directly assisting shippers in their negotiations with
transporters -- in this regard the CBC maintains offices at all regional ports through which they
arrange transport for shipments destined for Burkina Faso; coordinate the interventions of the
various players in the transport chain in transit countries and in Burkina Faso, in order to reduce
the time and cost of transport; and make available to shippers and other economic operators,
information on the organization, costs and conditions of goods transport. The various tasks
entrusted to the CBC make it a strategic link in the goods transport chain, though its role as the
primary broker between shippers and transporters is diminishing as other players increasingly
enter this space. Besides the above mentioned tasks, the CBC also plays a role in representing
the Government of Burkina Faso with certain institutions including the Academy of Science and
Technology of the Sea, the Economic and Monetary Union of West Africa (UEMOA), the Union
of African Shippers' Councils, etc.

Chamber of Commerce and Industry – Burkina Faso (CCI-BF)

3.11 CCI-BF was founded in 1948 and is directly involved in the transport sector. The
CCI-BF plays the usual advisory role to public authorities in the fields of trade, industry and
services, and represents the business community in various institutions and organizations such as
the Economic and Social Council, the Privatization Commission, the International Chamber of
Commerce, etc. However, somewhat atypically, the CCI-BF provides several services directly to
transport operators in general and in particular to freight operators. It provides port, rail and road
terminals with warehouses and related infrastructure. Its terminal space includes more than
78,000m2, of which 52% is located in Burkina Faso and 65,000m2 of parking space of which one
third is located in the transit countries.

3.12 Since 1980, CCI-BF has operated a 26 hectares terminal in Ouagadougou
specialized in domestic and international freight traffic. This terminal includes: three
warehouses of 5,000m2 of which one is Customs-bonded; a parking area of 28,800m2; offices of
2100m2; a 50 ton capacity weigh bridge; a further 10,000m2 area for maneuvering and parking; a
gas station concessioned to Shell and Total; and a 20 room hotel. Furthermore, the CCI-BF has
built a 19 hectares dry port at Bobo-Dioulasso including: a Customs-bonded warehouse of
approximately 2,275m² and bonded parking of 36,500m² for 268 trucks and an export warehouse
of approximately 600m²; a container terminal area of about 18,500m2; a maintenance workshop;
a "foreign transit" zone, which is a space for merchandise trucks and tankers; and an un-bonded
warehouse of 2,457m2 and an unbonded parking area of 8,000m2 for 48 trucks; an administrative
area consisting of offices, control stations, parking lots, a weighbridge and pathways; and a
mixed use area including a police station, hotels, restaurants, cafes, banks, insurance offices,
etc.).

Road Transport Training Center – Burkina Faso

3.13 This training center plays an important role in the transport sector in Burkina Faso. It is
financially dependent on the CCI-BF, but is under the technical supervision of the Department of

                                                 21
Transport. It provides pre-service and ongoing training to State personnel as well as to the
private sector in road transport related fields including: driver training; road transport business
and entrepreneurial training; mechanics training; and driving instructor and inspector training.

      Private Sector Actors

Shippers (Chargeurs)

3.14 The shipper is the essentially the client in need of transport services. A shipper can
be an individual, a producer of goods, a distributor, or a firm that specializes in organizing the
transport of goods for other parties. The shipper is essentially the owner and possessor of all or
part of a lot of goods transported by truck, and may be the actual importer or exporter, depending
on the nature of the commercial contract. Shippers tend to deal with multiple
carriers/transporters, many deal in significant quantities and require frequent access to transport
services. They enter into contractual relationships with transporters based on the frequency of
delivery, volume, price, quality of service, and the possible relevant penalties or compensation
clauses. According to an official of the OIC, "the shipper is a legal or natural person who exports
and imports goods."

3.15 Shippers are not homogenous however, and they vary in terms of volumes shipped and
frequency of shipments: some are regular shippers that are registered with the OIC for example
in Côte d’Ivoire, while others are occasional shippers and may not be registered by their
respective shippers’ councils. In recent years in Côte d’Ivoire shippers have created Economic
Interest Groups (GIE) as a platform for exchange of expertise, to carry out certain common
operations and activities, and to defend the social and economic interests of their members.

Freight Forwarders (Transitaires)

3.16 The freight forwarder is a person or company authorized by the sender or recipient
of goods to act on their behalf in managing the shipping/transport process and related
transactions, including successive transport operations. Freight forwarders essentially play an
intermediation role in the business transaction routing system. They can be responsible for
completing the Customs formalities for importers and exporters and they manage the links
between separate individual carriers and thus ensure the continuity of transportation. In their
warehouses, freight forwarders manage the entry, inventory tracking and exit of goods, and in
their bonded facilities can provide storage for goods exempt from duties and taxes pending
international shipping.

Stevedores (Acconiers)

3.17 A stevedore is a company (or contractor) responsible for conducting dockside
handling operations. Those employed in loading and unloading ships, i.e., the individuals
involved, are also frequently referred to as stevedores. Legally, the stevedore is responsible for
the goods during loading, unloading and storage. In Côte d'Ivoire, a distinction is sometimes
made between the dock-side handling (stevedores) and land-based handling (acconiers).



                                                22
Transporters and Trucking Companies

3.18 Access to the transport profession is regulated in both Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina
Faso. In order to enter the profession, one must register in advance, for example through
SONATT in Côte d’Ivoire. This registration results in the issuance of a certificate of registration
that is personal and non-transferable. It is available to: a) natural persons of Ivorien or Burkinabé
nationality registering in their respective countries; and b) to legal entities regardless of the
nationality of their members. In addition to registering as a transporter, the carrier must also
seek authorization to transport, which is issued for each vehicle.

3.19 Registration as a carrier and an authorization to transport permit gives the carrier
the right to practice and operate along the lines or routes assigned to each vehicle.
Registration also allows the person or entity the ability to join various professional organizations
(associations, trade unions, syndicats) and the access to infrastructure, equipment and funding
from the organizations of which it is member. Any entity that, for a period of more than a year, is
not in possession of an authorization to transport is determined to have ceased transport activity
and can be removed from the register of transporters.

3.20 With respect its obligations, each registered carrier must: a) ensure the movement of
goods in line with all safety and other transport regulations in force; b) have appropriate
insurance to cover third-party liability; c) pay all transport related taxes and fees (license, VAT,
etc.); d) declare employees to the relevant authorities (Inspectorate of Labour and Social
Legislation, National Social Security Fund); and e) respect all provisions and measures related to
the movement of traffic.

3.21 Transporters can be classified into two distinct groups: 1. those in good standing vis-
à-vis all modern and professional legal requirements relating to their activities; and 2. informal
transporters operating outside of current rules and regulations and/or not meeting required
standards. Formal, professional transporters can be legally established formal companies, but
can also be individuals that meet current standards and are operating formally as independent
owner-operator entities. These are companies which generally meet legal and modern
requirements, including access to the profession conditions and professional standards
(employment conditions, division of labor, remuneration guidelines, sound financial and
technical management, etc). These operations are in possession of a registration certificate and a
transport authorization permit for each vehicle. Employees are engaged on a formal basis, often
under contract. Under the terms of their employment contract, drivers cannot exceed 40 hours
per week. Many of these formal enterprises have their own garage where vehicles can be parked
and where technical and mechanical maintenance of their vehicles can be undertaken.
Furthermore, technical and administrative management within these firms is typically supported
by some training and based on employment is based on professional competence. Wages
typically exceed minimum wage standards. However, some formal firms are family businesses
who, even in these cases, operate professional and modern operations.

3.22 In contrast, informal transporters/truckers (the large majority of transporters in
terms of numbers) are primarily owner-operator entities operating a single truck, or very few
trucks, that are not registered, and whose vehicles are not authorized and are often non-compliant

                                                 23
with current vehicle standards and licensing requirements. Vehicles owned by informal
operators tend to be old, in poor condition and are used infrequently or only during seasonal high
demand periods. Many informal operators are only engaged in trucking on a part-time basis and
do not rely solely on trucking for their livelihood. Nonetheless, there are some informal truckers
who are engaged full-time in the transport industry and some maintain a fleet of several trucks,
though they continue to operate informally and outside of the formal, regulated system.

Drivers

3.23 A driver is clearly an individual engaged as the operator of a truck/vehicle involved
in road transport. He/she can be an employee of a transport company or an owner-operator of
an individual truck(s). Formally a driver must be at least 21 years of age for vehicles carrying
more than eight persons (in Côte d’Ivoire) excluding the driver, and 18 years of age for vehicles
carrying up to eight people. Licensing is subject to the demonstration of specific professional
capabilities and depends on the type of license applied for and the vehicle category for which it
is to be applied. The driver is required to perform his/her duties in conformance with applicable
laws, rules and regulations and must follow the instructions of police, security and defense forces
when he/she encounters such agents.
Unions and Syndicats

   ?      Syndicats in Côte d’Ivoire

3.24 Unions (syndicats) in Côte d’Ivoire are organizations of carriers and/or drivers
whose main formal objective is to defend the interests of its members . In practice however,
syndicats provide a wide variety of services including: allocation of freight; parking and staging
areas; protection and security services; etc. A syndicat can be easily formed by depositing at the
Interior Ministry, the town hall, or in administrative districts where the headquarters of the union
is established the syndicat’s statutes and by-laws. Although no particular form is imposed, the
statutes must identify the union’s leadership and management. The statutes often contain fairly
standard clauses, namely: the purpose of the syndicat; the headquarters location; internal
organizational structure; the geographical operating area; operating rules; the conditions for
amending the statutes; and the conditions of dissolution. Given the low threshold for creating a
syndicate, with no minimum number of members required, and little monitoring or enforcement
by the Ministry of Interior, there are over 250 syndicats in Côte d’Ivoire, some with very small
membership bases and others with hundreds of members. Approximately 35% of truckers do not
belong to a syndicat.

3.25 The modus operandi of syndicats and their management practices are very non-
transparent. Some would appear to be created for the sole purpose of extracting rents from
certain truckers and trucker groups, along the lines of protection rackets, while others appear to
be meaningfully committed to providing value-added services to its members. As an example,
one syndicate representative with a stated membership of 1,130 members welcomes the
envisaged government attempts at modernising the sector. He deplored that many syndicates are
principally hunting for freight and passengers and are not fulfilling their traditional role of
primarily representing the interests of their members. Competition among syndicates has
apparently increased and in the case of passenger traffic has resulted in a number of violent

                                                24
incidents. Conflicts over passengers and market share often play out in the parking complexes
(les gares, terrains de stationnement) that are usually managed by a number of syndicates, in that
they control access to passengers (or freight for that matter) through a tour de rôle system.
Managing these gares has also become a source of income for syndicates, as truckers pay a fee to
enter and leave the parking areas.

   ? Syndicats in Burkina Faso

3.26 The road transport sector in Burkina is marked by the existence of several
transport unions, the best known of which are: the Organization of Road Transporters of
Burkina Faso (Organisation des Transporteurs Routiers du Burkina Faso -- OTRAF) and the
National Union of Road Transporters of Burkina (Syndicat National des Transporteurs Routiers
de Voyageurs du Burkina -- SNTRV-B).

3.27 OTRAF is a union of freight and passenger carriers with branches in different regions
of the country, with “commissions? covering different transport areas, i.e., oil, general cargo,
passengers, etc., and it plays an influential role in the organization and functioning of the sector.
OTRAF has representatives in the ports of Abidjan, Lomé, Cotonou, and Tema, which coexist
with CBC offices and representation. OTRAF negotiates rates for freight carriers and arranges
freight for its members if necessary. It receives and transmits to its members transport offers
received from CBC and in this regard matches available loads with available member truckers
following a “tour de role? system where this function is still practised, including to a limited
extent at the Port of Abidjan.

3.28 The SNTRV-B is a union of road passenger transport providers, which incorporates
to some extent the transport of goods. It aims to provide assistance in the harmonization of
supply and demand for public transport vehicles and the establishment of fair prices for both the
providers and users of passenger transport services. They are also working to have
representatives in the various Burkina transit ports alongside OTRAF.

3.29 There are other trade union-based organizations that are also involved in the industry in
Burkina Faso. However, most of these organizations are located solely within the national
territory and many are of a local or provincial character.

Coxeurs

3.30 In Côte d’Ivoire access to cargo used to be institutionally regulated. In the past, the
OIC would inform the Ministry of Transport of cargo needing to be transported. It was up to the
Ministry to then inform the truckers’ trade unions of available cargo who in turn were
responsible for informing carriers and finding vehicles capable of transporting the goods. This
process has now been abolished and in theory, the market has been liberalized. Thus, shippers
now have the right to negotiate directly with the carriers.

3.31 In practice, access to cargo and loads usually pass through a coxeur. The coxeur is
the intermediary between the carrier, or where applicable the driver, and the merchant or shipper.
Coxeurs have a contact network of several traders, loaders, drivers and carriers. Coxeurs can also

                                                 25
on occasion deal with customs procedures and can work with freight forwarders. Coxeurs charge
a variable fee depending on the nature of the relationship with the customer and the quantity and
quality of the goods transported. Usually, this commission is about 50,000 CFAF per loaded
vehicle to Ouagadougou or Bamako. The contract between the coxeur and its customers is
typically via tacit understanding and is rarely in writing. This activity is dominated in and around
the Port of Abidjan by coxeurs of Burkinabé and Malian origin.

3.32 Coxeurs however, are not a homogeneous breed and practices vary widely. Indeed,
some truckers whose vehicles are not currently available or have no vehicle also play this role of
intermediary. This activity is also practiced by drivers, shopkeepers, and people of varying
capacity and backgrounds, but with some connection and knowledge of the industry. At times
practices of coxeurs can border on the coercive, predatory, and indeed illegal. For example,
many Burkinabé drivers can be stranded at the port for weeks while they wait to unload their
cargo at the port and await a return shipment. Frequently they run out of money and must borrow
funds. Coxeurs will fill this gap, but then confiscate their “carte grise? without which they cannot
depart and insist that they arrange their next load at often non-market prices. Others run
protection rackets whereby waiting trucks will be vandalized unless protection money is paid or
the services of particular coxeurs are used. In sum, practices vary widely and the use of coxeurs
tends to drive a price wedge in-between shippers and transporters.



3.33 As can be noted from the discussion above, the road transport sector is
characterized by considerable heterogeneity across companies. For example, trucking
companies, are typically unincorporated personal businesses (87.2% in Côte d'Ivoire and 72.7%
in Burkina Faso), while most freight forwarders are limited liability companies (63.2% in the
Ivory Coast against 48.8% in Burkina Faso).

3.34 This heterogeneity exists across the two countries as well. The typology of carriers
reveals that most “companies? (a “company? meaning an operation that is in the trucking
business as its primary activity and typically operates more than one truck and engages more
than one employee) operate in the informal sector in Côte d'Ivoire. Indeed, more than two out of
three (71%) are informal, against only one in five (19%) in Burkina Faso (Figure 3.1). A
company is considered formal if it has a taxpayer's account and keeps accounts of its business.
An informal company refers to those companies who fall outside of state regulation, taxation and
other state oversight. In addition to informal and formal companies, the analysis distinguishes
“artisans? who are defined as truckers that usually have only one vehicle and act as both manager
and driver.




                                                26
                                80



              % d'entreprises
                                                                                71,2                     Burkina Faso
                                                                                                         Côte d'Ivoire
                                60

                                            42,5
                                                                                                    38,1
                                40


                                                                        19,4
                                20                  15,1                                                      13,7


                                 0
                                              Artisan                     Informel                       Formel

            Source: EITM-ENSEA, 2014.

3.35 Truckers can also be differentiated as to whether they primarily haul freight for others
(public) or whether they haul freight principally on their own account (private). They can then
be further disaggregated by whether they are officially registered as a trucking company or offer
transport services without declaring as a transport company. Figure 3.2 provides the breakdown
of trucking interests along these lines.



                                70
             % d'entreprises




                                60                                                               Burkina Faso
                                                                                                 Côte d’Ivoire
                                50

                                40

                                30

                                20

                                10

                                 0
                                         Société          Société        Particulier      Particulier        Autres
                                     transport public transport privé transport public transport privé

                         Source: EITM-ENSEA, 2014.

3.36 Trucking is frequently not a full time activity, or is not the sole activity for many
firms. About 20% of road transporters (19.1% in the Côte d’Ivoire and 17.4% in Burkina Faso)
report being involved in other types of activities (see Table 3.1). In addition, in disaggregating
the data according to the whether the company is also involved in the transport of its own goods,

                                                                        27
we observe a higher proportion of carriers that diversify their activities. Indeed, more than four
Ivorian carriers in ten (41.03%) and about three Burkinabe transporters in ten (27.5%) among
those who transport their own goods are also involved in another activity. In Côte d'Ivoire, the
average share generated by freight transport in the total turnover of the company is relatively
lower than in Burkina Faso (34.62% against 46.12% respectively). Compared to Burkina Faso,
the average revenue share generated by freight transport for these companies is relatively more
important (44.44%). The main other activity in which companies are involved is general trading
activities, which represents about 50% of total revenue.



                                                             Percentage of transport activities in total
                       % involved in another activity
                                                                             revenue
                                         Companies that                               Companies that
                      All transport                             All transport
                                       transport their own                          transport their own
                       companies                                 companies
                                             goods                                        goods
Côte d’Ivoire            19,07               41,03                  46,12                 34,62

Burkina Faso             17,39                27,50                 40,90                  44,44
Source: EITM-ENSEA, 2014.

3.37 The assets of a business can be a key element in determining success . In the case of
the transport sector, assets also provide some insight into the logistical capacity available to
enterprises and a firm’s ability to conduct business in a professional manner. This can be
measured by the number of vehicles available to transport goods, but also by the availability of
parking spaces and storage facilities. Most transport companies in Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina
Faso do not have private parking areas. Indeed, more than half of them use public parking areas
(70% in Ivory Coast and 55% in Burkina Faso). About one in five leases a parking lot (22% in
Côte d’Ivoire and 12.4% in Burkina Faso). Only 11% of Ivorian carriers have their own parking
space, while in Burkina Faso, the proportion was 25% (Figure 3.3).




                                                 28
                               80



             % d'entreprises
                                                                                                       69,9
                                            Burkina Faso
                               60           Côte d'Ivoire                                      54,7



                               40

                                            24,8
                                                                            21,8
                               20
                                                     10,9           12,4


                                0
                                        Aire de stationnement   Location d'une aire de     Occupation du domaine
                                              personnel            stationnement                 publique

           Source: EITM-ENSEA, 2014

3.38 Many carriers do not own storage space for goods under their control. In fact, about
eight out of ten carriers have no such facility. Burkinabe carriers have slightly more of such
facilities and this may be related to their greater geographic isolation and the need to stockpile
before transport, especially in serving the internal domestic market and other Sahelian countries
(Figure 3.4).


                               100
                                                      87.8
             % d'entreprises




                                80            74.1

                                                                                             Burkina Faso
                                60                                                           Côte d'Ivoire

                                40


                                20                                   15.8
                                                                             7.0               10.1
                                                                                                       5.2
                                    0
                                            Aucun magasin         Un seul magasin        Au moins deux magasins


           Source: EITM-ENSEA, 2014




Vehicle Types


                                                                     29
3.39 Several types of vehicles are used by carriers in Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso.
Tankers and flatbeds dominate the Burkinabe fleet (respectively 49.3% and 23.2% of the fleet),
while the Ivorian fleet is dominated by semi-trailers/van trucks (49%) and dump trucks (20%)
(Figures 3.5). Formal firms in Burkina Faso have a fleet dominated by tankers (61.3% of
enterprises), while the informal and artisanal fleet includes more semi-trailers/van trucks
(respectively 27.0% and 19.7 %) and flatbeds (33.3% and 23.6%, respectively) (Figure 3.5). This
can be explained by the fact that tankers are used to transport oil and gas from producing
countries and ports, including Côte d'Ivoire to Burkina Faso. Indeed, tankers are the dominant
means of transport for companies engaged in international travel (60% of companies).
Transporting hydrocarbons necessitates formal contracts that require vehicles in good condition.
In addition, the transport of hydrocarbons is an ongoing activity with few fluctuations, while in
other areas of freight, supply fluctuates considerably, sometimes causing periodic suspension of
activities. Formal freight businesses have a tendency to get into the fuel transport business and
thus require the use of tankers. National traffic meanwhile is mainly provided by flatbed trucks
and semi-trailer/van trucks.




                                               30
        Operator Type                                        Truck Type
 100%                                         100%
                             Autres

  80%                        Tracteur         80%
                                                                                 Autres

  60%                        Camion frigo                                        Tracteur
                                              60%
                                                                                 Camion frigo
                             Camion benne
  40%                                                                            Camion benne
                                              40%                                Camion fourgon
                             Camion
  20%                        fourgon                                             Camion plateau
                             Camion           20%                                Camion Citerne
   0%                        plateau
                             Camion Citerne
                                               0%
                                                      National   International

Source: EITM-ENSEA, 2014.


3.40 In Côte d'Ivoire, semi-trailers/vans (49%) are the most frequent followed dump trucks
(20%). Semi-trailers/van trucks dominate international routes (79%) compared to domestic
routes (42%). This can be explained by the fact that international transport is done over long
distances and requires that the goods be better protected, i.e., covered and sealed. Large vans and
semi-trailers meet these requirements. Also, flatbeds used for transporting goods packed in
containers are also increasingly used by international carriers. In contrast, dump trucks used to
transport bulk goods, such as sand, gravel, etc., are used by carriers that do not cross borders
(24%) and rarely by international carriers (2%). The transport of hydrocarbons is done with
tankers, but in the case of Côte d’Ivoire seems confined to domestic travel only as tankers
represent only 0.3% of Côte d’Ivoire’s international fleet compared to 6% for domestic carriers.

3.41 Both public and private freight carriers generally use their own trucks . However,
they may occasionally use rental trucks or enter into lease agreements. In Côte d’Ivoire about
98% of trucks are owned while in Burkina Faso, the proportion is 89.4%. (see Table 3.2).




                                                31
       Types d’entreprises                                       Axes desservis
 100                                         100

  90                                          90
                              Autres                                        Autres
  80                                          80
                              Camion porte                                  Camion porte
  70                          grume           70                            grume
                              Camion frigo    60                            Camion frigo
  60

  50                          Camion          50                            Camion Citerne
                              Citerne
                                              40
  40                          Tracteur                                      Tracteur
                                              30
  30
                              Camion                                        Camion
                              plateau         20                            plateau
  20
                              Camion benne    10                            Camion benne
  10
                              Camion           0                            Camion
   0                          fourgon                                       fourgon




Source: EITM-ENSEA, 2014


3.42 Analysis of the fleet in terms of age reveals an aging fleet, especially among informal
enterprises and artisans. An aged fleet is common to freight carriers in West Africa, though it
should be noted that the Ivorian fleet is older than that of Burkina Faso (Table 3.2). In Côte
d’Ivoire trucks have an average age of 21 years with 89% being more than 10 years old. In
Burkina Faso, the average age is about 13 years, with only half the fleet over 12 years old.




                                              32
                                        Côte d'Ivoire                           Burkina Faso
   Droit de propriété sur le véhicule
  Propriété de l'entreprise                     97,88                               89,4
  Loué à un particulier                          0,86                                4,2
  Crédit/Bail                                     0,8                                3,8
  Loués à une compagnie                          0,46                                2,1
  Autre                                            0                                 0,5
   Classes d'âge des véhicules de transport de marchandises
  [0 ; 5]                                        3,24                               15,89
  [5 ; 10]                                         5                                18,54
  [10 ; 15]                                     17,27                               32,45
  [15 ; 20]                                     23,65                               15,89
  [20 ; 25]                                     19,73                                7,95
  [25 ; 30]                                     12,37                                5,96
  [30 ; 35]                                      9,13                                3,31
  [35 ; 60]                                      9,62                               15,89
   Classes d'âge des véhicules selon le type de transporteurs de marchandises
                                 Artisan      Informel Formel         Artisan     Informel     Formel
  [0 ; 5]                          1,18         0,78        9,25       17,65         0,00       19,35
  [5 ; 10]                         3,53         4,83        5,82        8,82        16,67       22,58
  [10 ; 15]                        5,88        17,45       20,21       29,41        33,33       33,33
  [15 ; 20]                       24,71        21,03       29,11       17,65        16,67       15,05
  [20 ; 25]                       22,35        21,96       14,04       14,71         8,33        5,38
  [25 ; 30]                       11,76        14,17        8,56        8,82        12,50        3,23
  [30 ; 60]                       30,59        19,78       13,02        2,94        12,50        1,08
 Source: EITM-ENSEA, 2014

Strategies for Truck/Fleet Renewal

3.43 In Côte d’Ivoire, trucks used by the majority of carriers (80%) are either second -
hand vehicles (75.6%) or rehabilitated purchased vehicles (4.4%). Only 41% of freight
carriers are currently considering acquiring one or more trucks in the next 12 months. The
acquisition of new vehicles by carriers would reduce the frequency of breakdowns, avoid delays
in the delivery of goods, contribute to improving the quality of road transport services, and
increasingly protect the environment.

3.44 In Burkina Faso, truckers have benefited from tax relief on taxes on imported
vehicles. These measures, have allowed for some fleet renewal and this is evident in the age of
the fleet. The purchase of new vehicles and the purchase of second-hand vehicles (used) are the
two main vehicle acquisition modes in Burkina Faso. The majority (65.3%) of the vehicle fleet in
Burkina Faso are second-hand vehicles and over 85% of all freight transport companies employ
used vehicles. New vehicles represent 30% of vehicles in the fleet and are held by 10.7% of
companies.

                                                    33
3.45 Access to financing is an essential element in fleet renewal and is a concern for any
operators in both the formal and informal sectors. Financing can be a constraint at both the
start of a trucking venture and in the ongoing operation of the business. Access to finance for
most private sector actors is generally based on financial and banking institutions that require
collateral. Unfortunately, this is not always within reach of small and medium enterprises, and
appears to be a particular constraint to trucking enterprises. Most carriers are forced to finance
their vehicle purchases with own-equity, resort to informal loans, or obtain assistance from their
family. In Côte d’Ivoire, the primary modes of financing truck purchases are: first self-financing
(85.5%), followed by rent-to-own (5%), informal loans (4.5%), family loans (2%), and bank
loans (2%). In Burkina Faso vehicle purchases are funded in whole or in part by self-financing
(78%) and bank loans (26%) (Figure 3.7). These differences between the two countries may
reflect the efforts of the Burkinabé government and the programs it implemented to encourage
fleet renewal.


          100


           80

                                                                                      Burkina Faso
           60
                                                                                      Côte d'Ivoire

           40


           20


            0
                Fonds propre Prêt bancaire Location vente    Prêteurs     Emprunt        Autre
                                                            individuels    familial

        Source: EITM-ENSEA, 2014

3.46 Limited access to the banking system can perhaps be explained by the nature of freight
carriers. Indeed, road transport freight companies in Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso tend to be
micro-enterprises (with less than 5 trucks) and very few keep regular accounts and pay taxes.
This reflects the high level of informality among freight carriers and hinders access to the formal
banking system. These carriers, like most small entrepreneurs in Africa, are rarely able to meet
the requirements of financial institutions. They are considered high risk and the formal financial
sector lacks information about their repayment capacity and their ability to provide and
guarantee collateral is limited.



4.1     In support of their national development plans, the Governments of Côte d’Ivoire
and Burkina Faso have prepared a comprehensive program of reform for the transport
sector. The program focuses on a number of reforms, such as the reform of drivers’ and vehicle
licenses, the professionalization of the trucking industry and the adoption of more stringent
                                                     34
criteria for access to the profession. The common vision of the two countries for modernization
of their transport sectors is spelled out in the joint Letter of Development Policy, which
accompanies the Bank’s program document. The LDP presents the medium-term reform
strategy of the two countries for modernization of their transport sectors and of operations along
the Abidjan-Ouagadougou, taking into account both transport and customs-related aspects.

        Burkina Faso’s Transport Reform Program

4.2     The transport sector is a major component of Burkin a Faso’s development strategy.
Noting that high transport costs remain a major impediment to Burkina's competitiveness and
growth, their Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustainable Development (SCADD)
emphasizes the necessity of improving the transport and logistics sectors in order to achieve the
country's long-term development goals. In addition to investment in better infrastructure, the
SCADD explicitly mentions the need to introduce measures enabling the emergence of
professional and efficient transport companies. Complementing the SCADD, a revised
Transport Strategy for the period 2011-2025 was adopted by the Government in December 2011
to guide the development of policies enabling profitable investment in the sector and maximizing
its contribution to growth and competitiveness.11 This document provides a diagnostic of the
constraints affecting transport in Burkina Faso, including:

        Obsolete or incomplete nature of legal texts regulating access to the road transport
         profession and defining the nature of various transport sub-sectors;
        High costs and long delays on the corridors linking Burkina to the coast and at maritime
         gateways, compared to other corridors in Sub-Saharan Africa;
        Freight transport services characterized by a high number of small, unprofessional
         operators with a dilapidated fleet, poor management practices, and low profitability and
         investments;
        Inefficient practices, such as the stripping of containers at the ports and the queuing
         system (tour de rôle) for trucks, which contribute to the survival of inefficient operators
         and negatively impact the profitability of the sector;
        High cost of container warranties and the short time allocated to transporters to return
         them, which creates pressures for container stripping.




11
   Actualisation de la Stratégie de Développement du Secteur des Transports au Burkina Faso – Rapport Final,
Juillet 2011 (available at: http://www.sips.gov.bf/img_tmp_fichiers/MIDT-PS-3.pdf).

                                                    35
Axis             Issue                                            Measures planned
Policy
International    Inadequate regulatory and institutional          Improvement of the institutional framework for
transit          framework for transit, with                      regional corridors and coordination within and between
                 responsibilities diluted between several         countries;
                 actors;                                          Liberalization of national and regional freight markets
                 Negative impact of practices such as             and promotion of competition, with accompanying
                 freight repartition and “tour de role? on        measures to mitigate the negative impact for inefficient
                 the quantity, quality and price of               operators;
                 transport services;                              Implementation of regional standards to limit
                 Obstacles along corridors, such as               checkpoints, introduction of system for tracking of
                 multiple controls and harassment                 cargo along corridors; Interconnection of customs
                                                                  management systems with neighboring countries; Joint
                                                                  borders post;
                                                                  Cargo tracking system along key regional corridors
Management       Increasing cost of road works and                Modernization and decentralization of the institutional
of road          systematic overloading of trucks                 framework for road management and maintenance;
infrastructure                                                    Measures to reduce overloading “upstream? (reducing
                                                                  incentives to overload through improved
                                                                  competitiveness of road freight and promotion of
                                                                  containerization through a guarantee fund) and
                                                                  “downstream? (implementation of axle-load
                                                                  regulations and improved controls);
Transport        Low proportion of freight transported            Promote containerization
services fees    with containers; High cost of                    Reduce maintenance and warranty fees for containers
                 maintenance and warranty for containers.
Trucking         Easy access to transport profession and          Professionalization of trucking industry
industry         no clear conditions limiting
                 responsibilities
Road safety      Increasing road safety issues, many              Support new transport fleet acquisition.
                 accidents                                        Speed limit for passengers cars
                                                                  Regulate license renewals for passengers transport with
                                                                  technical control and limited age of vehicles.
Infrastructure
Road network     Limited density and poor quality,                Increase of the size and density of the primary,
                 especially of the secondary and tertiary         secondary and tertiary road network;
                 road network                                     Rehabilitate the network, modernize the main transport
                                                                  axes; Highway Ouagadougou-Yamoussoukro
Rail             Poor condition of railway linking                Rehabilitation of the Abidjan-Ouagadougou-Kaya line;
infrastructure   Burkina to Côte d’Ivoire and insufficient        construction of rail link Ouagadougou-Niamey
                 wagons for fret carriage


        Côte d’Ivoire’s Transport Reform Program

4.3    The Ivoirian authorities have established an ambitious reform and modernization
plan for the transport sector. The Ministry of Transport recently presented its strategy to
improve transport in Côte d’Ivoire and facilitate exchanges along the Abidjan-Ouagadougou
corridor.12 As outlined in 4.2 below, an important part of this strategy concerns policy reforms

12
  Politique de Facilitation des Transports sur le Corridor Abidjan-Ouagadougou, Ministry of Transport of the
Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, October 2013.

                                                             36
to modernize the road transport sector. The program focuses on a number of reforms, such as the
reform of drivers’ and vehicle licenses and the professionalization of the trucking industry, by
adopting revised criteria for access to the profession. Fleet renewal schemes will provide
incentives for accepting and implementing the reforms.


Axis            Issue                                   Measures planned
Policy
Regulation of     Limited control over the              Establishment at the Ministry of Transport of a single
the road          sector; long delays for               management system for road transport activities and service
transport sector procedures; absence of reliable        delivery to users, connected to monitoring systems (e.g. geo-
                  statistics                            tracking of freight, cameras and radars, axle load control) and
                                                        to registries of drivers, companies and vehicles.
Trucking          Insufficient professionalism of       Professionalization of truckers by strengthening the training
profession        truckers and high informality         framework and the criteria to access the profession
Trucking sector   Difficult and opaque access of        Modernization of regulations governing road freight
                  transporters to freight               allocation
Trucking sector   Non-implementation of axle            Support to transporters to comply with regional regulations
                  load limit regulations                on axle load limits
Vehicle fleet     Old vehicle fleet for passenger       Fleet renewal through the establishment of credit lines by
                  transport and freight, creating       commercial banks and dedicated fund; vehicle scrappage
                  environmental, economic and           program
                  safety hazards
Trade             Limited information on trade          Establishment of a database for the Regional Transport
facilitation      facilitation bottlenecks              Observatory and collection of volume/time/cost data at the
                                                        port, on roads, rail, and at border posts; capacity building of
                                                        public/private actors and awareness campaigns on trade
                                                        facilitation
Driving skills    Poor driving skills, exam             Reform of driving license system, strengthening of driving
and road safety   fraud, high number of                 schools; Improvement of road signals, awareness campaigns
                  accidents and prevalence of           on road safety, establishment of alcohol and drug testing, etc.
                  risky driving practices
Infrastructure
Port              Poor quality and congestion of        Construction of a new road freight station, bridges and
infrastructure    the existing facilities at the port   circulation lanes at the port; establishment of parking spaces
                  of Abidjan                            for trucks outside the port
Road              Absence of modern equipment           Construction of freight and passenger transport stations in
infrastructure    for road transport                    Abidjan and other cities inland; construction of rest stations
                                                        for truckers along the Ivoirian part of the Abidjan-
                                                        Ouagadougou corridor
Rail              Poor state of the infrastructure      Rehabilitation of the Abidjan-Ouagadougou-Kaya line;
infrastructure    and limited network                   construction of a Western line (San Pedro-Man);
                                                        development of an urban transport railway system in
                                                        Abidjan

4.4    The Bank’s Regional Trade Facilitation and Competitiveness Development Policy
Credit (RTFCC) is designed to support the reform efforts of the Burkinabe and Ivoirian
Governments. This innovative Development Policy Operation (DPO) addresses previously
unsolved issues affecting trade and transport by offering a common framework for coordinating
reforms in the two countries.



                                                          37
4.5     The objective is to reduce trade and transport transaction costs in order to promote
development of the private sector and improve the business environment in the two
countries, with the aim of facilitating their integration with the global economy. Given the
importance of trade for the poor, both to create income opportunities and to reduce the cost of
living, this operation is fully consistent with the Bank’s twin goals of ending extreme poverty
and promoting shared prosperity. By lowering the currently high transport costs, facilitating trade
and promoting regional integration, the reforms supported by this program are expected to have
broad-based welfare gains in both countries, benefiting producers of exported products
(including farmers), consumers of imported goods and firms using imported inputs, among
others.


Area                 Prior Actions under RTFCC 1                       Triggers for RTFCC 2
Pillar A - Professionalizing and formalizing the trucking industry
A1 - Business        Adoption of legal and regulatory framework        Adoption of a regulatory framework (decrees
enabling             to redefine the criteria for access to the        and/or ministerial order) mutually elaborated
environment          profession of commercial and own-account          between the two countries defining (a) the
promoting            road freight transport operator (with a well-     training curricula for road transport company
professionalizatio   defined, time-limited transition period)          managers and truck drivers, following best
n and                following best international practices (e.g.      international practices (UN Conventions,
formalization of     UNECE Resolution No. 4 on facilitation of         IRU); and (b) the criteria and certification
the trucking         international road transport) [BF; CI]            mechanism for the creation of private
industry                                                               institutions providing training and issuing
                                                                       certificates of professional competence for
                                                                       the trucking industry [BF, CI]
A2 - Professional    Approval by Transport Ministry of the
organization         bylaws and rules of procedures for an
representing the     independent umbrella professional
trucking industry    association representing the trucking
                     industry, in line with best international
                     practices [CI]
A3 -                 Adoption of an interministerial order             Application of Article 11.a of WAEMU
Implementation of    defining the respective responsibilities of the   Regulation 14 on truck axle load standards
axle load            Ministries of Transport and Infrastructure        and controls [BF, CI]
regulations          regarding regulation and enforcement of axle
                     load controls [CI]
Pillar B - Modernizing the organization of the trucking market
B1 - Efficiency of                                                     Introduction in Burkina Faso of a virtual
road transport                                                         freight exchange that (a) is accessible only
operations                                                             by compliant transporters, (b) is voluntary
through better                                                         for both shippers and transporters and (c)
contractual                                                            allows a competitive matching of transport
relations between                                                      services supply and demand [BF]
trucking
companies and        Revision and implementation by the Ministry       Transition to electronic inter-State
shippers             of Transport of the regulatory framework          consignment notes and mutual recognition
                     (decree and/or ministerial orders) organizing     by BF and CI [Joint]
                     the issuance of consignment notes (OHADA
                     template) in Côte d’Ivoire [CI]
                     Ministers of Foreign Affairs of both              Signature by the two countries of the revised
                     countries sign MoU giving mandate to a joint      bilateral road transport agreement [Joint]

                                                         38
Area                 Prior Actions under RTFCC 1                       Triggers for RTFCC 2
                     technical committee to negotiate the revision
                     of the 1999 bilateral road transport
                     agreement in the framework of the
                     Friendship and Cooperation Treaty (TAC),
                     including issues related to trade and transport
                     facilitation and the liberalization of freight
                     allocation [Joint]
B2 - Efficiency of                                                     Establishment by the Ministry of Transport
road transport                                                         of a mechanism to support fleet renewal for
operations                                                             compliant transporters, including (a)
through a more                                                         provisions to lower the cost of vehicles
efficient truck                                                        (notably tax and customs duty exemptions);
fleet                                                                  (b) provisions to facilitate access to credit;
                                                                       and (c) accompanying measures [BF;CI]
                                                                       Revision of the technical inspection system
                                                                       and regulations for trucks to eliminate
                                                                       substandard vehicles [BF; CI]
Pillar C - Enhancing the competitiveness of maritime and inland gateways
C1 - Port and        Adoption of an arrêté (order) by the Ministry     Adoption of a ministerial order reactivating
terminals            of Transport liberalizing the activity of         the Commission on Competitiveness of
operational          container delivery in the Abidjan                 Ivoirian Ports [CI]
efficiency and       metropolitan area and setting objective and       Revision of tariff structure and practices of
prices               open eligibility criteria for transporters [CI]   container terminals in Burkina Faso to
                                                                       promote containerization [BF]
Pillar D – Improving customs clearance
D1 - Availability    Adoption by the Ministries of Commerce and        Establishment of TIW in line with Article 1
of information on    Finance of an interministerial arrêté (order)     of the WTO’s Trade Facilitation Agreement,
trade procedures     for the preparation and maintenance of a          based on the WAEMU template and best
and regulations      Trade Information Web Portal (TIW) [BF,           international practices (e.g. WCO, WB) [BF,
                     CI]                                               CI]
D2 – Customs         Establishment by the customs administration       Strengthening by the customs administration
clearance            of an automated and operational database on       of (a) risk management through the interface
procedures and       traders’ risk profiles [BF; CI]                   of the traders’ risk profiles database with the
reward of                                                              customs management system), and (b) post-
compliance                                                             clearance audits (PCA) through the adoption
                                                                       of a PCA strategy and manual of procedures
                                                                       [BF, CI]
                                                                       Adoption and implementation of a legal and
                                                                       regulatory framework defining the criteria
                                                                       and functioning of an Authorized Economic
                                                                       Operator (AEO) scheme [CI]
D3 – Professional    Adoption of the Customs Code of Ethic and         Transposition of the revised WAEMU
standards for        Good Governance [CI]                              regulation governing the profession of
customs and                                                            customs brokers [BF, CI]
logistics service                                                      Improvement by the customs administration
providers                                                              of transparency and anticorruption through
                                                                       the adoption of (a) an internal control
                                                                       strategy and audit plan, and (b) an annual
                                                                       plan for the control of customs brokers [BF,
                                                                       CI]



                                                         39
Area                  Prior Actions under RTFCC 1                    Triggers for RTFCC 2
Pillar E – Facilitating transit
E1 - Border           Signature by the two customs administrations   Interconnection by the two customs
crossing              of the interconnection agreement concluding    administrations of their information systems
procedures            the study phase of the project and defining    [Joint]
                      technical specifications, budget and
                      implementation timeline [Joint]
E2 – Transit          Signature by the Burkinabe and Ivorian
regime                Chambers of Commerce of an addendum to
                      the February 2014 Agreement on the single
                      payment of the ISRT transit guarantee
                      enabling its effective application [Joint]
                      Adoption by the Minister of Finance of a
                      ministerial order requesting Burkinabe
                      customs to stop collecting the ISRT transit
                      guarantee on goods in transit on top of the
                      one collected in CI [BF]


4.6     While there are clear economic benefits emanating from reforms areas supported
by the proposed operation, several of the measures will also likely have significant poverty
and social impacts on vulnerable segments of the population. The reforms supported by the
RTFCC series are designed to facilitate transport and trade, and are thus expected to generate
significantly positive economic, employment and welfare effects at the national level in the two
countries. To the extent that these reforms will reduce the costs of importing and exporting
goods, they should also have a positive impact on poverty reduction. These benefits should be
particularly important for Burkina Faso, where lower transport prices and enhanced efficiency of
logistics services for the movement of food staples will improve food security by preventing the
loss of crops during transport, while helping to strengthen the competitiveness of traditional
exports such as cattle from landlocked countries in the Sahel. This will benefit in particular
women, many of whom are involved in small businesses and have much to gain from lower
transport prices and better access to markets. However, given that the trucking industry in West
Africa is comprised largely of an over-supply of small independent and largely informal truckers
who operate on relatively thin profit margins, the impact of trucking sector reforms will be
considerable for those operators who may not be able or willing to comply with a stricter
regulatory framework for access to the profession.

4.7     The assessment of the poverty and social impact will, therefore, attempt to ascertain the
extent to which different actors in the trucking business are affected and what coping
mechanisms and mitigation measures may be employed. This PSIA, in the subsequent sections,
essentially assesses the impact of this broad road transport sector reform program.




                                                        40
5.1      This section draws on a study commissioned by USAID, in association with the
World Bank, and undertaken by Nathan Associates Inc.13 That report was prepared as an
initial analysis of the impact of regional road transport reform in the lead up to the consideration
and design of a regional road transport development policy operation. The report summarized
the situation of the West African trucking industry and designed and computed a model for
calculating the impact of reform on the industry and the regional economy.

5.2     Two scenarios were explored in order to define the benefits and costs of a package of
reforms, including axle load controls, elimination of quotas, queuing and the ban on freight
transport in one country by truckers from another country, subsidies for truck fleet
modernization, and major reductions in en route checkpoints and border transit times. The first
scenario assumed that the shares of transit traffic would remain the same between coastal and
landlocked trucking fleets, while the second scenario examined shifts in those shares to lower
cost operators. Both scenarios assumed that axle load controls reduce overloading of transit
trucks by 97 percent.

5.3     The net benefit to the regional economy from these reforms was estimated at
US$400–US$500 million per year, one-third of which would be attributable to axle load
controls and the rest to other reforms. Governments could be expected to save US$200-US$300
million in road maintenance, while the trucking industry (and especially the number of informal
operators) would shrink as a result of productivity increases and less waiting time in queues at
ports and border posts.

5.4    Under these scenarios, transport costs per ton-km are expected to decrease by 20
percent and transport prices by 19 percent. This would create the conditions necessary for an
increase in the value of transit trade by about 8 percent. The regional trucking industry would
gain about US$60 million in net revenue, while shippers, producers, and consumers in
landlocked countries could gain US$200 million in net economic benefits.

5.5     Among individual stakeholders and industry participants, the major losers
identified would be informal sector truckers, who would be expected to lose 16,000 jobs,
although many would gain by shifting to the formal sector. According to the model, 150,000 to
650,000 trade-related jobs would be created, substantially more and an order of magnitude larger
than the jobs that would be lost in the trucking industry.

5.6    The study cautioned that there could be resistance to lower prices for transport by
some stakeholders. This could create a critical problem since lower prices are needed to trigger
additional trade growth. If transport prices are not allowed to fall under the influence of market
pressures, there would be much less influence on trade, although a continuation of past relative



13
     Nathan Associates Inc., “Impact of Road Transport Industry Liberalization in West Africa?, May 2012.

                                                          41
modest growth is likely, even with restraints on competition. This scenario would have less
benefit for the region and policies should be targeted to avoid it.
5.7     Finally the report noted that there may be a need for a campaign to educate
stakeholders about the broader benefits of the reforms related to achieving additional
growth and its benefits. In sum, it was recommended that trucking industry reforms be initiated
in West Africa as the benefits are clearly much larger than the costs. These reforms should
include mechanisms to mitigate the impact on informal sector truckers, such as compensating
those bearing the greatest loss and providing job retraining.

5.8    The regional DPO has taken these findings and recommendations into account and
this PSIA provides greater detail on the potential negative impact on vulnerable groups and
potential compensatory measures.



5.9      The above brief summary of the macroeconomic impact of the planned reforms
clearly notes the significant benefits to the economies of the region that can be gained
through thoughtful road transport reform. The following discussion and tables highlight the
macroeconomic impact of the reforms on Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso specifically. It should
be noted that the impacts, both positive and negative, are magnified in Burkina Faso as compared
to Côte d’Ivoire given the dichotomy in impacts between land-locked countries and coastal
countries. Land-locked countries stand to benefit much more at the macroeconomic level from
the provision and availability of more efficient, more effective, more reliable, and lower cost
transport services. Nonetheless, given the nature of existing road transport conventions and
institutions, individual truckers and industry players in land-locked countries currently benefiting
from a somewhat protected domestic road transport industry also stand to potentially lose more
at the individual level. In sum, the reforms imply a more meaningful change for Burkina Faso
than for Côte d’Ivoire with resultant more positive macro impacts in Burkina Faso, but also
accompanied by more adjustment and dislocation at the micro/industry level.

5.10 The following presentation of the estimated impacts illustrate this well and begins at
the level of the trucking/transport industry and then extends to the broader macroeconomic
impacts.

5.11 The package of reforms supported under the Regional DPO are expected to have
the following direct impact on business practices, which will lead to the expected outcomes
noted and presented in the tables and discussion below:

      Reduction of waiting times in queues to get loads in favor of direct contracting or
       contracting through cargo brokers;
      Restriction of transit transport to operators, drivers and vehicles with modern,
       professional certification;
      Provision of either direct subsidies or reduced import tariffs for modern truck purchases
       and/or subsidized loans for truck purchases;
      Reduction of waiting times at borders and checkpoints;
      Reduction of informal payments by truckers;

                                                42
          Increases in cabotage trucking by transit operators from corridor countries.

5.12       In addition, there will be indirect effects that are expected to result in:

          An increase in the proportion of formal trucking operators (to 80 percent of transit
           trucks);
          An increase in the proportion of larger trucks (as transit operators trade up with new
           purchases);
          A related decrease in the percent of overloaded vehicles;
          An increase in the annual mileage for trucks engaged in transit of 20,000 km per year due
           to reduced wait times at checkpoints and borders;
          An increase in load factors by 10 percent for transit trucks due to cabotage operations.

5.13 The impacts detailed below are centered primarily on transit trade as the original
intention of the Regional DPO was to improve transit trade and road transport efficiency
along the Abidjan-Ouagadougou corridor. However, it should be recognized that the
supported reforms will also increase efficiency and reduce trucking prices for domestic trucking.
While the reforms are focused largely on the regional aspects of road transport reform, the
supported reforms will have a direct impact on domestic road transport as well, including a
demonstration effect on domestic truckers as the number of modern formal sector transit trucking
operators increases.



         Impact                                                Scenario     Côte         Burkina
                                                                          d’Ivoire         Faso
         Change in number of trucks in active transit fleet        1         -70           -900
                                                                   2         600          -1,400
         Percent formal operators after reform                     1        80%            80%
                                                                   2         80%           80%
         Change in employment due to increased                     1        -300          -2,900
         efficiency                                                2       -1,100         -1,800
         Change in employment due to increased demand              1         100            500
                                                                   2        1,500         -1,100
         Net change in trucking employment                         1        -200          -2,400
                                                                   2         400          -2,900
     Source: Nathan (2012)


5.14 The number of trucks in the total transit trucking fleets is expected to decline with
reforms under both scenarios by about 800 to 1,000 vehicles, or some 11 to 14 percent of
the 7,100 transit vehicle fleet. This will lead to a decrease in direct trucking industry
employment of around 2,500 jobs, a loss which is more than compensated for by much larger job
increases in other sectors arising from increased trade as discussed further below. There is a


14
  Scenario 1 assumes no change in the current shares of landlocked country and coastal country haulage along the
corridor. Scenario 2 incorporates expected changes in the shares of haulage by coastal and landlocked countries to
favor countries with the lowest transport costs.

                                                              43
significant difference in impact between countries with land-locked Burkina Faso being more
negatively affected than coastal Côte d’Ivoire.

5.15 With a decrease in the number of trucks and an increase in demand as trade
volumes increase in response to lower transport costs and prices, mileage per truck and
truck profitability metrics will increase. Table 5.2 estimates average mileage increases per
truck in both countries.


                                   Formal Sector                            Informal Sector
    Country              Without Reform     With Reform            Without Reform     With Reform
Côte d’Ivoire                87,000            110,000                 74,000             97,000
Burkina Faso                 45,000             69,000                 38,000             62,000
Source: Nathan (2012).

5.16 Net transport revenue after costs for transit truck operators calculated by the model for
the two countries is estimated to increase by about US$15 to US$60 million with a significant
shift toward Côte d’Ivoire under scenario 2, though both countries are net beneficiaries of the
reforms. This net effect includes the combined effects of increased productivity, lower unit
operating costs and increased revenue from increased demand and cabotage operations. This is a
conservative estimate of total benefits to truckers.


     Impact                                             Scenario   Côte         Burkina
                                                                   d’Ivoire     Faso
     Change in transit operating costs (US$ million)        1             -         -18.1
                                                            2          83.8         -71.6
     Change in informal payments (US$ million)              1           -2.5         -6.9
                                                            2           -2.0         -7.2
     Change in transit revenue                              1           -4.3         -7.7
                                                            2          116.4        -65.3
     Net benefit for transit truckers                       1           -1.8         17.3
                                                            2          34.6          13.5
     Source: Nathan (2012).


5.17 Estimated cost savings to truckers following reform implementation should be
significant and should increase profitability in the industry, as illustrated in Table 5.4. An
important takeaway from this is that from a poverty perspective, while the number of truckers
may decline as noted above, those remaining in the industry will be more profitable and will
benefit from higher incomes. As such, the reforms should have a significant impact on lowering
poverty levels among the significant number of operators remaining in the industry. Cost
savings in the neighborhood of 20 percent are envisaged and when combined with increased
demand and increased utilization rates should lead to significantly increased profits and incomes
for truckers and their families.




                                                       44
                 Impact                                          Côte         Burkina
                                                               d’Ivoire        Faso
     Average Unit operating costs         Before reform         0.060          0.076
     (US$/ton-km)                          After reform         0.051          0.058
     Savings in unit operating costs    Amount (US$/to-km)      0.009          0.018
                                             Percent              15             24
    Source: Nathan (2012).


5.18 Average transport prices should also fall as estimated in Table 5.5. Shippers should
benefit from increased efficiency in the transport industry as reflected in price decreases of
approximately 20 percent. These price savings will also be accompanied more intangible and
more difficult to quantify benefits such as improved reliability and predictability, faster delivery
periods, reduced damage to goods, etc. These additional benefits could be at least as significant
to shippers and consumer of transport services as the price reductions.


                 Impact                                          Côte         Burkina
                                                               d’Ivoire        Faso
     Average Unit transport prices        Before reform         0.092          0.091
     (US$/ton-km)                          After reform         0.073          0.072
     Savings in unit transport prices   Amount (US$/to-km)      0.019          0.019
                                             Percent              20             21
    Source: Nathan (2012)


5.19 In addition to direct impacts on truckers and shippers, there will be impacts on
government expenditures. Table 5.6 summarizes these impacts and it should be noted that the
model estimated impacts on governments only from the expenditure side. There will be
additional benefits in the form of increased import and export duties and losses or gains related
to licensing fees, etc., but these are not included in the estimates. Additional expenditures are
related to compensatory measures to accommodate the reforms, such as subsidies to facilitate
truck purchases and financing costs. These could clearly vary depending on program
parameters, but are estimated here based on the expected level of fleet renewal and
modernization. Savings to governments are directly related to lower road maintenance costs
stemming from reduced axle loads. Expenditures on compensatory measures will be one-time
expenses while savings will be ongoing, as explained in footnote 11.




                                                 45
                           Impact                          Scenario        Côte          Burkina
                                                                         d’Ivoire         Faso
      Subsidies for vehicle purchases and interest            1             3.4            19.7
      (potential accompanying measures)                       2             9.0            14.9
      Savings in road maintenance and repair               Low est.        12.4            59.0
                                                           High est.       16.8            88.5
      Low estimate of net impact on expenditures              1            -9.0           -39.3
                                                              2            -3.4           -44.1
      High estimate of net impact on expenditures             1           -13.4           -68.8
                                                              2            -7.8           -73.6
     Source: Nathan (2012).

5.20 Of course, the impact of road transport reform go far beyond the direct impact on
truckers, shippers and governments. Approximately US$42 million annually in economic
benefits is provided to regional consumers, with shippers and producers receiving some $34
million in direct benefits annually. Burkina Faso, being landlocked, benefits the most as it
enjoys additional trade and producer and consumer price savings from improved transit trade.
Total benefits across both countries are on the order of US$140 million to US$174 million when
net benefits to the trucking and government sectors are included.

                                                    (US$ million)
                                Impact                                Côte d’Ivoire Burkina Faso
        Net Economic benefits for shippers                                   0.3         8.7
        Net economic benefits for consumers                                  0.5        41.6
        Net economic benefits for producers                                  0.1        25.1
        Low estimate of net economic benefits for economya                   8.1       132.0
        High estimate of economic benefit for economya                      12.5       161.5
        a Includes net economic benefits for the trucking industry and the government
        Source: Nathan (2012).

5.21 High transport/logistics costs paid by importers and exporters and the unreliability
of the transport/logistics system depress trade. This includes transport tariffs paid by
importers and exporters and high logistics costs paid by both importers and exporters. Increased
competition and efficiency in the road transport industry due to reform and liberalization will
decrease transport tariffs, increase reliability and predictability, decrease logistics costs and,
ultimately, expand trade. More reliable transport service and lower tariffs will also facilitate the
integration of local companies into global supply chains. Trade gains are obtained by combining
trade creation and trade substitution effects. Since transport inefficiencies are more important for
imports, they would be most affected initially and the analysis focuses on the projected impact
on imports. Nevertheless, improvement of corridor efficiency would affect exports as well as
imports. Increased import volumes would benefit local consumers (including local companies
relying on foreign inputs) by increasing their consumer surplus, but it may also create a loss for

15
   Subsidy costs (first impact noted in the table) are a one-time expense, while savings in road maintenance and
repair are ongoing projected annual savings. Nonetheless, savings in first year more than cover the cost associated
with an accompanying measure related to purchase and interest subsidies to allow for trucker transition over the
reform period.

                                                         46
some local manufacturers, whose products could be replaced by cheaper imports. However,
increased export volume would benefit local producers by opening market opportunities.
Overall, trade creation effects are expected to be much larger than trade substitution effects.

5.22 The increases in trade to landlocked Burkina Faso forecast in this model amount to
US$380 million annually, see Table 5.8. These are related primarily to responses to price
changes which result in an increase in demand for imports and an increase in supply of exports.
This is a conservative estimate since it does not take into account the general improvement in
logistics service which will result from these reforms. The improved logistics systems may be an
equally effective catalyst for increased trade as the lower costs. Gains from more efficient and
cost-effective road transport could be expected in Côte d’Ivoire as well, but since the model
focuses on the impact of improved transit transport, these are not estimated for Côte d’Ivoire.


                                                    (US$ million)
             Impact                                Côte d’Ivoire                           Burkina Faso
Change in value of trade                                --                                     380
Source: Nathan (2012).

5.23 Table 5.9 presents the net employment effect of the proposed reforms – between
60,000 and 220,000 new jobs in Burkina Faso and an ambiguous outcome in Côte d’Ivoire.
The model calculates two types of indirect impact on employment: (1) the indirect effects of
direct employment changes in the trucking industry, and (2) the indirect effects on employment
related to the increase in trade.

5.24 The trade effects are an order of magnitude larger than the trucking employment
effects. Trade increases have a variety of employment impacts. For imports of consumer goods
there are retail jobs, delivery and distribution jobs and import service jobs and their multipliers.
For intermediate goods and exports there are distribution and logistics jobs, processing and
related services with their multipliers. Research has been undertaken in West Africa in this
area,16 and the resulting multipliers were used to calculate low and high estimates of the impacts
as shown in Table 5.9. What is clear from this table is that even by these low estimates trade
impacts on employment more than compensate for losses in trucking-related industries.


                               Impact                                     Scenario        Côte            Burkina
                                                                                        d’Ivoire            Faso
Direct and indirect employment changes for trucking industrya                  1           -400            -4,100
                                                                               2           700             -5,000
Low estimate of employment impact from increased trade                       1&2             --            60,000
High estimate of employment impact from increased trade                      1&2             --           220,000
a A multiplier of 1.5 was estimated for trucking industry employment, which means that each ten jobs in the
trucking industry generates another five jobs in other related sectors, as income earned in trucking is spent in the
local economy, and the trucking industry buys materials and services for its operations.




16
  As examples see Bromley 2011, which includes multipliers for both income and employment derived from
analysis of production and supply chains for selected products in West Africa.

                                                          47
Source: Nathan (2012)


Summary of Macro level Impacts

5.25 The results presented above clearly illustrate a significantly positive macro level
impact that will increase economic activity, hence growth, reduce transport costs and prices,
hence reducing factor costs, increase imports and exports, and result in increases in consumer
and producer surplus. The macro effect on poverty should thus be unambiguously positive and
large.

5.26 Nonetheless, the analysis also indicates that there are a variety of impacts on
different stakeholders and that these individual impacts differ between the two countries.
It is clear from the model that the biggest winners among the stakeholders are:

       Shippers, consumers, and producers in landlocked Burkina Faso;
       Government road maintenance agencies;
       Formal sector truckers in all countries;
       Informal sector truckers who can afford to modernize their fleets.

Smaller but positive gains are expected for:

       Shippers, consumers, and producers in coastal Côte d’Ivoire;
       Truckers in both countries since the sector as a whole will have increased transit earnings
        following reforms.

The main losers appear to be informal sector truckers who cannot afford to modernize
their fleets or who do not want to join the formal sector. This is the subject of the following
section.



6.1     As the previous discussion has highlighted, the road transport sector in West Africa,
including in Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso, suffers from a lack of competitiveness
emanating from high costs and resultant high transport prices. Transport costs directly and
indirectly affect price structures across other economic sectors and contribute to a lack of internal
and external economic competitiveness. In response, the ministries of transport in Côte d’Ivoire
and Burkina Faso have undertaken a series of reforms in the transport sector, which are being
supported through the Bank’s regional budget support operation. The reforms are focused on six
main areas: 1. professionalization and modernization of the transport sector; 2. fleet renewal; 3.
improving corridor management and control; 4. improving port efficiency and reducing the cost
of port transit; 5. promoting containerization; and 6. improving road conditions and reducing the
cost of maintaining the infrastructure.

6.2    These reforms, while expected to have large positive economy-wide impacts, will
have differential impact on specific actors within the goods transport industries in both
countries. It is important to understand these impacts in order to properly formulate and

                                                 48
sequence reforms, but also to consider, design and implement accompanying measures in order
to mitigate potentially adverse effects on transport actors.

6.3     As with any significant reform program, it may not be, and indeed is generally not
possible, to insulate all players from any and all negative impacts. In the end, there will be
winners and losers as is inherent in processes involving economic progress and structural
transformation. The purpose of the exercise undertaken and reported on in this section is to
identify those groups that may be most vulnerable to the changes brought about by the reform
program, to understand the scope and scale of the impact on these groups, to obtain their
perceptions on the reforms and potential impacts, and to suggest measures that could reduce or
mitigate to some extent the negative consequences identified.

6.4     It is in this context that broad discussions were held with industry stakeholders to
identify potential impacts and suggested accompanying measures. The results of these
discussions and interviews are presented below and represent the views and perceptions of
industry participants. They largely confirm the more quantitative approach presented in the
previous section, but provide a perhaps more nuanced and personal perspective on the reforms
and potential impacts. For the most part, industry participants were positive and supported the
reforms, recognizing the necessity of the reforms though noting that for some groups adjustment
will be more difficult.

6.5     The discussion is presented by reform area17 and industry participant groupings.

Reform Area #1: Business environment that promotes professionalization of the freight
transport industry

6.6     Reforms in this area, including revision of legislation and regulation concerning access to
the industry—trucker certification, licensing, professional standards, technical requirements—
will have an impact on jobs and livelihoods after the planned transition phase. While some
existing small informal truckers can potentially be absorbed into more formal firms as employees
or contract operators, and while others may organize into cooperative type structures or
groupement d’intérêts économiques (GIE’s) to continue operating, some will be unable to meet
new standards and over time will exit the industry. Those most vulnerable in this regard tend to
be older, illiterate informal truckers and coxeurs unwilling or unable to find employment
elsewhere in a more professional and modernized transport industry.

6.7     Stakeholders affected positively will include bigger, modern and more commercialized
operators. Smaller truckers (including many informal truckers) with the capacity to modernize,
professionalize and possibly expand their operations will also benefit from the reform. This
positive impact will extend to current and future employees of these more modern and
professional trucking companies. Increased demand for services, higher profits and greater

17
  The reform areas do not align exactly in their presentation with those presented in the DPO matrix of reforms as
the PSIA work proceeded concurrently with the preparation of the DPO and changes in the DPO program document
were ongoing. For purposes of the PSIA the reform groupings were maintained as originally conceived.
Nonetheless, the reforms analyzed are consistent across the PSIA and the DPO, though their presentation and
groupings may differ somewhat in how they are presented.

                                                       49
utilization of trucking assets should lead to increased returns and increased incomes among these
groups.

6.8     Stakeholders affected negatively will include primarily informal truckers as well as
individual and small operators that are unable to modernize, including their employees, in both
Burkina Faso and Côte d’Ivoire. Many of these informal, small and individual operators provide
services with dilapidated and poorly maintained trucking fleets and will unable to operate once
the reforms take full effect. The reforms will likely result in loss of jobs for some or the inability
of individual operators to continue in the trucking business.

6.9     Interviews and focus group discussions identified those most vulnerable among the
vulnerable groups as being the older, illiterate, informal truckers who are nearing
“retirement? and are unwilling to contemplate modernization and professionalization .
Some of these felt they could continue to serve local informal markets and continue to struggle
for a period in the midst of a reforming and modernizing industry.

6.10 Within an increasingly professionalized business environment, trucking should
become a more profitable and sustainable venture for trucking companies and individual
operators. In the current environment and under current practices, the over-supply of trucking
services (including from informal truckers) has driven prices down, making it difficult for
truckers to remain profitable. While some informal truckers may be unable or unwilling to
operate in the new environment, many of these have been finding it difficult to operate profitably
in the current environment and many were, often unknowingly, operating at a loss. As such, for
many leaving the industry this may, in a kind of perverse sense, represent a positive step from an
income, livelihood and poverty status.

       Formal Truckers

6.11 The impact on formal truckers is expected to be by and large positive. In both Côte
d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso, big operators welcome the move towards increased
professionalization of the business environment as the current environment constrains the
profitability of transport businesses along the AOC corridor. In Côte D’Ivoire, some concern
was expressed among some big operators regarding the loss of previous contracts that have
already been entered into with shippers given the impending implementation of the freight
exchange system. However, it was recognized that this system will likely benefit all truckers,
including large operators, but especially those who have difficulty gaining access to freight to
transport.

       Informal and Artisanal Truckers

6.11 Small and artisanal truckers, in individual interviews and focus group discussions,
expressed a strong willingness to professionalize and to be part of the modern transport
sector. In Burkina Faso, a number of small operators noted that they were unable to gain access
to freight due to the proliferation of informal intermediaries, including coxeurs. Provided that
these smaller operators can make good on their willingness to modernize and are able to adhere
to the requirements of a professionalized transport industry, they perceive the freight exchange
system as enabling them to access more freight and to remain profitable.

                                                 50
6.12 Nonetheless, the requirements for professionalization could be cumbersome for
some informal truckers, especially artisanal truckers that often tend to have just single trucks,
and for whom trucking is an additional or secondary trade (although there may be some for
whom the trucking business is their sole trade). In the absence of other activities they can
transition to, this reform area will likely have a negative impact on them.

6.13 The possibility that informal/artisanal truckers could be hired by expanding larger
operators is a strong possibility. This was recognized and welcomed by some small truckers
and confirmed by larger operators. Wages as an employee in a larger and more professional
operation would likely exceed income earned as a small informal operator and this transition
would thus be positive from a poverty perspective.

       Potential Mitigation Measures

6.14 Phasing and sequencing of reforms: First, given that a number of those unable to
transition to a more modern and professional environment tend to be older operators, it may be
useful to phase in some requirements or provide “grandfather? clauses to permit a logical
phasing-out period and to permit natural attrition to take its course. Second, some adjustment
will be required even among those willing and able to modernize. Appropriate timing and
sequencing of reforms could facilitate and allow for a more gradual, less disruptive and more
inclusive adjustment period.

6.15 Re-group into groupement d’intérêts économiques (GIE): Small and artisanal
operators can organize themselves into cooperatives to attain economies of scale -- potentially
enabling them to share costs and assets as a means to attain a degree of professionalization.
Several small operators expressed an interest in this avenue and some were planning such efforts.

6.16 Partnership with big operators: Small, informal, and artisanal operators could
potentially partner with big, formal operators, including through the sale of their trucks.
Supporting measures may be necessary to organize and bring them together with potentially
interested big operators, but this was noted as a possibility.

6.17 Transition to other activities: If unable to professionalize, small/informal operators can
transition to other activities based on their existing skill levels or asset endowment. For
example, some have indicated the possibility of transitioning to passenger transport, which is less
cumbersome in terms of investment requirements relative to the trucking business. Others could
transition to trade in merchandise related to the trucking business such as sale of truck tires,
vehicle oil and lubricants, etc.

6.18 Supporting policy measures: As part of the reform process, operators intending to
transition to other activities could benefit from supporting policy measures such as access to
finance as well as training opportunities to transition to other activities. Training opportunities
were noted as being very important, in particular for the small operators considering the fact that
almost all the chauffeurs are illiterate.



                                                51
6.19 Scrappage schemes: Measures to facilitate the removal of old, unreliable, unsafe, costly
and polluting trucks, including the payment of scrappage fees, could enable not only the
transformation and compliance of truckers wanting to professionalize and modernize, but also
could facilitate the movement of those truckers incapable or unwilling to modernize into other
activities. As truck numbers are expected to fall, at least initially, appropriately designed
mechanisms that provide incentives to scrap old trucks could be useful in modernizing the road
transport sector and also in providing resources for those wanting to transition to other activities.
Participation in scrappage schemes could also help identify those truckers leaving the sector and
thus facilitate their access to and participation in other programs, such as re-training programs,
that could further accommodate their transition.

       Coxeurs

6.20 Should the freight exchange system become operational and fully fulfill its function,
coxeurs would be expected in all likelihood to be largely out of business. Given the informal
nature of their activity in the freight transport business, it is difficult to ascertain how many are
engaged in intermediating between shippers and transporters. However, it is evident that they
are significant in number and that they play an important, though at times distortionary and
predatory, role in the absence of a professionalized system of freight transport and modern
freight allocation mechanisms.

6.21 The majority of coxeurs have little education, many are functionally illiterate, with
seemingly limited possibility to transition to other activities. Therefore, the likely negative
impact on those who solely rely on this activity will be significant. Nonetheless there was some
ambiguity here, as several coxeurs interviewed in both Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso indicated
interest in and the possibility of converting/transitioning to other activities, such as agriculture or
trade-related activities. Many appeared well-versed in transport industry operations and
expressed an interest in occupying other roles within the transport industry. Several indicated
the possibility of playing a complementary role to the freight exchange system since they already
have a roster of clients with whom they work – or otherwise have some contractual relationships.
They believe that they can work as representatives of shippers to bring business to trucking
companies.

6.22 Despite improved freight allocation measures and the existence of a freight
exchange, virtual or otherwise, there was a general impression across industry participants
that the services of coxeurs, or similar intermediaries will be required, even if only to assist
in helping truckers and transporters initially navigate the new environment. While this
need may dissipate over time, it seems reasonable to assume that the need for coxeur-like
services will continue over the foreseeable future though at reduced levels.

6.23 Many positive suggestions by industry participants seemed to indicate that coxeurs
could remain engaged in a fully professionalized freight transport business . However,
further consultation with all actors, including coxeurs, were noted as necessary to ensure
provision of required training, say in operation and functioning of the virtual freight exchange, as
well as public sensitization.

       Potential Mitigation Measures:

                                                  52
6.24 Transition to other activities: Facilitation support may enable them to mitigate
negative impacts in both the medium- to long-term. Some coxeurs interviewed in both Côte
d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso indicated the possibility of transitioning to other activities such as
agriculture or trade-related activities. Facilitation support may enable them to mitigate negative
impacts in both the medium- to long-term.
6.25 Participation in the transport business: Some coxeurs have indicated a willingness to
participate in the professionalized freight transport system since they are familiar with the
business. However, they would need to gain access to financing as well as further training to
adhere to the new standards of the business.

6.26 Continued provision of brokerage services: Suggestions were made to make a
concerted effort to identify those coxeurs who would like to remain engaged in a
professionalized trucking business and provide them with a fixed commission as well as training
so that they could complement the freight exchange system. Whereas the freight exchange
system is envisaged to function virtually, some truckers believe that the coxeurs could play a
facilitation role of verification on site.

Reform Area #2: Modernizing/Renewing fleets

6.27 By the time a potential RDPO-3 comes into effect, the institutional framework for
technical inspection of commercial trucks will have been adopted in both Burkina Faso and Côte
d’Ivoire. This implies an expectation that truckers will have modernized their fleets and
consequences and sanctions for non-compliant vehicles.

6.28 Stakeholders expected to be affected positively include those bigger operators with the
means or ease of access to financing to renew their trucking fleets. In particular, Ivorian
operators18 that stand to benefit from potential accompanying measures to facilitate their access
to finance19 as well as operators in Burkina Faso, who stand to benefit from their government’s
policy of support for fleet renewal through tax incentives and exemptions from customs duties on
trucks.20 Smaller, currently informal operators who have the capacity and desire to
professionalize and modernize through the purchase of a new truck(s) could also benefit.
Smaller operators wanting to renew their fleet will be highly dependent on accompanying
measures to facilitate the purchase or leasing of new vehicles.

6.29 Stakeholders affected negatively will include small and individual truckers that are not
able to renew their fleets, despite anticipated policy incentives and supporting measures. There
may be a myriad of reasons for an inability to purchase or lease new trucks, but this could
include: demanding collateral requirements; inappropriate amortization periods; high cost of new
trucks; perceived limited management capacity; and a lack of professionalization among some



18
   Currently, the Ivorian fleet is decimated to such an extent that CI cannot even meet the minimum requirements of
one-third of transit traffic to which it is entitled under bilateral agreements with BF.
19
   A law was voted in 2012 that exempted buyers of trucks in CI from 18% tax on new trucks, which resulted in an
upsurge of new truck imports (PEA study).
20
   Toward the end of 2013, the government of Burkina Faso facilitated fleet renewal for 400 new trucks and 200 oil
trucks through tax incentives (PEA study).

                                                        53
small truckers and their inability to adequately present loan proposals or be considered for
loans/leases.

6.30 Focus group discussions as well as individual informant interviews with a wide
cross-section of truckers (both small and large operators) indicate a strong willingness to
take advantage of potential fleet renewal accompanying measures – in particular access to
financing schemes. If the supporting policy and accompanying measures are well coordinated
between the relevant authorities in both countries, the expectation among the trucking
community is that there will be a lot of positive benefits for the truckers, banks, insurance
companies, drivers, trainees, and other industry actors, including coxeurs (provided they are
given a role as described above).

6.31 However, all actors have indicated the need to enforce all the reform areas to ensure
that there remain no disincentives for fleet renewal. Should the planned reform measures not
be fully implemented or adequately enforced, and should this permit the continued operation of
non-complying trucks, continued over-loading and an otherwise continuation of the status quo,
all recognize that the benefits would be seriously diminished.

6.32 A number of small as well as large operators indicated that they were not aware of
any supporting policy and accompanying measures that could enable and facilitate fleet
renewal. Others remarked during focus group discussions that despite a strong willingness by a
majority of small operators to modernize their fleets, many were suspicious of potential
supporting measures given past experience in dealing with unaccommodating policies from the
banks themselves. This suggests the need for proper awareness campaigns backed by a targeted
communication strategy.

       Potential Mitigation Measures

6.33 It was suggested that organizing small operators together into cooperatives (GIE)
could enable them to achieve greater influence and access with the banking and financial
community.

6.34 Accompanying measures, particularly measures to facilitate access to finance, will
have to be appropriately structured so as to facilitate access from across the spectrum of
truckers and companies, from large to small and from formal to informal. This will have to
include a careful determination of collateral requirements, interest charges, amortization periods,
down payment requirements, etc. In a more modern, more professional and more technically
demanding environment, the inability to access vehicles that can comply and remain compliant
with increasingly demanding standards will pose a serious barrier to entry and/or ongoing
participation in the industry.

6.35 As noted previously, well-designed scrappage schemes could meaningfully contribute
to both fleet renewal efforts and in the provision of financial resources to those truckers
leaving the industry.

Reform Area #3: Reduce roadblocks and improve control operations on the corridor

                                                54
6.36 There are 31 mobile and fixed checkpoints between Abidjan and Ouagadougou
(UEMOA/West Africa Trade Hub 2013). In both Côte d’Ivoire and Burkina Faso, the reduction
of roadblocks and improved control operations on the transport corridor will likely have net
positive impacts as noted in previous sections.

6.37 Stakeholders affected positively will include highly compliant operators, typically large
operators and shippers, who will benefit from streamlined and faster service and quicker turn-
around times.

6.38 Stakeholders affected negatively will clearly be currently non-compliant operators who
do not wish to or are not capable of becoming compliant. This would typically, though not
exclusively, be small individual operators who may otherwise benefit from lax enforcement of
transport sector legal and regulatory controls.

6.39 It was noted in the focus group discussions that the excessive number of roadblocks
and inefficient control operations cause traffic delays and expose truck operators to
extortion. In addition to the direct costs incurred in paying bribes, this time lost on the
roadblocks renders the Abidjan-Ouagadougou transport corridor highly costly, resulting in the
diversion of traffic to nearby countries – including Togo, Ghana, and Dakar. Indeed, Togo has
eliminated almost all roadblocks entirely and is quickly becoming recognized as a more efficient
and less costly corridor as a result.

6.40 The reduction of roadblocks and more efficient and effective control operations will
also likely lead to increased traffic and merchandise trade. This should, in turn, provide more
business opportunities for truck operators, the Port Autonome d’Abidjan;21 as well as for direct
and indirectly related employment opportunities.

        Potential Mitigation Measures

6.41 When fully implemented, the benefits will be largely positive for all compliant
operators. Mitigation measures for operators negatively impacted should typically include
helping them to achieve professionalization as have been previously noted.


Reform Area #4: Improve Port Operational efficiency and reduce gateway and terminal
prices

6.42 The AOC is characterized by high cargo handling prices and port charges in
Abidjan. In addition, the monopolistic nature of the freight delivery business in the Abidjan
metropolitan area, coupled with an oligopolistic organization of handling companies, results in
high terminal prices. As indicated by previous studies, the de facto monopoly in freight
allocation in the Abidjan metropolitan area may stem from the poor quality, insecure and

21
  According to some transport syndicates in Côte d’Ivoire, this would potentially mean the return of importers from
Mali and Burkina Faso who attempt to circumvent the problems associated with cumbersome system of roadblocks
and control systems.

                                                        55
unreliable nature of available transport services and the risk of losing containers, i.e., from the
desire of the terminal operator to deal only with known and trusted transporters. As a result,
curbing the monopoly for local deliveries in the Abidjan metropolitan area will impact those
truckers, handlers, shippers and their employees that currently benefit from this monopoly.

6.43 This reform area is expected to have an overall net positive benefit to most actors in
the trucking business, in particular among all compliant operators who will benefit from
increased business opportunities. It is estimated that some 650,000 containers will become
available annually for delivery in the Abidjan metropolitan area.

6.44 In addition, the reduction in the port prices will likely incentivize importers from
Mali and Burkina Faso to frequent the AOC corridor in lieu of alternative routes (in
particular, from Dakar), thereby creating more business opportunities for all actors involved in
transport services along this corridor. To enhance this likely positive effect and accommodate
the resulting influx of traffic, a coordinated streamlining of customs and port authority
procedures would be necessary to avoid delays and traffic congestion.

6.45 A more competitive trucking business in the Abidjan metropolitan area will likely
create more opportunities for all stakeholders in the medium- to long-term, although the
curbing of monopolies may initially cause some negative impact on those shippers, handlers,
truckers, and their employees currently benefiting from monopoly power. In addition, potential
negative effects will be offset by gains for those currently not permitted access and should also
result in significant welfare gains, to both consumers and producers, overall.

6.46 Stakeholders affected positively will be large operators and shippers that will benefit
from a reduction in gateway and terminal prices. In addition, all compliant operators will benefit
from increased business opportunities as the monopoly is more or less dismantled.

6.47 Stakeholders that will be affected negatively, as noted, will be those shippers, handlers,
truckers, and their employees currently benefiting from monopoly power.

       Potential Mitigation Measures

6.48 Mitigation measures for operators affected negatively by this reform area are largely in
line with supporting measure outlined in other reform areas, namely supporting them to
professionalize or participate in related activities.

       Reform Area #5: Promote Containerization

6.49 A number of current jobs in the port of Abidjan are dependent on the inefficient
practice of unloading containers and re-packing their contents into trucks. It is estimated
that of the 55,000 containers imported into Ouagadougou, only 22 % come through Côte d’Ivoire
and only 10-20% are containerized.

6.50 Containerization will require truck operators to adapt their trucking fleets to be
able to accommodate containers. This may be difficult for some small operators that may not

                                                56
have access to financial resources with which to modify their fleets (these issues are similar to
those related to fleet renewal in reform area #2). While large operators in Côte d’Ivoire seem to
be ready to transport containerized cargo to Burkina Faso, some small operators indicate that this
reform area may have a negative impact given their inability to modify their fleets.

6.51 The most significant negative impact will be among dockers who are engaged in the
unloading, stripping, and re-packing containers. Although it is difficult to ascertain how
many would be directly affected, these dockers are likely to be relatively low-skilled, illiterate
and hence have limited capacity to be absorbed into other trades.

6.52 Stakeholders affected positively will include: 1. shippers and large trucking operators
who will benefit from more efficient inland logistics; and 2. smaller operators who could also
benefit from improved efficiency, particularly from faster turn-around times, fewer delays in
loading and unloading, as well as from improved access to shipments.

6.53 Stakeholders affected negatively will largely be those individuals engaged in stripping
and re-packing of transit containers at the ports in Côte d’Ivoire as this practice will to a large
extent be significantly reduced, though probably not entirely eliminated. In addition, small
operators unable to upgrade or modify their fleets so that they can transport containerized freight
could also be negatively affected.

       Potential Mitigation Measures

6.54 Provide training for transition to other activities:                   Given that when fully
professionalized, the industry is likely to create job opportunities in industries related to the
trucking business itself as transport services respond to increased demand, some specialized
training could be provided to dockers/stevedores to allow for a transition into other activities.
However, training need not be limited to industries related to the trucking business and it could
include training in other trade-related activities, or basic skills upgrading, among others.

Reform Area #6: Improve road conditions and reduce infrastructure maintenance costs
through enforcement of axle load regulations

6.55 As noted, there is a general problem of overloading in the Abidjan-Ouagadougou
corridor, which incurs high road maintenance and vehicle operating costs. By reducing
these costs, this reform will have large positive net economic benefits over the medium- and
long-term. However, the enforcement of the reform areas may have immediate impact across
all operators, both small and large.

6.56 Ex-ante one would expect that axle-load controls may affect smaller operators more
than larger operators as they may have a greater incentive to overload their fleet in order to
maximize revenue per trip. However, reaction to the policy reform measures was mixed among
all trucker groups as some, both small and large operators, would prefer not to overload while
others feel the practice is necessary. There is some fear that axle load enforcement may lead to
greater opportunities for corruption and rent seeking, a burden that my fall more heavily on



                                                57
small, informal, and already less-compliant operators, i.e., those less able to overcome such
obstacles.

6.57 As mentioned earlier, overloading is largely a function of the need to maximize
revenues per trip rather than over a period of time, which can be achieved through frequent
trips by newer and more efficient trucks, and is thus related to issues of fleet renewal.

6.58 Stakeholders affected positively will include all complaint operators, both large and
small, who will benefit from improved road infrastructure, leading to a reduction in maintenance
costs, faster trip times, and potentially an increase in average mileage per truck.

6.59 Stakeholders affected negatively, at least over the short-term, will be truckers who
decide to continue to practice over-loading, particularly single-truck and small operators along
with their employees.

       Potential Mitigation Measures

6.60 Re-group into groupement d’intérêts économiques (GIE): As in other areas, small
and artisanal operators could organize themselves into cooperatives to attain economies of scale -
- potentially enabling them to share costs to achieve a greater degree of professionalization in
order to be able to access financing for fleet renewal upon which this reform area depends.

6.61 Supporting policy measures: As part of the reform process, operators intending to
comply with the reform areas could benefit from supporting policy measures such as access to
finance as well as training opportunities. Training opportunities could also be twinned with
proper communication strategies – as the specific reform areas are not yet well known by some
actors.




                                               58
Arnold, John, John Mathenge, Nora Dihel and Nicholas Strychacz. (2011). “The Role of Clearing and
    Forwarding Agents in Reforming the EAC Logistics Sector.? Africa Trade Policy Note No. 17.
    Washington DC: The World Bank.

Arvis, Jean-Francois. (2011a). “Chapter 17: Transit Regimes.? in McLinden et al. (eds) Border
     Management Modernization. Washington DC: The World Bank.

Arvis, Jean-Francois, Robin Carruthers, Graham Smith and Christopher Willoughby. (2011b). Connecting
     Landlocked Developing Countries to Markets: Trade Corridors in the 21st Century. Washington DC:
     The World Bank.

Bromley, D. W. (2011). Exports, Employment and Income in West Africa. West Africa Trade Hub
    Technical Report No. 39. USAID.

Burkina Faso. Strategy for Accelerated Growth and Sustainable Development (SCADD).

Cantens, Thomas, Robert Ireland and Gaël Raballand (eds). (2013). Reform by Numbers: Measurement
    Applied to Customs and Tax Administration in Developing Countries. Washington DC: The World
    Bank.

CIRES. (2010). Faisabilité socio-conomique du ticket syndical de solidarité (TSS). Report.

Debrie, Jean. 2012. The West African port system: global insertion and regional particularities.
  EchoGéo, No 20.

EITM-ENSEA. (2014). Industrie du Transport routier de Marchandises en Côte d’Ivoire at au Burkina
   Faso. ENSAE. Report prepared for the World Bank.

Fitzmaurice, Mike and Olivier Hartmann. (2013). Border Crossing Monitoring along the Northern
     Corridor. SSATP Working Paper No. 96. Washington DC: The World Bank.

Hartmann, Olivier. (2013). Corridor Transport Observatory Guidelines. SSATP Working Paper No. 98.
    Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Lin, Justin. (2012). “From Flying Geese to Leading Dragons: New Opportunities and Strategies for
     Structural Transformation in Developing Countries.? Global Policy. 3: 397-409.

Likeng, Minette Liborn Li, Thomas Cantens and Samson Bilangna. (2009). Gazing into the mirror:
    Operational Internal Control in Cameroon Customs. SSATP Discussion Paper No. 8. Washington
    DC: The World Bank.

Likeng, Minette Liborn Li, Marcellin Djeuwa and Samson Bilangna. (2011). Gazing into the mirror:
    Performance Contracts in Cameroon Customs. SSATP Good Practice Paper No. 1. Washington DC:
    The World Bank.



                                                   59
McLinden, Gerard, Enrique Fanta, David Widdowson and Tom Doyle (eds.). (2011). Border
   Management Modernization. Washington DC: The World Bank.

Ministry of Transport of the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire. (October 2013). Politique de Facilitation
    des Transports sur le Corridor Abidjan-Ouagadougou.

Nathan. (2013). Logistics Cost Study of Transport Corridors in Central and West Africa. Report prepared
    for the World Bank.

Nathan. (2012). Impact of Road Transport industry Liberalization in West Africa. Final report prepared
    for the USAID under the Worldwide Trade Capacity Building (TCBoost) project.

Nathan. (2011). Authorized Economic Operator Program, Abidjan-Lagos Corridor. Report prepared for
    the World Bank.

Nathan. (2010). Customs Modernization handbook: Authorized Economic Operator Programs. Handbook
    prepared for the USAID.

Olievschi, Vasile Nicolae. (2013). Rail Transport: Framework for Improving Railway Sector
     Performance in Sub-Saharan Africa. SSATP Working Paper No. 94.

Pinard, Michael Ian. (2011). Emerging Good Practice in Overload Control in Eastern and Southern
     Africa. SSATP Discussion Paper No. 12. Washington DC: The World Bank.

Pinard, Michael Ian. (2010). Guidelines on Vehicle Overload Control in Eastern and Southern Africa.
     SSATP Working Paper No. 90. Washington DC: The World Bank.
Raballand, G. and Teravaninthorn, S. (2009). Transport Prices and Costs in Africa: A Review of the
  International Corridors, Washington DC: The World Bank (Directions in Development,
  Infrastructure, 46181)

Rodrigue, Jean-Paul Claude Comtois and Brian Slack. (2013). The Geography of Transport Systems (3rd
    edition). Routledge

Siva, Ramesh. Developing a National Single Window: Implementation Issues and Considerations.
     Chapter 8 in McLinden et al. (eds) Border Management Modernization. Washington DC: The World
     Bank.

Teravaninthorn, Supee and Gaël Raballand. (2009). Transport Prices and Costs in Africa – A Review of
    the Main International Corridors. Washington DC: The World Bank.

UEMOA / West Africa Trade Hub. (2013). Abidjan-Ouagadougou Corridor Road Governance Report
   (May 2013).

West Africa Trade Hub. (2010). Implementation of Axleweight Rules in UEMOA Member States - Lessons
    Learned from Transit Traffic in Ghana.




                                                  60
World Bank. (2014a). A Political Economy Analysis of Transport Reforms: The Abidjan-Ouagadougou
    Corridor. Washington DC: The World Bank.

World Bank. (2014b). Trade and Transport Corridor Management Toolkit. Washington DC: The World
    Bank.

World Bank. (2014c). Doing Business Report. Washington DC: The World Bank.

World Bank. (2013a). Quantitative Analysis of Road Transport Agreements (QuARTA). Washington DC:
    The World Bank.

World Bank. (2012). Developing a Trade Information Portal. Washington DC: The World Bank.

World Bank. (2011b). La Facilitation des Transports et du Transit en Vue de Stimuler la Reprise
    Economique en Côte d’Ivoire. Unpublished Background Paper.




                                               61
