                                                                                   98499
                         Non-Lending Technical Assistance (NLTA)
             Capacity Development for the Indian Bureau of Mines (P144934)

                Summary of Activities and Outputs supported by the NLTA

1.    Per the request of the Ministry Mines, Government of India, this Non-Lending
Technical Assistance aimed at supporting the Indian Bureau of Mines, a subordinate office
of the Ministry of Mines, in developing strategic and institutional capacity to better
regulate, manage and monitor mining and inclusive growth related issues . The TA
supported: 1) the implementation of the UNFC classification and quantification System for India,
2) the preparation of an efficient licensing system supported by an online tenement system and 3)
further development and implementation of a Sustainable Development Framework (SDF) for
mining in India.
2.    To achieve these objectives, this NLTA provided convergent assistance to the
Government of India at both the federal level (Indian Bureau of Mines) and state level with
support to the Government of Odisha (State Planning Commission and Department of
Steel and Mines) as a pilot project and proof of concept for an integrated planning process
to mining. In particular, the Bank supported the development of a resource-corridor based
approach towards integrated spatial planning in the mining sector. This support sought to
operationalize the SDF for Mining in India with concurrent application of the United Nations
Framework Classification (UNFC 2009) to improve sustainable mine planning in the mineral
rich state of Odisha. These work programs were launched concurrently to establish a “proof-of-
concept” that improved spatial planning within a coherent SDF framework could be a
demonstration of improved administration of a sector that has imparted both growth and conflict
to the country.
3.   Activities implemented under the pilot in Odisha and resulting outputs detailed in the
“Using Mining for Inclusive Growth” study include:
    Creation of a GIS baseline data set describing principal landscape activities, including
     mine permitting, mining, water resources, communities, other landscape activities, forest
     areas and habitats, and infrastructure.
    Application of the UNFC 2009 resource classification framework to prioritize
     resource areas according to ease of addressing social/environmental impacts that could
     lead to conflict and block resource development.
    Application of the Sustainable Development Framework to improve coordination and
     integrated spatial planning through an improved understanding of the drivers of
     sustainability and conflict.

4.    Based on the pilot, the study also provided recommendations on strengthening the
knowledge base and institutional arrangements for integrated planning, as well as on key actions
for improved management in mineralized regions in India that takes into account environmental
and social impacts.
5.   In addition, the Bank further facilitated the sharing of international best practice on
reporting mineral resources and reserves by organizing a major conference at the request of
the Government of India on sustainable mining and the UNFC system.
