                                                                                     98535




                          GLOBAL FOOD SAFETY PARTNERSHIP (GFSP)



                                           Key Outcomes

                                   Strategy Retreat, June 4-5 2015


                                 Towards GFSP Strategy 2015-2020


I- INTRODUCTION

During the December 2014 Annual Conference of the Global Food Safety Partnership in Cape
Town, members of the GFSP Leadership Group and other Conference participants voiced support
for a reconsideration and refinement of the GFSP Strategy in order to strengthen the Partnership
and create a sustainable path forward. As such, members of the extended Leadership Group
participated in a Strategy Retreat in Vienna, Austria, on June 4-5, 2015, hosted by the United
Nations Industrial Development Organisation (UNIDO) to discuss the development of a strategy for
the GFSP for the period 2015-2020. The list of participants to this meeting is appended at Annex 1.
The Strategy Retreat was preceded by a consultation and engagement period with members of the
GFSP Leadership Group and the extended GFSP stakeholder community, spanning from March 26th
to May 23rd, 2015. The consultation enabled the gathering of input and insights into the current
functioning of the GFSP to support the development of a vision for the future, including an
updated strategy of the GFSP, for the period 2015-2020. Feedback gathered during the Cape
Town Conference was also taken into account in this process.


This summary is aimed to present a record of the key outcomes of the discussions that took place
during the Strategy Retreat and relevant decisions, but is not meant to capture all aspects of the
conversations.
                                                                                                        2


II- DISCUSSION OF VALUE-ADDED FOR THE GFSP AND THE NEED FOR SUCH AN INITIATIVE AT THE
GLOBAL LEVEL


This discussion attempted to better characterize the “raison d’être” of the GFSP. It was aimed to
collect various perspectives related to the value-added of such an endeavour and the “what’s in it
for me/us” factor. Through discussions regarding the unique benefits and value-added of the
Partnership, participants reached common ground on a number of foundational perspectives,
including:


o GFSP offers a unique platform for discussions between public, private and academic partners
   and relevant international organisations, on food safety issues and in particular on food safety
   capacity building;
o GFSP offers a unique platform for public and private sector partners to more deeply engage
   with international organisations with oversight responsibility for food safety i.e., FAO, WHO
   and for some aspects, OIE. These organizations have a broad level of oversight on food safety
   and food safety capacity building at the global stage and can serve in a critical advisory role in
   supporting and influencing food safety capacity building initiatives in which the GFSP is
   engaged, to help guide these initiatives, to foster the adoption and implementation of food
   safety practices that are consistent with international standards. By working together, public
   partners, private partners, educational institutions and international organisations are likely to
   achieve better results in building food safety competencies than each working alone;
o As well as providing a platform for global coordination and as a convenor of the global
   dialogue, GFSP also offers opportunities to lead, influence and steer food safety capacity
   building locally, regionally and globally in a manner that prevents duplication and leverages
   existing resources and competencies amongst partners;
o Food safety capacity development is a costly undertaking, with considerable investments being
   made by public and private partners. The GFSP is a platform for constructive conversation,
   across borders and boundaries, and has the potential to become the uniting mechanism that
   helps break through barriers and institutional silos in a way that will identify and facilitate
   action on opportunities for collaboration and synergies;
o GFSP offers a «Platform» to convene food safety capacity building actors «globally» to support
   and foster «local» and targeted partnerships;
                                                                                                     3


III- CONFIRMATION OF THE MISSION OF THE GFSP:

The mission of the GFSP was thoroughly discussed and two statements were retained as a result of
these discussions. It was concluded that the mission statement would be finalised as part of the
Strategy Document 2015-2020, based on the following two statements:



   • The mission of the Global Food Safety Partnership is to enable better, more coordinated and
       integrated public and private partnership in food safety capacity development globally, to
       improve public health and economic development outcomes.



   • The mission of the Global Food Safety Partnership is to enable strong and effective public and
       private partnership in food safety capacity development globally, to improve public health
       and economic development outcomes.

It was agreed that the GFSP Secretariat would use the outcomes of the discussion to develop a
consensus mission statement.

Participants reached consensus that a positive «tag line» or «banner» for the GFSP could read:

                                 Global Platform – Local Partnerships



IV- STRATEGIC VISION STATEMENT FOR 2020:

The discussion related to creating a Vision statement for the GFSP by 2020 (i.e. the status of the
GFSP upon implementation of its strategy 2015-2020) resulted in the following consensus
statement:


By 2020 the GFSP aims to be the preeminent public private enabler, catalyst and knowledge-
sharing hub for global food safety capacity building initiatives.
                                                                                                         4


V- ROLE AND OPERATING MODEL



There was general consensus about the need to more clearly state the purpose of the GFSP, to clarify
its role in contributing to food safety outcomes, to simplify the operating and governance
arrangements of the GFSP, and to ensure that future arrangements deliver tangible outcomes with
visible early wins.



To that effect, participants agreed that the GFSP will act as a robust Platform to foster public private
food safety capacity building partnerships that deliver measurable improvement in food safety
capacity globally. Meeting participants proposed that the GFSP platform should have two core
functions: 1) as course setter; and 2) as resource mobilizer, described as:

1) Acting as the course setter and global advocate for food safety capacity building, through:
       a) identifying issues and priorities;
       b) setting the course and influencing directions of food safety capacity building investments
            globally, through input from public and private partners; and
       c) harnessing the expertise made available by these partners.
The course setter function would be supported by a robust analytics capability, for use in measuring
success of GFSP activities, and for informing future course corrections, as appropriate. The analytics
function will be performed by the dedicated, professional GFSP Secretariat.


2) Acting as the coordinator, to convene and mobilize resources in support of key food safety
       capacity building initiatives that will deliver improved food safety capacity. Such capacity
       building initiatives will be initiated upon request from partners1 and will be enabled through
       access to the vast network of food safety players, and tapping into the expertise and resources
       made available through the partnership. This latter function will be undertaken when initiatives
       for which GFSP support is sought meet certain criteria regarding, for example, their expected
       global impact and their potential to serve as a model amenable to replication and further scaling-
       up. These initiatives may have their own sources of funding or could seek the GFSP’s convening
       support to enable access to funding (fully or partially). GFSP’s support may also enable the



1   Partners include financial and in kind contributors, beneficiaries and implementing organizations.
                                                                                                                        5


   formation of partnerships of players who agree to pool resources in order to deliver specific
   capacity building efforts.

The Global Platform would therefore facilitate the identification and prioritization of needs, bring
its convening power to bear on resourcing initiatives in response to such needs, analyze and report
on the effectiveness of capacity building initiatives and best practices in this regard and, when asked,
coordinate local or regional partnerships in food safety capacity building (subject to available
resources).




                                      GFSP Global Pla orm
                       $$TF$$
   Partners:
  WB Group                                                                                                  FAO, WHO, IOs
  Interna onal
                      Submission: Call for Support                Needs ID & Priority Se ng                 GFSI
  Organisa ons        • Criterion 1                               • Global advocacy                         Academia
  Countries           • Criterion 2                               • Design tools and solu ons               SPS community
                                                                                                            Industry
  Industry            • Criterion n…                              • High level posi ons                     Pla orm
  Others

                           Robust / clear and transparent governance system managed
                                      by a leader and professional secretariat

                                                         Leadership/
                                                         Secretariat
                            Facilitate / Analyze / Report / Capture and Coordinate by the
                                               professional secretariat -

                                                    Partnership                 Partnership
       $$$              Partnership                      Z                           T
                             X
     Case by
                                                                  Partnership
      case                            Partnership
                                                                      W
                                                                                              Partnership
                                           Y                                                       R




                                           Local partnerships


  Figure 1: Proposed Schematic representation of GFSP’s role in supporting food safety capacity building
                                globally under the updated operating model.




A number of considerations were discussed regarding the proposed model depicted in Figure 1.
Highlights of these considerations include:
                                                                                                     6




 This model would not be resource intensive, but would rather require a resource base to support
   the effective functioning of a robustly staffed GFSP Secretariat;
 This model does not limit requests for support to financial support. A request for support could
   come in the form of a request for expertise, technology, or tools that exist within the GFSP
   network of partners;
 This model may rely on a membership model with an annual subscription fee (amount to be
   determined and governance to be defined);
 This model should be flexible and allow for growth. The model would, for example, provide
   mechanisms by which the GFSP could raise additional funds for food safety capacity building
   initiatives deemed important to public and private partners as well as for priority areas identified
   by GFSP partners through their foresight, anticipation and issue identification / prioritization
   actions.
 The need for flexibility of funding mechanisms was discussed, and various ideas regarding
   flexible funding options in support of the model were offered. The WB representatives indicated
   that they would discuss such proposals internally and later inform the GFSP Leadership Group
   regarding the feasibility of making available the various flexible funding mechanisms discussed.
 The operation of this model was also discussed, including the need to rely upon a robust and
   nimble governance structure and decision-making process, supported by a well-staffed
   secretariat with the analytical capacity and expertise to support the Platform needs. Participants
   were in agreement that this would be essential for the success of the model.



Participants concluded that in operating in this fashion the GFSP would fulfill its vision of becoming
the main catalyst and leader in enabling food safety capacity building globally, supporting the
creation of synergies and optimizing use of resources amongst public and private partners.



Members of the extended Leadership Group present at the Strategy Retreat endorsed this model
and agreed that the 2015-2020 Strategy would enable this model to be operational and sustainable.

The implementation of the Strategy would also invite engagement from other partners to secure
further support and to establish the operating procedures of the Global Food Safety Capacity
Building Platform and the associated Secretariat.
                                                                                                    7




The GFSP Leadership Group members discussed and gave direction on other aspects supporting the
development of the 2015-2020 Strategy, such as the development of criteria for GFSP involvement
in capacity building initiatives upon request from partners, initial suggestions on governance, and
suggestions on operating guidelines for the GFSP Secretariat.




VI- DISCUSSION OF MEASURES OF SUCCESS FOR THE GFSP IN UNDERTAKING ITS PROPOSED GLOBAL
ADVOCACY FUNCTION:



Participants discussed recommendations for defining, at a high level, the types of advocacy activities
and analytical functions expected of the GFSP Secretariat, as the hub for food safety capacity
building globally.

These recommendations include:



 The GFSP will play a leading advocacy role in promoting food safety capacity building globally,
   attempting to steer the direction of investments towards enhanced convergence and synergies.
   The GFSP would become a recognized, strong and global voice communicating and
   disseminating food safety capacity building priorities and direction. It would evaluate progress
   and foster enhanced action from all partners. This global leadership function would require a
   leadership role played by international organizations with oversight on food safety (i.e., FAO and
   WHO) in the Partnership;
 Another possible output of the advocacy function would be coalition building and mobilization
   of resources, for example to support establishment of funding mechanisms for food safety
   capacity building locally and globally;
 Possible outputs of the GFSP analytical activity could be a “white paper” on food safety capacity
   building needs and priorities globally and/or regionally to support guidance for areas of
   investment amongst partners. The paper could identify areas where weaker coordination is
   noted and possible recommendations of action to alleviate such shortcomings;
 The GFSP could also aim to consolidate and illustrate best practices in coordinating and
   delivering food safety capacity building. It could also build and disseminate relevant tools
                                                                                                      8


   enabling added effectiveness of food safety capacity building initiatives, such as quality
   assurance tools, reporting mechanisms and evaluation of return on investment / impact on
   improvement of food safety systems locally and globally for a given set of initiatives; and
 Measures of success for this function being fulfilled would consist of having the relevant
   information about food safety capacity building appropriately captured, analyzed, shared /
   disseminated and leveraged. The GFSP would therefore become the focal point to access the
   relevant food safety capacity building networks. Other measures would include the GFSP having
   a broader private sector audience and having a stronger and more visible influence in shaping
   the food safety capacity building agenda globally (policy and technical influence).



VII- DISCUSSION     OF   CRITERIA   TO BE   CONSIDERED   FOR   GFSP   INVOLVEMENT,   UPON REQUEST,   TO

SUPPORT FOOD SAFETY CAPACITY BUILDING INITIATIVES:



Participants in the Strategy Retreat gave advice on the way criteria would be developed and applied
to consider when an initiative could / would benefit from GFSP’s conveni ng, coordination and
support function.



Although it was agreed that the full set of criteria and their operationalization would likely be
developed during the early stages of the implementation of the GFSP Strategic Plan 2015-2020, and
may be refined over time, members of the Leadership Group gave some initial recommendations /
advice on such criteria, for guidance purposes:



 Criteria would be expressed as a set of questions that should be considered when reviewing
   food safety capacity building proposals submitted to the GFSP for consideration. Some of these
   questions may serve in guiding considerations for decision-making:
       o Whether the proposal has a main focus on food safety with both public health and
           trade/economic development related impacts;
       o Whether the proposed initiative is seeking technical support and other non-financial
           support from the GFSP, or if the proposed initiative is only seeking financial support from
           the GFSP.
                                                                                                    9


       o Whether resulting benefits from undertaking the proposed initiative would be of value
           and relevant for both public and private sectors;
       o Whether the proposed initiative is of global and regional relevance (e.g. laboratory
           training in China could have relevance for the entire Asia / Asia-Pacific region);
       o If the proposed initiative is local, whether it is scalable or amenable to being replicated;
       o Whether another organization’s involvement would be more appropriate than the GFSP
           (i.e., characterizing the tangible value-added from GFSP’s involvement through its
           coordination and resource mobilization power);
       o Whether the proposed initiative presents a sustainable business model (i.e., after GFSP’s
           intervention, whether this initiative could be self-sustaining);
       o Whether the proposed initiative could be implemented with existing funding from the
           submission holder or whether GFSP funding is needed;
       o Whether the proposed initiative has in-country support to enable “follow-through”; and
       o Whether the proposed initiative could result in positive impacts for the reputation and
           the position of the GFSP as the main driver of food safety capacity building globally.


 Participants noted that the various criteria to be adopted would need to be weighted, for
   example based on scope and potential magnitude of impact. They also noted that other
   priorities stemming from the GFSP’s advocacy and analytical function would need to be
   considered, in particular whether a proposed initiative would address key priority areas of
   intervention that GFSP partners have identified. The evaluation of impacts of previous GFSP
   initiatives would also feed into the continual refinement and updating of criteria, in an iterative
   manner.




VIII- ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR ENABLING AND CONVENING FUNCTIONS OF THE GFSP:



Partners discussed some additional measures and indicators of success for the GFSP.

Some of the indicators included:

 The establishment of partnerships that build food safety capacity building on a large scale,
 Completion of food safety capacity building projects that demonstrably improve food safety,
 The recruitment of up to 50 new partner organizations into the Partnership,
                                                                                                                                  10


 A significant increase in the number of bilateral and multilateral forums where the GFSP is
     represented and where it is coordinating input related to needs and priorities for food safety
     capacity building (e.g, FAO / WHO Codex regional committees2 etc.),
 Having adequate representation from the European Union as a main player in food safety
     capacity development regionally and globally,
 The GFSP having appropriately documented mechanisms and criteria guiding its interventions,
 The GFSP becoming the hub where partners feature their on-going and upcoming (pipeline
     requests) food safety capacity building initiatives.

IX- DISCUSSION           OF    OPERATIONAL CONDITIONS                  UNDER THE          NEW MODEL: SECRETARIAT -
GOVERNANCE STRUCTURE OF THE GFSP



Participants took stock of the new proposed model and discussed some of the requirements to make
this model operational.



IX-1- Secretariat function:

Members of the Leadership Group emphasized the need for a strong and effective Secretariat that
is fully staffed with the relevant expertise to support the successful implementation of the new
model.

        In particular, and beyond the coordination, convening and partner engagement efforts, a
         recommendation was made to ensure that the skill sets of the Secretariat staff enable the
         delivery of the analytical capacity expected of the Partnership platform, as well as its role
         to be the course setter and leading advocate, steering food safety capacity building efforts
         globally. Some suggestions noted the need to rely on a “charismatic food safety leader” to
         be the “principal voice or leading force” of the Secretariat. Other suggestions included the
         following characteristics to be identified in the secretariat staff:

              o    Strong analytical skills
              o    Food Safety expertise
              o    Communicating with Impact
              o    Results oriented


2 GFSP would not necessarily be the instigator nor the convener of such fora, but rather could solicit their support and leverage the
competency provided by such fora. For example, the revitalised FAO/WHO Regional Coordinating Committee structure with its
objective to take a leadership role under the auspices of FAO and WHO in dentifying food safety issues of importance to each region
(including Food Safety Capacity Building) could become an important source of information and vehicle that GFSP could leverage.
                                                                                                        11


                o    Ability to draw from a wide range of resources to connect and integrate
                o    Financial management
                o    Member services provider
                o    Project management; monitoring and evaluation
                o    Understanding of Multi-sector environment
                o    Consensus builder




IX-2- Hosting of the Secretariat function:

Members of the Leadership Group discussed various options for hosting the GFSP Secretariat and
related consequences of each option. Based on the discussion, it was felt that the GFSP Secretariat
should continue to be hosted by the World Bank (WB). The World Bank Group (WBG) delegation
reconfirmed its commitment to hosting the GFSP while it implements its new Strategy. The
delegation highlighted possible options to manage the Secretariat, and the Trust Fund that would
support the Partnership, as per the proposed new strategy. It reaffirmed its commitment to support
and pursue with the management and legal departments of the WB on the need for a strengthened
Secretariat and a robust governance structure that allows for participatory decision-making on the
staffing and operational activities of the GFSP. The WBG delegation further highlighted the critical
importance of the full financial and operational support of all partners in the GFSP to ensure that it
can undertake its mission.



IX-3- Governance Structure:



Members of the extended Leadership Group agreed on the need for a robust governance structure
to support the decision-making process of the GFSP. They recommended setting a GFSP Governing
Council3 whose function would include to:



       - be the decision making and steering body for the GFSP as a partnership;
       - be the body to whom the (Head of the) Secretariat reports ;
       - set the strategic direction of the GFSP; and




3   The title of the governing body may change, based on guidance from WB Legal and Senior Management
                                                                                                   12


   - oversee business processes of the GFSP;

Examples of areas of oversight of the Council would include approval of strategic direction,
workplans and associated budgets.

It was recommended that all members of the GFSP (Partners), whether they sit on the Council or
not, be financial contributors to the GFSP Trust Fund, via a membership fee. It was also
recommended that all financial Donors would be considered for eligibility to serve on the Governing
Council. This was intended to create added incentive to contribute and support the GFSP as a Global
Platform.

It was suggested that the Governing Council would include up to 15 members.

Recommendations were also made on the composition of the Council, with the suggestion to have
an elected membership representing the various sectors of the Partnership.

Each eligible representative of a given sector (with contributing donor status) would be able to elect
members of the council amongst the eligible sectors’ members (all holding a contributing donor
status).

An example of the Governing Council composition was suggested as follows:

   - 4 members representing Donor Governments
   - 4 members representing Industry Donors
   - 1 World Bank representative (as the host of the Partnership), serving as the Chair of the
       Council
   - 2 representatives from International Organizations (1 amongst FAO, WHO – and 1 amongst
       other international organisations contributing to Food Safety e.g., OIE, UNIDO, WTO-STDF,
       IAEA etc.)



The Governing Council may create or task Working Groups or any other subsidiary body that reports
to it, to undertake time-limited or on-going initiatives.

It was also recommended that the Governing Council be supported by other bodies/forums that will
help shape the Governance structure, including potentially an Assembly of Partners, representing
the broader GFSP constituency.

Participants confirmed that the development of the GFSP Strategy 2015-2020 should enable the
development and implementation of this updated governance structure. Participants agreed that
                                                                                                13


current GFSP Working Groups and Advisory structure would be reviewed in line with the proposed
new direction, with the possibility to suspend some of groups / activities. This review will be
undertaken by the existing GFSP Secretariat and will be communicated to Partners during the
transition period (while the updated Strategy is under development).




X- NEXT STEPS:




                       • Consolida on of input – Summary of
     June 9-19th         decisions and Valida on within WB

                       • Development of Dra Strategy and peer
    June 22nd-July
      17th, 2015
                         review with volunteers (itera ve approach)


                       • Valida on within WB Group
    July 19- July 23




     Target for Distribu on to Extended Leadership Group for review
                              July 27th , 2015



The outcomes of the discussions that took place during the Strategy Retreat will be used to inform
the development of the GFSP Strategic Plan for 2015-2020, underpinned by the new operational
model endorsed by the extended Leadership Group. It was agreed that the Summary of Outcomes
from the Strategy Retreat be shared no later than June 22 nd 2015. It was also agreed that the WBG
will engage in internal consultations and will communicate to GFSP partners the feasibility and the
limitations associated with some of the options related to the administration of the GFSP and its
Trust Fund, as discussed during the Strategy Retreat.
                                                                                               14


Dr. Samuel Godefroy was tasked to lead the development of the draft 2015-2020 Strategy,
supported by key representatives of the Leadership Group (with representation from public, private
and International Organization partners), acting as peer reviewers. An iterative approach will be
followed to reach an agreed-upon draft. This draft will be shared for broader consultation before
being adopted. Some suggested initial steps and associated timelines were discussed and will be
updated based on input received from members of the Leadership Group and progress
accomplished.
                                                                15


                                 Appendix1:

    Global Food Safety Partnership Strategy Retreat
                             List of Participants
                             Vienna, 4-5 June 2015


            International Organizations and World Bank Group
                                  Leadership Group Member
Renata Clarke   FAO
                                  representing Ren Wang


Amy
                WHO                International Organization
Cawthorne


Marlynne
                WTO/STDF          International Organization
Hopper


                                  Agriculture Practice
Nathan Belete   World Bank        Manager for East Asia
                                  Pacific - resource person


Francois                          GFSP Manager - resource
                World Bank
Le Gall                           person


                                  Senior Executive Food
Samuel
                World Bank        Regulator (Health Canada)
Godefroy
                                  in secondment to GFSP


                                  Head of GFSP Secretariat -
Amy Evans       World Bank
                                  resource person


                                  GFSP research analyst –
Tingting Wang   World Bank
                                  resource person


Patrick                           Advisory Agriculture
                IFC
Luternauer                        Manager - resource person

                                 Sr. Operations Officer, IFC
Valentina
                IFC / World Bank and GFSP - resource
Paskalova
                                 person
                                                                      16


                  Governmental Organizations as Donors
                                         Donor and Leadership Group
Julie Callahan     US FDA
                                         Member

                                         Donor and Leadership Group
Mary Lou Valdez    US FDA
                                         Member

                                         Donor and Leadership Group
Kelley Cormier     US AID
                                         Member

                   CFIA (Canadian
                                         Donor and Leadership Group
Paul Mayers        Food Inspection
                                         Member
                   Agency)

                                         Donor and Leadership Group
Rob Theelen        The Netherlands
                                         Member
                   New Zealand
Bill Jolly         Ministry of Primary   New Donor
                   Industries




                                     Associations
                   FIA (Food Industry
Bev Postma                               Leadership Group Member
                   Asia)

                   GMA (Grocery
Leon Bruner        Manufacturers         Leadership Group Member
                   Association)




                          Private Entities as Donors
                                         Donor and Leadership Group
Paul Young         Waters Corporation
                                         Member


                   Waters & GFSP         Donor and Leadership Group
Sonia Bradley
                   Secretariat Team      Member


                                         Donor and Leadership Group
Robert C. Baker    Mars Incorporated
                                         Member


                                         Donor and Leadership Group
Jean Reidemeister Mars Incorporated
                                         Member


David Isherwood    Fonterra              New Donor
                                                                        17




                                Educational Bodies
                                           Manager for GFSP support -
Stuart Morriss      Massey University
                                           resource person

Hamish Gow          Massey University      GFSP Support

                    IFPTI (International   Working Group Co-Chair
Julia Bradsher      Food Protection        (Communication &
                    Training Institute)    Regulatory Issues WGs)

                    International Union
Geoffrey                                   Working Group Co-Chair
                    of Food Science &
Campbell-Platt                             (KLSWG)
                    Technology


                                        Facilitator

                    Directions for
Di van Meegen                              Retreat Facilitator
                    Change



                                 Host Organization

Philippe Scholtes   UNIDO                  Host organization


Bernardo
Calzadilla-         UNIDO                  Host organization
Sarmiento


Ali Badarneh        UNIDO                  Host organization


Ulvinur Muge
                    UNIDO                  Host organization
Dolun
