                                 98538
     OPPORTUNITIES ABOUND:
 PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS FOR
LABORATORY SERVICES IN EAST AFRICA
 DISCUSSION PAPER      SEPTEMBER 2015




 Nirmala Ravishankar
 Joel Lehmann
           OPPORTUNITIES ABOUND:
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS FOR LABORATORY
           SERVICES IN EAST AFRICA




         Nirmala Ravishankar and Joel Lehmann




                   September 2015
      Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice. The papers in this
series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are
entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its
affiliated organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they
represent. Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take into account this
provisional character.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact Martin Lutalo at
mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2015 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                                2
            Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
                                      Opportunities Abound:
                 Public Private Partnerships for Laboratory Services in East Africa
                                  Nirmala Ravishankara and Joel Lehmannb
a
    Health Financing Specialist (Consultant for the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project)
b
    Health Research Specialist (Consultant for the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project)

       This document was prepared under the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project
     (EAPHLNP), which is funded by the World Bank and coordinated by the East, Central, and Southern
                                 Africa Health Community (ECSA-HC).

Abstract: This document presents findings from a study conducted to identify and document ongoing
public-private partnerships (PPPs) for improving access to quality laboratory services, especially for the
poor, in the East Africa region. The East, Central, and Southern Africa Health Community (ECSA-HC)
coordinated the study along with the partner states in the East African Community participating in the
World Bank funded East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project (EAPHLNP). The authors
implemented key informant interviews in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda, and analyzed the
information gathered from the interviews which is presented in this report.

The study finds that while there are numerous examples of public-private collaboration across all four
countries, the number of formal PPPs remains scarce. The most common form of PPP is placement,
whereby privately owned laboratory equipment is leased by public facilities. Most other instances of
collaboration between public and private partners did not meet the formal definition of a PPP. Key
stakeholders from both public and private institutions showed a keen interest in learning about and setting
up more, diverse kinds of PPPs. The numerous informal and semi-formal arrangements that currently
exist represent opportunities for establishing formal PPPs in accordance with global best practices.

Keywords: Laboratory services, diagnostics, public-private partnerships, outsourcing, leasing.

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in the paper are entirely those of
the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, ECSA or its member countries.

Correspondence details: Nirmala Ravishankar, nravishankar@gmail.com.




                                                       3
4
                                                         Table of Contents
List of Acronyms ...................................................................................................................................... 6
Acknowledgements ................................................................................................................................. 7
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................. 8
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 10
   Background and Rationale ................................................................................................................. 10
   Methodology ...................................................................................................................................... 12
   Definitions of key terms...................................................................................................................... 12
   Study Limitations ............................................................................................................................... 14
PPPs for Laboratory Services in East Africa........................................................................................... 15
   The PPP Climate in East Africa .......................................................................................................... 15
   Landscape of Existing Collaborations................................................................................................. 18
   Case Studies ..................................................................................................................................... 22
Challenges and Opportunities for Enhancing PPPs in East Africa .......................................................... 27
   Key Challenges for Laboratory PPPs ................................................................................................. 27
   Recommendations ............................................................................................................................. 29
   Opportunities ..................................................................................................................................... 30
Conclusion ............................................................................................................................................ 33
References ............................................................................................................................................ 34
   ANNEX A: Details for Identified Partnerships ..................................................................................... 35
   ANNEX B: Qualitative Sample Composition ....................................................................................... 37


List of Tables

 Table 1:     Number of Laboratory-Specific Partnerships/Collaborations identified by Country                                                         8
 Table 2:     Themes and Potential Codes                                                                                                             14
 Table 3:     Master list of PPPs in the laboratory sector                                                                                           21
 Table 4:     Perceived benefits and challenges in relation to PPPs for laboratory services                                                          27




                                                                            5
                                    List of Acronyms

BMC        Bio Medical Centre, Kigali: A private standalone laboratory
CHUK       Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Kigali: Rwanda National Referral Hospital
CPHL       Central Public Health Laboratory, Uganda
CSR        Corporate Social Responsibility
EAC        East African Community
EAPHLN     East African Public Health Laboratory Network
ECSA- HC   East, Central, and Southern African Health Community
EID        Early Infant Diagnosis of HIV
FBO        Faith-Based Organization
HIPS       Uganda Health Initiatives for the Private Sector
HIV/AIDS   Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
KAPTLD     Kenya Association for the Prevention of Tuberculosis and Lung Diseases
IFC        International Finance Corporation
IHK        International Hospital of Kampala
KNH        Kenyatta National Hospital: Kenyan National Referral Hospital
MoH        Ministry of Health
NTRL       National TB Reference Laboratory
MoU        Memorandum of Understanding
PEPFAR     The U.S. President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief
PHSP       Uganda Private Health Support Program
PPP        Public Private Partnership
PPP HK     PPP Health Kenya: Dialogue Platform
EQA        External Quality Assurance
RDB        Rwanda Development Board
TB         Tuberculosis
TB PPP     Tuberculosis Public-Private-Partnership Working Group, Kenya
SHOPS      Strengthening Health Outcomes through Private Sector project
UHMG       Uganda Health Marketing Group




                                                6
                                      Acknowledgements
This study would not have been possible but for all the key informants, who generously shared their time
and ideas with the study team. The authors thank the East, Central and Southern African Health
Community (ECSA-HC), especially Martin Matu and Samwel Mfanga for their guidance, technical inputs,
and logistical support. The East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking (EAPHLN) Project country
offices in Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, and Tanzania provided the team with vital technical and logistical
support for conducting field research, for which the team is very grateful. We thank Dr. Edwine Barasa for
conducting field research in Tanzania, as well as Metrine Muhavi and her team for transcribing the
interview transcripts. This report benefited immensely from technical inputs and comments from Miriam
Schneidman, April Harding, G.N.V. Ramana, Josephine Muigai, and Barbara O’Hanlon. Finally, the
authors are grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP Discussion Paper.




                                                    7
                                      Executive Summary
This study, which was commissioned under the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking
(EAPHLN) Project, examines the role of public private partnerships (PPPs) to strengthen
laboratory services in East Africa. The objective of EAPHLN is to establish and strengthen a network
of efficient, accessible and high quality public health laboratories 1 in the region. Exploring how PPPs can
be leveraged by public and private actors in East Africa to achieve this goal as well as to improve access
to high quality laboratory services more broadly is critical for regional policymakers. Consequently, the
study sought to gather information through interviews with key stakeholders and experts in Kenya,
Uganda, Rwanda and Tanzania about: (1) the existing landscape of PPPs for laboratory services, (2)
what challenges impede the further use of PPPs for laboratory services and recommendations for how
these might be addressed, and (3) opportunities for new PPPs related to laboratory services in the region.

The interviews revealed that a wide range of public private collaborations are already in place in
East Africa. The study identified approximately 36 partnerships in the four countries. Table 1 below
summarizes the number of partnerships and collaborations identified that strengthen various aspects of
laboratory service delivery. A majority of these are ongoing, while some occurred in the past or are
planned for the near future.

Table 1: Number of Laboratory-Specific Partnerships/Collaborations identified by Country

        Aspect of Laboratory                       Number of Partnerships Identified*
        Services Strengthened            Kenya          Tanzania       Uganda         Rwanda
        Infrastructure, Equipment           7              1              3              4
        Human Resources                     3              1              1              1
        Operational Services                8              2              7              1
        Information Systems                 2              0              3              0
        * A total of 36 partnerships were identified. Some strengthen more than one aspect of
        laboratory services.

Placement of privately owned laboratory equipment in public facilities is the most commonly used
form of PPPs. It adheres to the conventional definition of PPPs which emphasizes a formal
written contract and the transfer of significant risk and responsibility from the public actor to the
private actor. In this model, a private manufacturer or distributor makes equipment available at no cost,
trains staff to operate it, and provides free maintenance services. In exchange, the public sector provider
commits to the regular purchase of an agreed minimum volume of specific reagents from the same
company. Placement is used in several national referral hospitals and most national referral laboratories,
as well as secondary referral public hospitals in the East African countries. It is considered to be highly
successful by all professionals interviewed.

Most of the remaining public-private collaborations do not meet the aforementioned strict
definition of a PPP. This includes donor-financed partnerships for training local laboratory technicians
and expanding the reach of national disease control and treatment programs, informal and semi-formal
instances of collaboration between the public and private sectors, and private actors donating assets or
services to the public sector as part of their corporate social responsibility (CSR) agenda. Some of these

1
  The term “public health laboratories” refers to laboratories offering diagnostic services and disease
surveillance in order to improve public health. Such laboratories are typically financed and operated by
the government. In this study, we looked at medical laboratories more broadly, spanning both public and
private sectors. Some of them provide diagnostic services but do not serve a surveillance function. The
term “medical laboratory” is defined below.
                                                     8
are long-standing partnerships that are documented in formal memoranda of understanding (MoU). The
extent to which risk and management responsibility are transferred from the public sector to private actors
varies across these arrangements. Collaborations that work without any written agreement represent
opportunities for the establishment of formalized PPPs.

In all four countries, respondents had a very favorable view of PPPs. They reported broad support
for PPPs among national and industry leaders and professionals. All respondents without exception
agreed that PPPs have great potential to improve access, efficiency and quality of laboratory services in
East Africa, and expressed an interest to see more PPPs implemented. Moreover, most East African
governments have already or are in the process of implementing PPPs for health policies or frameworks.

Despite the widespread support for PPPs, all four East African countries face challenges in
implementing more PPPs for laboratory services. One of the key issues identified was that there is no
platform to share and discuss experience from public-private collaborations. As a result, key actors are
often unaware of existing partnerships and models. Financial constraints prevent ministries of health from
committing to partnerships where they will be required to pay private institutions. Greater technical
expertise and political will within ministries of health in the region would go a long way in promoting more
PPPs.

Study participants offered diverse recommendations for how EAPHLN and other stakeholders
could assist East African countries to overcome these challenges. These include setting up national
and regional platforms for experts and stakeholders interested and/or experienced in laboratory PPPs to
interact and share their experience; creating a practical manual with models of laboratory PPPs, contract
templates, etc.; and setting up prototype laboratory PPPs in each EAPHLN country. Respondents
identified a wide range of areas related to laboratory services where PPPs could add value, including
pooled procurement of laboratory consumables; formalizing ad-hoc referrals between public and private
sector entities; outsourcing the management of public sector laboratories to private vendors; mentorship
and training programs to transfer skills between sectors; and exploring ways in which donor financing for
making services available to the poor can be channeled effectively through the private sector.




                                                     9
                                            Introduction
The past decade has seen a growth in interest for and use of public private partnerships (PPPs) in the
health sector [1, 2, 3]. Such arrangements feature long-term contracts between governmental and private
sector actors that leverage the skills, expertise and resources of the respective parties. PPPs at the
national-level have taken a variety of forms, ranging from greater communication and cooperation
between public sector, private for-profit, and private not-for-profit actors on the one hand to more formal
PPPs such as contracting-out arrangements, outsourcing, leasing, concessions, and private financing
initiatives on the other [1,4,5].

The use of PPPs to improve the delivery of the clinical laboratory services is the focus of this study
commissioned by the East, Central and Southern Africa Health Community (ECSA-HC) in the context of
the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking (EAPHLN) Project supported by the Work Bank. The
objective of EAPHLN is to establish and strengthen a network of efficient, accessible and high quality
public health laboratories in the region. ECSA-HC and the East African Community (EAC) are supporting
regional coordination between ministries of health in the East African countries to achieve this goal.

The Bank-funded EAPHLN Project included financing for analytic work to document the role of PPPs in
strengthening laboratory services in the East African region and to support innovative approaches to
enhance such partnerships. Correspondingly, the objectives of this study are to:

    •   Identify and systematically document promising PPP arrangements in clinical laboratory services
        in Kenya, Tanzania, Uganda and Rwanda
    •   Analyze the views of both public and private sector stakeholders in these four countries regarding
        the challenges they face in operationalizing PPPs and provide general recommendations about
        how EAPHLN and other key stakeholders might address these challenges
    •   Identify specific opportunities for future PPPs in the four countries

This chapter summarizes the background and rationale for the study, as well as the conceptual
framework and methodology used for implementing it. Chapter 2 presents the current landscape of public
private collaboration in the four study countries, and presents 5 examples in greater detail. Chapter 3
discusses current challenges identified by laboratory sector stakeholders in relation to PPPs in the sector,
general recommendations about how they may be addressed, and specific opportunities for future
laboratory sector PPPs in East Africa.

Background and Rationale
National and international stakeholders have increasingly embraced PPPs as an effective way to boost
health system performance and in turn improve health outcomes [2]. This follows from the recognition that
greater collaboration between public and private sectors is both a necessity and good strategy. It is
necessary given that private health actors already play a large role in a range of health system functions,
be it in the manufacturing of medical technologies, training of medical personnel, the delivery of services,
or financing health. Hence, good governance in the health sector requires communication and
collaboration between the government and private entities. Partnership between public and private actors
is a good strategy since, much like in other sectors, PPPs for health can benefit public systems for service
delivery in multiple ways [5]. For example, PPPs can create a channel for private capital to flow into the
health sector, thereby supplementing government spending on health or freeing up government
resources for other purposes. PPPs can leverage private partners’ operational efficiency or good
management practices, thereby leading to greater efficiency in the delivery of health services. PPPs also
offer a way for superior technology, technical expertise, skills, and clinical practices to flow from the
private to the public sector, thereby resulting in quality improvements. To be successful, PPPs have to be
planned and managed effectively [5]. This includes the clear articulation and implementation of a contract
                                                    10
that allocates financial risks and rewards, stipulates roles and responsibilities, and describes processes
for oversight, regulation, and conflict management.

The global literature on PPPs for health offers a range of examples of innovative and successful PPPs
related to different aspects of healthcare, such as the design and construction of facilities, the
management of entire health facilities or a network of facilities, training of health personnel, and the
delivery of clinical services, clinical support services (such as laboratory analysis and diagnostic imaging)
as well as non-clinical services (for example, IT support, facility maintenance or cleaning, and billing). A
few examples of health PPPs from around the world are highlighted below:

    •   In 2003, the Government of Romania engaged private providers to upgrade, expand and operate
        dialysis services at public hospitals. Service contracts were awarded to private contractors
        through a tendering process for an initial period of four years. The operators took on the full
        responsibility for renovating and refurbishing the facilities, renewing the equipment, employing
        and training staff, maintaining and operating the equipment, and delivering all services. The
        Ministry of Health determined the prices for the services based on regional standards and
        provided continued monitoring for quality. Independent evaluations of the projects have shown
        that the PPP arrangement generated €28.6 million in private sector investment for dialysis
        services and that the privately-managed clinics have delivered higher-quality and less-expensive
        care to the public than their public sector counterparts [5,7].

    •   The Government of Bihar, a state in India, has contracted two private providers to provide clinical
        laboratory services in government-owned health facilities. Under the arrangement, private
        providers were required to set up the necessary infrastructure in the space provided inside the
        health center. They are responsible for providing all pathology, biochemistry, and microbiology
        laboratory services. Initially, the test charges were being paid by patients. Subsequently, the
        Government decided to make the tests free for patients and started reimbursing the private
        providers at fixed rates. The coverage under this partnership has been extended to 25 district
        hospitals, 23 sub-divisional hospitals, 76 referral hospitals and 398 primary health centers across
        the state [8, 9]. State governments in several Indian states have implemented similar service
        contracts for a range of laboratory, radiology, and emergency care services.

    •   The State of Punjab in Pakistan is using a PPP to address the shortage of nurses in the state.
        Under the arrangement, the Provincial Government provides resources to the Fatima Memorial
        Hospital, a renowned private sector nursing school, to train nurses in the region. Since 2007, an
        equivalent of 740 million Pakistani Rupees (close to US $9 million) has been provided by the
        Provincial Government for the purpose of training various categories of nurses [10].

    •   Netcare, South Africa's largest private hospital company, signed a 17-year concession agreement
        with the Provincial Government in the Eastern Cape region of the country to equip and maintain
        two facilities that co-locate public and private hospitals. Together, Port Alfred Hospital and
        Settlers Hospital have 140 public beds and 60 private beds. Under the terms of the contract,
        Netcare renovated Settlers hospital, and provides maintenance and all ancillary services
        (gardening, catering, laundry, etc.) on an ongoing basis. The Eastern Cape Provincial
        Government employs the clinical staff and pays Netcare a monthly fee for the space and services
        provided. In Port Alfred, Netcare is responsible for maintenance and all soft services for which the
        Government pays Netcare a monthly fee [11].

    •   The Government of Lesotho established a health PPP for the private operation of public clinics as
        well as a new $100 million national referral hospital in 2006. The Lesotho PPP has been cited as

                                                     11
        the first of its kind for Africa for its size and scope. A private consortium led by Netcare, the South
        African firm, won the contract to design, build, and operate the facilities. The new clinics began
        providing services to public patients in May 2011 [12].

While the existing literature on PPPs for health has documented the experience from around the world,
this study is focused on assessing the landscape of PPPs for laboratory services in East Africa. The
purpose is to, firstly, understand what is currently happening in this area. What are the most common
forms of PPPs for laboratory services? How have they been structured? Are they considered successful?
What challenges have they faced? Secondly, the study synthesizes lessons learnt from the experience of
existing PPP arrangements as well as the views and recommendations from experts and key
stakeholders to offer recommendations for how EAPHLN and other key laboratory sector stakeholders in
the region can enhance the use of PPPs for strengthening laboratory services in the future.

Methodology
As per the objectives of the study, the following questions were the focus of the investigation:
    1. What PPPs involving health laboratories are known to exist in each country?
    2. How can these partnerships be categorized?
    3. What other ideas for PPP in the laboratory sector are considered promising by stakeholders?
    4. How can EAPHLN and ministries of health provide support to catalyze existing or new PPPs?
    5. What are key challenges and opportunities for the public and private sectors to work together?
    6. How well have partnerships been implemented, and what results are said to have been attained?
    7. What are the key challenges and lessons learnt in various partnerships?

These questions were addressed by conducting in-depth key informant and stakeholder interviews in
Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, and Rwanda. The sample of key informants was chosen purposefully to
include representatives from the private sector and the public sector, as well as third-party experts. An
initial list of participants was developed in collaboration with the EAPHN country teams for each of the
four countries; additional participants were identified according to a snowballing methodology during the
interviews. One member of the study team spent 5 working days in the capital city of each country
conducting face-to-face interviews. The exception was Kenya, where the interviews were completed over
a 3 week timespan due to the fact that all members of the study team reside in Kenya. The sample size in
each of the four countries was between 11 - 20 participants. The total sample size was 62 participants. A
list detailing the number of participants of each type is in Annex B.

Semi-structured interviews based on a discussion guide designed to address the research question were
conducted at a time and location of the participant’s preference, usually at their workplace. Interview
durations ranged from 25-60 minutes each. All interviews were audio-recorded with a digital recorder,
except when respondents preferred not to be recorded; in such cases, the team took detailed notes. The
recorded interviews were transcribed. Then the team analyzed the written transcripts and notes.

Definitions of key terms
Medical Laboratories
Throughout this report, the term “medical laboratory” or “laboratory” is used to include all types of
laboratories that are relevant in public health and clinical health service provision. It is therefore an
umbrella term for public health laboratories, clinical laboratories, and - where applicable - health research
laboratories. The terms covers all laboratories, both situated within a hospital or stand-alone, that
examine materials derived from the human body for the purpose of providing information on the
diagnosis, prognosis, prevention, or treatment of disease.




                                                      12
Public Private Partnerships
Private entities were defined as all non-state organizations, including for-profit and not-for-profit entities
such as faith- and community based organizations and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) [13,14].
This initial categorization notwithstanding, it became clear during the interviews that the proximity of the
faith-based organizations (FBOs) to the government varied greatly between countries; in Tanzania and
Rwanda FBOs are considered quasi-public institutions, while in Kenya and Uganda they are considered
to be part of the non-profit private sector. In the case of some NGOs, the classification is not entirely clear
either; they are seen as representing a public interest, taking on a public sector role [1,15]. For the sake
of this assessment, a pragmatic approach was used. A partnership between a NGO and a private for-
profit company was considered to be a PPP if more than one study participant considered them as such.

From among a broad range of definitions of PPP offered in the literature, the following definition from the
World Bank Public-Private Partnerships Reference Guide [16] was initially adopted for the study:

        “A written formal agreement between a private partner and a government agency for providing a
        public asset or service, in which the private party bears significant risk and management
        responsibility.”

According to this definition, both the public and the private partners may be responsible for all or some
project operations, and likewise financing can come from either one or both sides. The definition applies
to PPPs related to assets and services, both new and existing. It includes arrangements where the
private party is paid by service users as well as cases where the government pays, fully or in part, the
private entity. This formal definition emphasizes the importance of “significant risk and management
responsibility” being transferred from the public sector to the private agency [16].

The aforementioned definition was used as a starting point for the study and presented to all key
informants interviewed. Early on during data collection, it became clear that the number of public-private
partnerships in the laboratory sector in East Africa that meet the requirements of the definition of PPP
described above is low. Moreover, the term “PPPs” is used very broadly in East Africa to refer to any kind
of collaboration between public and private actors. A placement contract, wherein a private manufacturer
of laboratory equipment places laboratory equipment in a facility and takes full responsibility for its
maintenance in return for the facility purchasing reagents from the manufacturer, is an arrangement that
is commonly used by public facilities in several East African countries and meets the requirements of the
definition. However, most other instances of collaboration between the public and private sector in the
laboratory sector in East Africa, which were described as “PPPs” by study participants, differ from the
traditional PPP model implied by the definition. Moreover, many of the terms used in the broader health
policy literature such as contracting, outsourcing, leasing, concessions, etc. were not commonly used by
study participants.

For example, partnerships between donor governments and private companies or facilities for the delivery
of goods or services in developing countries are often called PPPs. However, these partnerships do not
meet the requirement of a traditional PPP in that there is minimal transfer of risk from the public to the
private actor and the public partner in question is not the government of the country where the services
are being delivered. There are also PPPs between developing country governments and local private
actors where donors are financing what the government would have normally paid. Similarly, there are
instances of corporate social responsibility (CSR), where private actors donate goods or services to the
public sector. These are often referred to as PPPs, but are not bound by formal written contracts and do
not entail a transfer of risk.



                                                      13
Participants in the study emphasized that these kinds of collaborations as well as informal arrangements
between public and private players exist in all four East African countries covered by this study and that
these partnerships are important. Based on these observations, the study team decided to discuss and
enlist all forms of collaboration between public and private actors that the key informants deemed relevant
and that in a broader sense can be considered as public private collaborations, even if they do not adhere
to the strict definition of PPP provided above. For the purposes of this study, we refer to all these
collaborations as PPPs even though they do not meet the strict definition of PPPs.

PPPs can take a variety of different forms, and there are multiple ways of classifying them. As a heuristic
tool during the interviews, as well as for developing the case studies and the detailed listing of PPPs in
table 4 and annex A, the partnerships were categorized along four dimensions:
     a. Objective, which refers to the key goal of the PPP
     b. Structure, which looked at the contractual arrangement, the role and investment of the private
         partner, and reimbursement model
     c. Geographic scope
     d. Outcome

It was, however, not possible to assess the outcome of the partnerships in a meaningful and exact way
based on the level of knowledge of study participants. There was no formal monitoring or impact
evaluation for most of the partnerships. The dimension “outcome” was, therefore, dropped from the
analysis. For the analytical dimensions, several themes were identified at the inception stage of the study,
which are shown in Table 2.

Table 2: Themes and Potential Codes
  Dimension            Theme
                       Main public sector aspect to be
  Objectives of PPP strengthened
                       Expected private sector benefits
                       Type of contractual arrangement
                       Role of the private partner
        Structure
                       Financial reimbursement
                       Types of partners involved
     Geographical      Geographic scope
          scope


Study Limitations
The study methodology was qualitative in nature, and aimed to gain a deep understanding of the
mechanisms and risks involved in the use of PPPs to strengthen laboratory services in East Africa. The
sampling was designed to cover important experts and essential stakeholders in each country. The
underlying assumption was that their combined knowledge and networks was likely to lead to the
identification of a large proportion of PPPs for laboratory services to interview within the scope, timeline
and methodology of this study. Arrangements between local governments and small private sector
entities at locations distant from the capital cities may not have been adequately captured.




                                                      14
                     PPPs for Laboratory Services in East Africa
As a general rule, public sector health facilities in East Africa keep diagnostic services for their patients in-
house or refer them to the next level public health facility or reference lab. Larger health facilities in the
private sector (typically large private hospitals) similarly have in-house diagnostic laboratories. In all four
countries, there are stand-alone private laboratories that serve clients on a walk-in basis.

Below, we first describe the health system context as it relates to public private collaboration in each of
the four countries. Then we discuss the PPPs identified in the course of the landscaping exercise.

The PPP Climate in East Africa

Rwanda
Rwanda has a nascent private health sector, which only started developing in the last decade after being
virtually non-existent in the years that immediately followed the genocide. The number of private facilities
is relatively low, and they are heavily concentrated in the capital, Kigali. In contrast, the public sector is
well distributed throughout the country and covers remote areas. Facilities operated by FBOs, mostly
providing primary healthcare, are formally accredited by the Ministry of Health and are not considered to
be part of the private sector by most stakeholders. Private health facilities are categorized into 3 groups:
clinics for basic primary care, polyclinics for comprehensive primary care, and hospitals. There are three
private hospitals: La Croix Du Sud, King Faisal Hospital (which is owned by the state, but run as a private
company) and a specialized eye hospital (Agarwal eye clinic). The only well-known private stand-alone
laboratory is the Bio Medical Centre (BMC), which has less than 20 staff members; the remaining private
laboratories are typically small and embedded within clinics.

As a result of Rwanda having a reputation for efficiency and the Government of Rwanda enacting a new
policy to leverage the private sector to spur development, international firms are interested in investing in
the country. The Rwanda Development Board has a key role in supporting and enabling investment, and
more generally in building a favorable market climate. Making Rwanda a destination for medical tourism
by 2020 is a key component of the Board’s vision for the health sector. Despite the Government’s
recognition of the important role the private health sector and strong political will at the highest levels of
Government to engage the private sector, the implementation of PPPs in the health sector is moving
slowly.

Private sector stakeholders interviewed expressed the view that greater openness on the part of the
Ministry of Health to ideas and initiatives originating in the private sector could foster a larger number of
PPPs in the future. The Rwandan government’s collaboration with the private sector for the national HIV
and TB programs could be further enhanced. Public hospitals often refer patients to private laboratories
when they have a stock-out of reagents or when equipment is down. Respondents working at facilities
expressed an interest to formalize these relationships to comply with accreditation requirements.

In terms of human resources, qualified laboratory personnel in Rwanda generally prefer to work in the
public sector, which makes it difficult for private laboratories to attract talent. Rwandan private health
facilities, including the stand-alone laboratories, operate within the context of Rwanda’s health financing
system, which presents a few additional challenges. A majority of Rwandans are covered by government-
managed health insurance schemes (the Rwanda Medical Insurance Scheme with the French acronym
RAMA that covers state employees; the Military Medical Insurance scheme; and Les Mutuelle de Santé,
the community-based public health insurance program). Private facilities stated that they see themselves
in a situation where they do not have the market power to negotiate tariffs that they deem adequate, and


                                                       15
therefore need to operate with inadequate resources. This prevents them from investing in infrastructure
and equipment.

A flagship project in Rwanda that is likely to influence the future perception of PPPs is the recent
privatization of King Faisal Hospital. Whilst being fully owned by the government, the hospital will be run
as a private for-profit company (see case studies for more detail).

Uganda
A large number of private clinics, hospitals and stand-alone laboratories operate in Uganda. The private
sector includes both for-profit and a range of not-for-profit facilities. Facilities run by Protestant, Catholic
and Muslim FBOs are coordinated by their respective umbrella organizations in Kampala, which also
organize the participation of secondary facilities in testing services for national TB and HIV programs.
Human resources in the public laboratory sector are viewed as being better trained than their
counterparts in the private for-profit sector. However, average service quality in faith-based facilities was
seen as being higher than in public facilities by some respondents. Highly specialized laboratory tests,
especially histopathology, are referred out of the country by both the public and the private sector.

Whilst traditionally the relationship between decision makers in the public sector and the private for profit
sector has not been close, it has been improving over the past 5 years. Some respondents mentioned
that there is some rivalry and competition between the two sectors, which can have positive effects like
improvements in quality (for example, by leading laboratories to acquire quality certification). However,
respondents also emphasized that greater non-competitive collaboration and coordination of resources
would lead to more efficient operations and lower prices. Leading private facilities are eager to collaborate
with the public sector for specialized referral services that they could offer at reduced rates provided the
volumes are high. Two of the respondents interviewed, who are key decision-makers for laboratory
services in the public sector, have in the past been – or still are – private sector entrepreneurs and
therefore appreciate the perspectives of both public and private sector actors.

Uganda has a history of memoranda of understanding (MoU) between the government and faith-based
facilities. Typically, the national Ministry of Health has signed agreements with the umbrella organizations
for FBOs such as the Uganda Protestant Medical Bureau, Uganda Catholic Medical Bureau and Uganda
Muslim Medical Bureau, whilst MoUs with health facilities are often signed at the district-level between
district officials and individual faith-based facilities. Beyond such arrangements, formalized public-private
partnerships are rare, although some respondents considered the provision of emergency healthcare to
the population, which private facilities are constitutionally obliged to do, as a form of PPP. There are
several successful placement arrangements involving Mulago National Referral Hospital, central public
health laboratories, regional referral hospitals, and FBO hospitals. Despite the limited use of formal PPPs
currently, they are widely seen as an important vehicle for improving the quality and scope of public
services in the future. PPPs are officially part of the government’s strategy as highlighted in the current
health sector strategic and investment plan.

Like other countries in East Africa donor-funding takes an important role in supporting the health sector in
Uganda. There is an important category of donor-funded research laboratories that, through their
extensive activities especially in laboratory services for HIV and TB, have shaped the current market
situation. They provide high-quality services at a relatively high cost, which raises concerns regarding
sustainability of the services should the program be taken over by the Government of Uganda. Since the
World Health Organization introduced more stringent regulations for evidence-based care, especially for
HIV treatment, the volume of tests needed as part of standard clinical protocol has risen. To meet the
increased demand for testing, donors are increasingly recognizing the need to build the capacity of
private laboratories. There are several donor-financed initiatives for networking small private facilities to
provide better quality service to the poor. For example, the Ugandan Health Marketing Group (UHMG), a
                                                       16
donor-funded NGO, has built a network of over 200 private facilities that provide quality HIV testing and
treatment. The Uganda Health Initiatives for the Private Sector (HIPS), a USAID-funded program,
accredited 100 private clinics for HIV services; the program ended in early 2013 and will be succeeded by
the Uganda Private Sector Support Project (PHSP). Reach Out, a government accredited, nonprofit
specialized HIV facility is working with a small network of 5 private clinics in Kampala for HIV testing and
treatment.

Kenya
Kenya has one of the largest private health sectors in the region. Consequently, there are a large number
of private health facilities with laboratory facilities and stand-alone private laboratories, both in the capital,
Nairobi and elsewhere in Kenya. Moreover, the private sector is more attractive to laboratory
professionals, as it offers better salaries and more exposure to new technology. Kenya is to some extent
a pioneer of PPPs in the region. Equipment placement contracts for laboratory equipment in public
facilities were started in Kenya by Roche and Becton, Dickinson and Company, and have now spread to
other countries in the region. While other forms of written PPP arrangements related to laboratory
services are not widespread, Kenya offers several examples of public-private collaboration. The two
largest private health providers, Aga Khan and Nairobi Hospital, are officially not-for-profit private
enterprises and are therefore beneficiaries of public subsidies. For example, they benefit from the “public
sector” subsidized pricing for the Cepheid GeneXpert equipment and reagents. There are agreements for
quality control and training between public sector entities and specialized private providers. Finally, there
is considerable collaboration between private and public entities for service delivery within vertical health
sector programs for TB and HIV/AIDS through initiatives like Kenya Association for the Prevention of TB
and Lung Diseases (KAPTLD) that can be considered formal, despite not being signed on paper. Some
respondents saw the provision of TB cultures for multi-drug resistant TB testing as a promising avenue for
partnerships, as the National TB Laboratory is struggling with a high workload, and there are two private
hospitals that are able to offer TB culture services.

Despite there being a large number of private laboratories, both stand-alone and within private facilities,
only three facilities were mentioned during the interviews as offering highly specialized tests: Lancet
Kenya and the clinical laboratories of Aga Khan and Nairobi Hospitals. The private facilities are generally
open to collaboration with the government for specialized referral services, and are willing and able to
offer tests at lower rates if high volumes are guaranteed. Private sector respondents expressed the view
that donor support to laboratories (especially from PEPFAR) is not necessarily based on criteria and
procurement procedures that are transparent to local stakeholders, and instead tend to be biased towards
institutions with whom they have established links.

Supporting PPPs is a key component of Vision 2030, Government of Kenya’s long-term national
development roadmap. A PPP Bill was passed in 2012. The Ministry of Heath has a PPP Unit that is
meant to provide leadership and guidance in fostering PPPs in the health sector. Several respondents
noted that historical mistrust from decision-makers in the public sector towards the private sector seems
to have dwindled, and two existing dialogue platforms, PPP Health Kenya and the TB PPP Mix, bring
together public and private sector actors. Outside the laboratory sector, the Ministry of Health has MoUs
with FBO health facilities, primarily related to the seconding of health professionals to these facilities. In
addition, there are several MoUs between private training institutions and public health facilities to enable
internships for trainees. Respondents in Kenya were hopeful that with the new government structure and
the PPP framework in place, more PPPs would emerge and prosper in the future.

The EAPHLN country team has been discussing various PPP options for one or more of the regional
referral laboratories that the network is building. Contracting a private vendor for the management of the
referral laboratories was actively discussed and EAPHLN reached out to technical experts at the

                                                       17
International Finance Corporation (IFC) for advice and technical support. With the recent devolution
process underway, any PPP options will require buy-in from the new county governments.
Tanzania
In Tanzania, the private health sector is relatively new; the private sector as a whole was non-existent
until the mid-1980s when socialist economic controls against private ownership were relaxed. A large and
diverse private sector for health has significantly grown since 1991, when the ban against private practice
was removed. The private health sector is often categorized into private not-for-profit facilities (which
include facilities operated by FBOs, civil society organizations, and NGOs) that have traditionally played
an important role in service delivery, and a small but rapidly growing number of private for-profit health
facilities.

Tanzania has an advanced policy environment for public-private collaboration in the health sector. The
1994 proposals for health sector reforms highlighted the need for the public sector to effectively engage
with the private sector in order to improve delivery of health services in Tanzania. These proposals were
adopted and have been integrated in a number of health sector policies and strategies. For example, the
country’s National Health policy of 2003 explicitly states that public and private actors will jointly mobilize
and share resources for the efficient delivery of well-regulated health services while ensuring
accountability to the public. The health policy of 2007 also acknowledges the contribution of the private
sector in health service provision. The important role that PPPs play in the health sector is also
emphasized in the country’s strategic plans for the health sector, which highlights the effective
operationalization and enhancement of PPPs for the provision of health and nutrition services as strategic
focus areas. In 2008, the Ministry for Health and Social Welfare appointed a national PPP steering
committee whose role is to promote effective PPPs, with the specific objectives of coordinating
stakeholders, formulating and refining service agreements between government and service providers,
and addressing all legal requirements for PPPs.

In contrast to the highly developed health policy environment for PPPs, the legal framework for PPPs in
Tanzania requires greater refinement. With the exception of the private hospital act and private health
laboratories act, most of the laws neither articulate the role of the private sector nor provide for their
engagement. This is because most of these laws were enacted before the policy push for PPPs in the
country. However, recent reviews of health legislation in the country propose to expressly empower
specific government authorities to establish and sustain PPPs for the purpose of improving services to the
people.

Despite a supportive policy environment and an improving legal environment, actual implementation and
use of PPPs remains low. This is especially the case with partnerships involving private for-profit entities.
In contrast, the Government of Tanzania has a very close relationship with the private not-for-profit
sector. The Ministry of Health has a long history of service-level agreements with FBO facilities which are
called schemes of service, wherein the government provides a range of inputs including infrastructure,
equipment and commodities, while the private partner provides human resources and management of the
facility or vice versa. An estimated 40 percent of districts in Tanzania have a “designated district referral
hospital” that is run by a FBO. Another example of a successful PPP in Tanzania is the support that the
Abbott Fund has provided the Government for modernizing laboratories and mentoring laboratory staff.
Apart from these arrangements, however, formal PPPs in the health sector, especially with respect to
laboratory services, are few.

Landscape of Existing Collaborations
In the course of conducting key informant interviews in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, and Rwanda, the study
team learnt about 36 distinct PPPs. Table 3 summarizes the partnerships identified. The names of the
partnerships shown in the second column were assigned by the study team and, as such, are unofficial.

                                                      18
Placement of laboratory equipment by private companies in public facilities is the most common form of
PPP in East Africa. In this model, a private manufacturer or distributor makes equipment available to a
facility at no cost, trains staff to operate it, and provides free maintenance services. In exchange, the
public sector facility commits to the regular purchase of an agreed minimum number of reagents from the
same company. In Kenya, several respondents used the term “leasing” interchangeably with the term
“placement” to describe such an arrangement.

Apart from placements, the most typical mode of collaboration for laboratory and diagnostic services can
be described as extension of public services through the private sector. The public sector provides in-kind
subsidies to private providers (for example, free test kits, reagents etc.) so that private providers may
deliver public services to patients. This is often done to expand the reach of national programs, especially
for priority diseases like HIV/AIDS and TB, by leveraging existing private providers. The private partner is
often allowed to charge a small administrative fee from patients, though in some instances they also
provide services for free. The private provider is contributing their infrastructure and staff time. In part, this
is a donation as they do not recover these costs, or at a minimum they are not making profits from such
an arrangement. Using the free or low-cost services to “market” themselves to new clients, as well as
receiving free government quality control, staff training, and supportive supervision, are the benefits that
the private providers derive from such an arrangement. In table 3, which lists all the identified public-
private collaborations in the four countries, this type of collaboration is categorized as public service
extension in the third column.

In addition to these two types of arrangements, public service providers have engaged with private sector
counterparts for the following type of partnerships:
    • Specialized referral services, where specimens or patients managed in a public facility are
         referred, typically on an informal basis, to private laboratories for tests that are unavailable in a
         secondary public hospital,
    • Transport of specimen, where a private company is contracted for courier services,
    • Management contracts, where a private partner takes on responsibility for the operations of a
         laboratory that is physically set in the premises of a public clinical facility,
    • Procurement pooling, where the acquisition of supplies and management of reagents are
         centrally coordinated and logistics optimized across institutional boundaries, and
    • Training, where public sector technicians are provided training by private institutions or vice
         versa.

In the case of some of the training partnerships, where private sector staff receive training organized by
government agencies (for example, numbers 33 and 34 in the table below), it is not entirely clear whether
an aspect of public sector service provision is strengthened.

Some of the partnerships identified in table 3 combine several objectives. For example, the partnership in
Voi District Hospital (number 13) involves a private contractor managing the laboratory of the public
health facility, as well as a placement arrangement for the equipment. The informal collaboration in
Makueni Hospital (number 20) entails a private partner providing referral laboratory services, contracted
sample transport, and the electronic transmission of test results. In example 35, Thika Referral Hospital
and Mount Kenya University have an MoU whereby students of the private university get internship
placement in the hospital, whilst the Hospital benefits from equipment and infrastructure provided by the
training institute.

All the placement arrangements are grounded in a formal contract. Of the remaining 24 PPPs identified,
only 6 featured a formal contract. An additional 6 PPPs were based on some sort of MoU, while the
remaining 12 were informal. A number of the partnerships were a product of CSR initiatives on the part of

                                                       19
private companies (see annex A). The logic of such partnerships is quite distinct from the traditional PPP
model, and they face distinct issues around their implementation. They are often "one-offs," representing
a bi-lateral relationship between one particular company and the government. While there were a number
of places where patients were being referred from a public facility to private laboratories, these were
typically informal arrangements. In such situations, patients need to physically go to these facilities to
deliver samples and pick up test results, which they then take to their doctor. Payments in such cases are
typically made out-of-pocket. While there were reports of informal sample delivery arrangements in Kenya
between doctors in public hospitals with a private laboratory, formal outsourcing arrangements that would
increase convenience and reduce costs for clients are still rare.

The informal nature of many of the existing PPPs in East Africa means that a majority of them do not
adhere to principles that are considered “best practice” in the implementation of PPPs, such as
competitive tendering, neutrality, transparency, and public accountability. On the upside, they represent
“low hanging fruit,” situations that are ripe for the introduction of formal PPP arrangements.




                                                    20
Table 3: Master list of PPPs in the laboratory sector (Details in Annex A) 2
                                                                                                                 Risk
    No     Name                                                             Type             Formalization                      Status
                                                                                                                Share
                                                       Equipment/Infrastructure
           Centre Hospitalier Universitaire (CHUK)                                              Contract         Yes
    01     (Rwanda)                                                     Placement*                                             Ongoing

    02     Rwanda Military Hospital (Rwanda)                       Placement                    Contract         Yes           Ongoing
    03     Mulago National Referral Hospital (Uganda)              Placement                    Contract         Yes           Ongoing
    04     Central Public Health Laboratory (Uganda)               Placement                    Contract         Yes           Ongoing
    05     National Referral Laboratory (Rwanda)                   Placement                    Contract         Yes           Ongoing
    06     Kenyatta National Hospital (Kenya)                      Placement                    Contract         Yes           Ongoing
    07     Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital (Kenya)              Placement                    Contract         Yes           Ongoing
    08     Temeke Regional Hospital (Tanzania)                     Placement                    Contract         Yes           Ongoing
    09     Secondary Public Hospitals (Rwanda)                     Placement                    Contract         Yes           Starting
    10     Regional Hospitals (Uganda)                             Placement                    Contract         Yes           Ongoing
    11     Secondary Public Hospitals (Kenya)                      Placement                    Contract         Yes           Ongoing
    12     Machakos County (Kenya)                                 Placement                    Contract         Yes          Discussion
                                                      Operational Services
    13     Laboratory Management Voi (Kenya)*                 Management Contr. 3               Contract         Yes           Ongoing
    14     EAPHLN Gulu Lacor (Uganda)                          Management Contr.                Informal         Yes           Starting
    15     EAPHLN planned PPP (Kenya)                          Management Contr.                Contract         Yes          Discussion
    16     Rwinkwavu Hospital Referral System (Rwanda)           Referral Service               Contract         No            Ongoing
    17     Nyahururu Hospital Referrals (Kenya)                  Referral Service               Informal         No            Ongoing
    18     Nyeri Hospital Referrals (Kenya)                      Referral Service               Informal         No            Ongoing
    19     Makueni Hospital Referrals (Kenya)                    Referral Service               Informal         No            Ongoing
    20     ReachOut Network (Uganda)                            Service Extension               Contract         No            Ongoing
    21     UHMG Network (Uganda)                                Service Extension               Informal         Yes           Ongoing
    22     Private HIV Reference Lab (Uganda)*                  Service Extension               Informal         Yes           Starting
           Partnerships with FBO Facilities
    23                                                          Service Extension                 MoU            Yes           Ongoing
           includes Laboratory Aspect (Uganda)
           Schemes of Service with FBO Facilities
    24                                                          Service Extension                 MoU            Yes           Ongoing
           includes Laboratory Aspect (Tanzania)
    25     Malaria Diagnostics Subsidy (Tanzania)               Service Extension               Informal         Yes           Ongoing
    26     Tuberculosis Reagent Subsidy (Uganda)                Service Extension                 MoU            Yes           Ongoing
    27     KAPTLD Tuberculosis Reagent Subsidy (Kenya)          Service Extension               Informal         Yes           Ongoing
    28     Post Office Sample Transport (Uganda)              Specimen Transport                Contract         No            Closing
    29     G4S Specimen Transport (Kenya)                     Specimen Transport                Contract         No            Ongoing
    30     Centralized TB reagent supply (Kenya)                 Supply Logistics               Informal         No           Discussion
                                                       Human Resources
    31     Mentorship/ Training (Aga Khan Kenya)*                    Training                     MoU            No             Ended
    32     Informal Knowledge Exchange (Kenya)                       Training                   Informal         Yes           Ongoing
    33     Private Sector Staff Training (Rwanda)                   Training 4                  Informal         No            Ongoing
    34     Private Sector Staff Training, Kampala (Uganda)          Training3                   Informal         No             Ended
    35     Thika Hospital & Mount Kenya University                   Training                     MoU            Yes           Ongoing
    36     Regional Laboratory Modernization (Tanzania)*            Training 5                    MoU            No            Ongoing




2 Partnerships marked with an asterisk (*) are described in more detail in the next section on case studies.
3 The partnership in Voi also entails the placement of laboratory equipment.
4 These two cases in Rwanda and Uganda refer to instances where technicians from the private sector received government-

sponsored training.
5 The Regional Laboratory Modernization Initiative initially built, renovated, and equipped 23 regional laboratories with a

private foundation as a donor. Employees of a multinational pharmaceutical company continue to volunteer time for training
mentorships.
                                                             21
         Case Studies
              1
                   Placement Contracts
                                  Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, Tanzania (ongoing)
                          Purpose: Acquire modern equipment and have them continuously maintained

                          Public Partner: Referral Hospitals and Laboratories          Private Partner: Equipment Manufacturers and Distributors
                                                                                       •   Provision and installment of equipment
                           • Staff and infrastructure management
                                                                                       •   Training on use of equipment
         Roles




                           • Equipment operations in line with training / SOP
                                                                                       •   Routine maintenance, calibration and quality assurance
                           • Purchase of reagents from manufacturer
                                                                                       •   Supply of reagents
                          A manufacturer (or their distributor) provides laboratory equipment at no cost to a laboratory that handles a minimum
                          volume of tests per quarter. A contract obliges the laboratory to purchase a minimum number of reagents, usually per
         How it works




                          quarter, at a pre-determined price from the manufacturer (or distributor) of the equipment. The manufacturer trains
                          facility staff on the use of the equipment and provides refresher trainings when necessary. The manufacturer also
                          assumes full responsibility and costs for equipment maintenance. The price of the reagents is designed such that it
                          allows for the manufacturer to amortize the upfront cost of the equipment and costs associated with installation,
                          training, maintenance and repair, as well as realize a profit within a calculated time period. After the contract duration
                          elapses, the equipment is either replaced with new technology, or ownership is transferred to the facility. This model
                          is widely used by private sector facilities globally and, more recently, by public sector facilities in East Africa.

   Contract               Formal contract with detailed financial specifications, typically valid for 3-5 years.

    Results               Significantly decreased down-time and stock-outs, increased revenue for private wings.

                          The placement model in East Africa has its roots in a 2009 donation of Early-Infant Diagnosis machines to KEMRI
         How it started




                          laboratories in Nairobi, Kisumu, and the Coast General Hospital by Roche Diagnostics. Roche financed the
                          renovation of the laboratories to meet the required standards for molecular testing. While there was no formal
                          contract, there was an informal agreement that the facilities would buy reagents from the company. The model of
                          placement then emerged naturally and, subsequently, placement with Kenyatta National Hospital was done with a
                          contract. Since there is a lot of donor financing for HIV/AIDS-related laboratory services, Roche ventured into the
                          placement of other equipment, especially routine chemistry equipment in several health facilities in Central Rift in
                          Kenya. After the success of Kenya, the same model was used by Roche in Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda.

                          • A minimum volume of monthly tests is required. It does not work for smaller facilities on their own. They can
                            benefit from the approach if they pool testing and/or refer samples to a hub facility in their area.
                          • CHUK Rwanda had a placement arrangement where the placed machine did not have the capacity to handle the
                            required test volumes, which was somewhat dissatisfactory.
Challenges,               • There is only minimal sharing of information about placement arrangements; key stakeholders in Kenya, Uganda
  Lessons                   and Rwanda were unaware of the extent to which placement was used as an approach.
     Learnt               • Placements are seen by many as preferable to equipment donations by donors, as donated equipment is not well-
                            maintained and recurrent costs associated with the purchase of reagents are not accounted for in the facility
                            budget.
                          • There is the perception that placement arrangements could lead to quasi-monopoly on reagents; this perception is
                            a barrier to a faster uptake of the approach in government institutions.

                          • The Government of Rwanda has recently concluded a placement contract with Roche for HIV/AIDS equipment
                            across the country in a large number of clinical settings.
                          • Roche Regional Office in South Africa was initially skeptical about the plan to extend the scale to new
                            geographical areas and the scope to non-HIV/AIDS equipment; thanks to the insistence and visionary thinking of
  Enablers,                 the Kenya office director, it was successfully introduced.
 Highlights               • For vertical programs, donors support for the purchase of reagents has been invaluable.
                          • Decentralization has opened up multiple venues for placement in Kenya; Roche was recently invited for talks
                            about a comprehensive placement solution in Machakos county.
                          • Placement of equipment is the standard business model for both public and private laboratories in the US,
                            Europe, and South Africa.


                                                                                  22
                               Regional Laboratory Modernization Project
                         2
                               Tanzania (mentorship ongoing)

                         Purpose: To enhance the capacity and quality of laboratories in all 23 Tanzanian regional hospitals
                         Public Partners:                                     Private Partners:
                         Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, CDC           Abbott Fund, Association of Public Health
                         Tanzania                                             Laboratories, Design 4 Others
                             • Coordinate the contribution of the different   • Design, build, and renovate laboratory
                              partners                                          infrastructure
          Roles




                             • Contribute technical expertise                 • Supply modern equipment and maintenance
                             • Provide comprehensive laboratory services        services
                              to the public                                   • Mentorship and training to laboratory staff

                         Abbott Fund, a philanthropic foundation associated with Abbott Laboratories, funded the construction or
          How it works




                         renovation of modern, well-equipped laboratories in all 23 regional referral hospitals in Tanzania, which
                         serve over 120 district hospital laboratories for referrals services. After completion of the infrastructure
                         project in 2011, the most important component of the partnership continues to be staff training and
                         mentorship that is provided by Abbott employee volunteers and focuses on improved work-flow,
                         standard procedures and quality assurance. The project is a corporate social responsibility initiative
                         and, as such, is not a traditional PPP.

                         Improved quality; increased capacity and utilization of lab services; reduced turn-around time; improved
    Results
                         staff motivation and productivity.


                         In 2001, the Abbott Fund started working with the Government of Tanzania to provide funding and
                         expertise, often based on volunteering, for the public healthcare infrastructure. An early program
      How it             involved the construction of a modern outpatient care center in Muhimbili National Referral Hospital.
     started             Assessments of Tanzania’s healthcare system subsequently identified laboratory services as a
                         particularly weak link in providing quality patient care in the country, and in 2007 the regional laboratory
                         modernization project was started with a consortium of public and private partners.


Challenges, Before the modernization project, other projects to strengthen public laboratories were unsuccessful
  Lessons due to a burdensome procurement process, inadequate human resources and weak coordination of
     Learnt multiple partners.




                                                                         23
                                Private sector laboratory mentorship to public sector staff
                          3
                                Nairobi, Kenya (concluded)

                        Purpose : To enhance the skills of public sector laboratory technicians

                        Public Partner: National Referral Laboratories           Private Partner: Aga Khan University Hospital

                         • Provide health / risk insurance to trainees
                                                                                 • Host staff from the national referral
                         • Pay a fee per trainee to cover costs
                                                                                   laboratories for a period of 4 weeks; train them
         Roles




                         • Cascade training, acquired skills to sub-national
                                                                                   in the use of specialized equipment and
                          level through peer interaction, mentorship
                                                                                   workflow in a modern, output-oriented busy
                         • Continue to provide regular reference laboratory        private laboratory environment
                          and quality assurance services
         How it works




                        The private sector partner provides staff time of senior laboratory professionals, mostly pathologists, to
                        mentor public sector employees, who spend a few weeks of their time in the private laboratory. This
                        allows them to get exposure to a different range of equipment, and to a different workflow and
                        management system. The public sector employees are expected to cascade the acquired knowledge
                        and skills to their peers within national laboratories and referral hospitals.
  Contract              MoU

                        • Improved staff knowledge and skills, broader horizon and innovative thinking
   Results
                        • Strengthened relationship between the public and private sector labs and professionals

                        The idea for this partnership came from a CDC-funded laboratory strengthening program and was
     How it             initially conceived as an ongoing mentorship program. Together with partners in the Ministry of Health,
    started             they reached out to Aga Khan Hospital, who was receptive to the idea. The Ministry of Health paid the
                        fee for the technicians for 1 year.


                        • The main challenge with this partnership is that it did not continue after 1 year, as there were no
                          donor and/or Ministry funds available to cover the fees (this was initially paid by the Ministry, but
Challenges,
                          could not be sustained).
  Lessons
                        • A sustainable design for a similar partnership could work without the requirement of financial
     Learnt
                          reimbursement by the public sector side; instead, a design that is based on an in-kind type of
                          exchange (either in terms of expertise, or other lab related services or commodities) might work.

  Enablers,             • Close ties between consultants from the CDC project and Dr. Revathi, Chief Pathologist at Aga Khan
 Highlights               University hospital played an important role in the success of this partnership.




                                                                      24
                            Private supply of equipment to and supervision of a District Hospital Laboratory
                      4
                            Voi, Kenya (early phase)
                     Purpose: Renovate, equip, and operate a modern district hospital laboratory

                     Public Partner: Moi District              Private Partners:      Pathologists Lancet Kenya
                     Hospital, Voi                                                     Wildlife Works Carbon (WWC)
                                                               Lancet Kenya
                                                               • Advice for the renovation of the lab
                                                               • Provision of equipment on a lease-basis (financed by
                                                                 WWC)
                      • Staffing and day-to-day
                                                               • Training of staff
                       laboratory operation
                                                               • Supervision, quality assurance
      Roles




                      • Patient management, collection
                                                               • Computerization of the laboratory
                       of user fees
                                                               WWC
                                                               • Renovation of laboratory
                                                               • Financing of the equipment lease/regents
                     World Wildlife Carbon (WWC) is financing the renovation of the hospital laboratory and is
                     investing in improving its internal infrastructure. They are also financing the leasing of laboratory
      How it works




                     equipment from Lancet Kenya. Lancet provides training, operational supervision, equipment
                     maintenance, computerization and quality assurance services. The hospital will continue to staff
                     and operate the laboratory on a day-to-day basis. The user-fees, which will be at regular
                     government rates, will be shared between Lancet (60%) and the Hospital (40%). The hospital
                     laboratory will typically provide basic/routine tests, while highly specialized tests will be referred
                     out.

                     A tripartite agreement was signed, running for 3 years, after which it will be revised and equipment
Contract
                     might be handed over to Moi District Hospital.

Results              The laboratory was expected to commence clinical operations in January 2014.

                     Representatives of WWC approached the Voi District Hospital to find out how they can provide
                     support as part of a corporate social responsibility initiative. Diagnostic services were identified as
  How it             a weak point. The medical superintendent of the hospital connected WWC with Lancet Kenya, as
 started             they represent an international, experienced, and accredited company that is expected to deliver
                     high quality services. The leasing and renovation arrangements were discussed between WWC
                     and Lancet.




                                                                   25
                               Subsidy to increase reach of basic HIV services
                         5
                               Kampala, Uganda (ongoing)

                        Purpose : To extend the reach of quality HIV testing services to clients of private clinics in Kampala
                        Public Partner: Reach Out Clinic
                        (government accredited, nonprofit specialized HIV      Private Partners: 5 private clinics in Kampala
                        facility)
                                                                                • Provision of infrastructure, management, staff to
                         • Supply HIV test kits                                   enable HIV testing at no cost to clients
         Roles




                         • Run laboratory (infrastructure, equipment,           • Sample collection and referral for CD4 count
                          staff) for HIV monitoring tests                         and viral load tests
                         • Data management                                      • Monthly reports on HIV testing and treatment
                                                                                  statistics
         How it works




                        Instead of building additional clinics of their own, Reach Out contracts existing private clinics to provide
                        HIV testing and patient management services, which includes sample collection for HIV monitoring.
                        The clinics are obliged to meet quality and reporting standards, and in exchange are compensated by
                        Reach Out for the provision of free services.

  Contract              Formal service contracts, renewable after one year

                        Increased uptake of HIV testing and treatment services by a segment of the population that previously
   Results              preferred not to use the services in the specialized HIV clinics because of limited geographical
                        accessibility of the Reach Out Clinics and/or fear of social stigma

                        The idea of starting a partnership with existing private clinics to reach more clients came about during
     How it
                        discussions by the Reach Out Board, which was able to proceed to test the model. Once it was
    started
                        deemed successful, it was subsequently expanded to include more private clinics.

                        • The implementation of the partnership with the private facilities requires more staff time on the part
                          of Reach Out for supportive supervision and administration than was originally anticipated.
                        • The volume of tests performed by the private facilities is variable, and sometimes drops to lower
                          than desirable levels.
Challenges,
  Lessons               • A model of HIV Test-Kit subsidies to a large number of private clinics by the Uganda Health
     Learnt               Marketing Group, a USAID-funded NGO, has similarities with the Reach Out model; however,
                          instead of UHMG compensating clinics for the services they provide to the poor, this model allows
                          private partners to charge a small administrative fee to patients. It would be desirable for the
                          implementers of the two models to compare notes, learn from each other, and discuss how the
                          “decentralization” model could be made independent of donor funding.

                        • Reach Out is technically not a full-fledged government facility; it is a NGO that has achieved “quasi-
                          public” status through accreditation by the government. This independent status means that the
  Enablers,               administration does not have to go through the full government protocol for procurement and
 Highlights               contracting, which made the initiation of contracts with private facilities possible. Similarly, UHMG
                          acts as a kind of intermediary between government and private facilities for their program, which
                          reduces bureaucratic barriers.




                                                                     26
    Challenges and Opportunities for Enhancing PPPs in East Africa

In this chapter, we first summarize the challenges preventing greater use of PPPs in the laboratory sector
in East Africa as perceived by study participants. Next, we present general recommendations for how the
challenges can be addressed in the future as well as concrete ideas for future PPPs to strengthen
laboratory services in East Africa.

Key Challenges for Laboratory PPPs
The key informants interviewed by the study team were unified in their support for PPPs in the laboratory
sector. They listed many benefits that derive from laboratory PPPs. They also identified a range of
barriers inhibiting greater use of PPPs for improving access to good quality laboratory services in East
Africa. Some of these barriers were common to all four countries in the study, while others were unique to
particular countries. The left column in Table 4 shows the perceived benefits of PPPs, differentiating
between views about the benefits accrued to the public sector and benefits enjoyed by the private sector.
In the right column, challenges as perceived by insiders in both sectors are listed. The top right cell shows
where representatives in the public sector see the biggest challenges, and the lower right box where
study participants in the private sector see them. The key challenges are discussed below. Not all
challenges apply to all countries. Moreover, challenges as perceived by study respondents may reflect
reality to varying degrees.

Table 4: Perceived Benefits and Challenges in relation to PPPs for laboratory services
                          Benefits of PPPs as perceived by         Challenges impeding PPPs as perceived
                       stakeholders in the public sector versus      by stakeholders in the public sector
  l




                                  the private sector                       versus the private sector

                                                                    Lack of quality and skills in private sector
      PUBLIC SECTOR




                            Greater efficiency and timeliness
                                                                         Lack of understanding of PPP
                              Increased reach of services
                                                                      Lack of enabling legislation or policy
                        Higher staff motivation and performance
                                                                       Need to understand private sector
                           Improved equipment maintenance
                                                                               Risk of monopoly
                        Better service quality and accreditation
                                                                     Private sector not sharing information
                           Reduced workload, de-congestion
                                                                        Lack of PPP specialists in MoH
                                  Increased financing
                                                                         High charges in private sector


                                                                              Government mindset
      PRIVATE SECTOR




                                                                           Government bureaucracy
                       Increased patient volume & added revenue
                                                                           Risk of government default
                         Improved infrastructure and equipment
                                                                        Restrictive market environment
                           Improved relations with government
                                                                         MoH not easily approachable
                       Enhancement of human resources and skill
                                                                       Lack of private sector leadership
                                  Increased financing
                                                                   Donor-funded programs are biased towards
                                                                                the public sector




                                                              27
Financial barriers
Lack of public funding or budget availability was seen as a core barrier to driving forward certain
partnerships that had already started, such as the Central Public Health Laboratory (CPHL) – SIMS
partnership in Uganda, the Aga Khan Mentorship program in Kenya, and the organization of meetings of
the TB PPP Mix, also in Kenya. Many existing PPPs rely on donor financing and would be hard to sustain
in the long-run unless governments in the region take over their financing. Respondents noted that
presently ministries of health in the region may not able to easily enter into partnerships that commit them
financially for several years at a time due to procurement rules and budget constraints.

Administrative barriers
Respondents viewed complicated and time-consuming government processes for procurement and
contracting as a deterrent to the development of new PPPs. The lengthy process of enacting an MoU or
contract as well as the complexity of public procurement laws can discourage public sector officials from
attempting PPPs. There is a feeling among private sector stakeholders in some of the study countries that
there is no clearly defined, sufficiently empowered point of contact in the Ministry of Health who can be
approached with new ideas and who will be in a position to take projects forward by making decisions.
Additionally, lack of autonomy at the district- and facility-level to enter into formal contracts with private
partners inhibits on-the-ground innovation and problem-solving.

While cumbersome government procedures have discouraged formal PPPs, they have at times had the
unintended consequence of promoting informal collaborations between public and private actors. For
example, complicated procurement laws lead to delays in the acquisition of consumables. The resulting
stock outs at public facilities have worked in favor of informal referrals to the private sector. This could be
an entry point to foster organized and formalized collaborations for referrals.

Mindset
In all four countries, respondents reported mistrust between technocrats in the public sector and
entrepreneurs in the private sector, although to varying degrees. Some respondents noted that
government officials often have the view that the private sector is too profit-oriented, is primarily
interested in serving the rich, and might default on contractually agreed maximum price levels. On the
private sector side, there is a lack of visionary and long-term thinking beyond institutional boundaries.
Respondents noted that private business in the region often think in terms of day-to-day operations and
short-term revenue. There is also mistrust within the private sector and, as a result, innovative ideas and
experiences related to PPPs are treated as a business secrets rather than being openly shared and
discussed.

Limitations within donor programs
Respondents in Rwanda and Tanzania expressed the wish that the private sector ought to be taken into
consideration by international partners as they design their interventions, so that subsidies aimed at
serving the poor can be channeled through the private sector as well as the public sector. Donor-financed
training interventions should be aimed at technicians in both sectors, especially in places where the most
highly trained professionals are already in the public sector. Other respondents were critical of donors
who favor equipment donations. Such arrangements invariably overlook critical issues such as equipment
maintenance. In the absence of adequate support for the donated equipment, the machines stop
operating after a few years, well short of their expected life span. It is common for the public sector to
then approach a new donor for financing to purchase replacement equipment. Respondents familiar with
placement contracts were quick to point out that donor funds can be more efficiently used for financing
reagents within a placement model, instead of the conventional equipment donation approach. There
was also a perception on the part of several private laboratory sector representatives that choices made
by donors to support particular public or private entities were not transparent. In the absence of this
transparency in donor-financed procurement, private sector players criticized donors for favoring higher-
                                                      28
cost service providers and/or setting up new laboratories instead of working with and building the capacity
of existing private sector options.

Lack of knowledge
Lack of understanding of the tangible benefits of PPPs, what different models of PPPs look like, and how
individuals can get involved in PPPs with their respective organizations were mentioned as important
challenges, both on the public and private side. It was evident that there is limited information sharing
about the successes and challenges of existing PPPs, mostly due to the lack of interaction between
different stakeholders and the absence of communication platforms.

Recommendations
Study participants offered a range of suggestions for how PPPs for laboratory services could be
enhanced in the East African region by EAPHLN in particular, but also by Ministries of Health, donors and
other stakeholders in the laboratory sector. They are summarized below.

Translate and disseminate PPP Policy
Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda already have PPP-focused policy documents in place, and in Rwanda a
general PPP law is being discussed in parliament. Respondents noted that the existence of an official
strategic document or policy is, however, not sufficient. It needs to be “translated” into a short version with
concrete instructions and recommendations. This more actionable version as well as the original policy
should be broadly disseminated in both written form and in oral presentations to all those who can benefit
from it. Moreover, a step-by-step instruction manual for private companies that outlines the definition and
types of health PPPs, explains what is legally allowed, who needs to be contacted and how long it takes
to go through contracting process etc. would be highly beneficial.

Engage key stakeholders within ministries of health
Despite a generally positive mindset and the institutionalization of a PPP focal person in the ministries of
health in three of the four countries, study participants felt that constant and repeated engagement with
high-level executives of the ministries is important and necessary to keep up the momentum and
advocate for the realization of concrete, formal projects. EAPHLN could play this role, advocating to and
working closely with key personnel with ministries of health for more PPPs in the laboratory sector. This
could be further reinforced by dialogue and advocacy at the ECSA and EAC levels.

Facilitate dialogue between PPP visionaries and champions through a networking platform
The lack of a platform to discuss needs in the laboratory sector and exchange ideas on how PPPs could
be designed to address those needs, and to ensure that representatives from the public and the private
sectors interact and “compare notes” was seen as an impediment for the development of PPP projects. It
was suggested that EAPHLN could take on an active role in the convening and facilitation of such a
platform for laboratory partnerships, especially in Uganda and in Rwanda (together with RDB). Individuals
in the different countries who are in similar professional positions could be proactively introduced to each
other with the express goal to encourage them to exchange information and lessons learnt about PPPs
they have been involved in. For example, laboratory managers in all countries face the challenge of
having to structure placement contracts, and the laboratory manager of CHUK in Kigali might benefit by
comparing his contract modalities with thoseof Mulago Referral Hospital and Kenyatta National Hospital.
The same holds for ministry officials. To start, existing technical working groups could be used as a
platform for discussing PPP-related issues.

Create an online repository of PPPs
A simple online repository, starting with the partnerships identified in this study, could be set up and used
as a starting point to register all partnerships for laboratory services and their modalities, which can be
made accessible to interested stakeholders throughout East Africa. EAPHLN could offer some kind of
                                                      29
incentive (for example, subsidized or free transaction advice, access to contract templates) to encourage
people to register any new PPP with the repository.

Advocate for the formalization of existing informal relationships
Existing non formal relationships could be formalized, improved, documented, and eventually replicated.
This could start with just one partnership in each country – perhaps with those individuals who are most
open to it. Since certain administrative rules and a lack of policy might be a hindrance to the formalization
of certain relationships, this may best work in conjunction with the engagement of key stakeholders in the
ministry.

Encourage comprehensive needs assessments and the development of a PPP pipeline
In Kenya, a needs assessment and subsequent prioritization was the basis for the decision of the PPP
team in the Ministry of Health to launch an Oxygen Plant PPP project. A similar exercise focused on
laboratory services for each of the EAPHLN member countries would likely result in added momentum,
and possibly the launch of laboratory-focused projects in each country within the next 2-3 years. The
method for the exercise could be designed based on work already done in the PPP units in the ministries
of health in Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania, and in collaboration with RDB in Rwanda.

Development of a PPP prototype model catalogue and contract templates
Deciding on a feasible and adequate PPP model for a specific purpose and writing a contract that
correctly allocates obligations, benefits and risks to all parties is highly complex and requires the
expertise not only of a transaction advisor, but also subject matter specialists, in this case the expertise of
experienced laboratory professionals. A short catalogue of different PPP models that are particularly
conducive for the laboratory sector, with a brief explanation of how each model works and its key benefits
would address existing knowledge gaps. The catalogue would contain examples from the health sector
globally, contact persons who can help for the replication of the model, and a description of elements and
conditions to make it work. Additionally, a catalogue could provide standard, adjustable contract
templates that public sector officials can easily modify, customize and use.


Implementation of model PPPs
EAPHLN could attempt to implement at least one model laboratory PPP, working in close collaboration
with Ministries of Health and other key stakeholders. Ideally, a model PPP will include one or more public
partners (for example a subnational referral hospital) and one or more private partners (for example, a
private secondary hospital, a private laboratory etc.). “Bridging organizations” that transcend the
public/private categories, such as professional associations and regulatory bodies, could be invited to the
management board or steering committee. Such an experimental, model PPP would need to be
monitored and documented, so that lessons can be learnt and the model improved and replicated.

Practitioner Training
General training workshops about PPP are not a new idea, and they have been held in East Africa
before. However, as long as the training curriculum is purely theoretical, content is likely to be forgotten
after a while, and becomes less relevant. Study participants in Uganda and Rwanda encouraged
EAPHLN to organize hands-on training with practitioners that de-emphasizes theory, and instead focus
on existing needs, practical prototype models, concrete experiences among peers, and guidance on how
the models can be put into practice within the local setting. Such practical trainings could serve as a
venue for greater interaction, exchange of ideas, and for the initiation of concrete laboratory PPPs.

Opportunities
The fact that there is a sizable number of ongoing relationships, informal or formal, presents a unique
opportunity to leverage. Rather than starting from scratch, existing, naturally evolved partnerships can be
                                                      30
taken up, nurtured, and developed. Stakeholders from both the public and the private sector see a large
potential in PPPs; this positive perception can be reinforced by re-iterating the potential impact and
providing concrete examples. Below, we summarize ideas and opinions about new PPPs for laboratory
services in East Africa.

Management Contracts
Leading private sector laboratories are highly interested to engage in this model. Private wings of public
referral hospitals would be an ideal avenue for testing this. EAPHLN referral laboratories would be
another good opportunity to test the outsourcing of management to existing private laboratories. Private
sector stakeholders think that the initiative for such arrangements needs to come from the public sector.

Procurement and Resource Pooling
The advantages of pooling the procurement of consumables have been recognized by a range of actors.
Partnerships that facilitate such pooling can therefore be very attractive to both public and private
facilities. For example, the PPP TB Mix platform hosted by KAPTLD for greater public-private
collaboration for TB service delivery in Kenya has been discussing pooled procurement for GeneXpert TB
cartridges in Kenya. Moving this forward at an increased pace through targeted advocacy and support
represents a quick win. Pooled testing can drastically reduce the price of laboratory tests in the private
sector, an advantage which can directly benefit clients. Networking models that bring together smaller
clinics and link them to referral laboratories, such as the UHMG and Reach Out models in Uganda, could
be replicated in other countries.

Engaging the Private Sector to deliver subsidized services to the poor
Provision of government or donor subsidies is common for FBO health facilities in all countries of East
Africa; however, it has not been conceptualized in terms of PPP. Formalized through contracts, such
arrangements could be expanded to the private-for-profit sector. A key challenge is ensuring that public
subsidies to the private facilities are used to cater to the poor, which could be done using demand-side
financing mechanisms such as vouchers or insurance models that incorporate means-testing to target the
subsidies to the poor. Private sector professionals especially in Uganda and Rwanda have a desire to
participate in such arrangements, and see it as an opportunity to expand their services to those who
cannot typically afford to purchase their services.

PPPs to facilitate referrals
It is not uncommon for public sector facilities to refer patients to large private laboratories when they have
a stock-out or equipment breakdown, or specialized tests are necessary; respondents in Rwanda, for
example, noted that this is not uncommon in their country. Formalization of such referrals from the public
sector to the private sector could lead to greater efficiency, since the public facility can negotiate
favorable prices from the private vendors for a certain volume of services. A formalization of the referral
system would lead to referral of specimens rather than patients, which would be more convenient and
cheaper for patients. PPPs for specimen transportation could further save costs and improve timeliness,
both in the case of referrals from the public sector to the private sector, as well as between primary health
centers in the public sector to public referral laboratories.

In Kenya and Rwanda, public-sector laboratories have attempted to market their specialized testing
services to the private health facilities. Unless tests are part of a national disease control programs (for
example, TB, HIV), public sector offer these specialized tests on a fee-for-service basis. For vertical
programs where private sector facilities systematically refer samples to public laboratories, a PPP could
be designed that formalizes private “sample collection services.” For other programs, PPP programs
formalizing referrals between private facilities and highly specialized public laboratories could bring in
added revenue to the public sector. CPHL in Uganda already has a very strong hub-and-spoke system for

                                                     31
sample referrals within the vertical HIV/AID program; this can be expanded relatively easily to include a
broader set of tests and a larger proportion of private facilities.

Building relationships to enable better quality
Collaboration for external quality assessments (EQA) is seen as a natural and important form of
partnership, which has not yet been leveraged fully. Public facilities could refer their samples to
accredited private laboratories, and vice versa. For example, public facilities in Rwanda currently refer
samples to facilities overseas and pay a fee for EQA services to a range of different referral labs.
Partnerships with large private labs could drive down these costs. Most small private laboratories do not
have any EQA, which results in reduced service quality. They would benefit from collaborating with public
reference laboratories.

Mentorship and training
The already existing informal exchange of knowledge and expertise among laboratory professionals from
the public and private sectors can be officially sanctioned and formalized, for example by allowing a
certain number of hours for mutual information sharing and mentoring, and by matchmaking of peers.
Additional training PPPs for transferring advanced skills either from abroad to laboratory technicians in
the region or between sectors (in Kenya, this would be from the private sector to the public sector, while
in Uganda the opposite may be needed) were also welcomed by respondents. For example, the
mentorship program between Aga Khan Hospital and the Kenyan National Microbiology Reference
Laboratory was deemed a success by both sides. It stopped after one year because funds could not be
secured to continue the arrangement. The modality of this exchange could be reviewed with the initiators,
and a modified version developed that requires minimal financial investment from the public side. Lancet
Kenya is interested to provide short-term internship and mentorship placements within their laboratory for
public sector staff, an opportunity that could be explored further.

Other opportunities
Study participants recommended to look beyond the healthcare environment when exploring potential
partnerships and formal PPPs. Outsourcing of sample transportation services to private courier
companies is the most typical example of partnership with a non-health company; the experience with
that in Uganda is somewhat mixed, to the extent that CPHL preferred to build an internal courier service.
Other typical third-party service providers and potential partners are technology companies for laboratory
information systems and the transmission of results, including telepathology. Private training institutions
are also potential partners, as the case of Mount Kenya University demonstrates. In Kenya there are two
examples where private non-health companies have provided capital investment for the construction of
health facilities on their premises, so that their employees and surrounding community can benefit from
improved access to healthcare. The public sector could explore ways in which PPPs could be used to
target services to the poor.




                                                    32
                                              Conclusion
All four East African countries covered by this study -- Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda and Uganda --have
vibrant private health sectors. Additionally, collaboration between public and private actors is on the rise
in all four countries, with several of them having policy frameworks in place to guide the design and
implementation of health PPPs. In the area of laboratory services, all four countries offered numerous
examples of public private collaboration for improved delivery of services. A majority of these initiatives
were informal or one-off arrangements. Consequently, they do not meet the definitional criteria for being
called PPPs and do not reflect “best practice” principles for PPP implementation such as competitive
tendering, transparency, etc.

Both public and stakeholders interviewed for this study expressed keen interest in both formalizing what
have hitherto been informal and/or ad-hoc arrangements and initiating new PPPs in the health sector.
Study participants identified a number of ways in which PPPs could enhance the delivery of laboratory
services. For example, the pooled procurement of laboratory consumables could reduce the cost of
services, the formalization of ad-hoc referral between public and private sector entities would lead to
improved access to services, and the outsourcing of laboratory management in public facilities to private
vendors would result in greater efficiency, lower costs, and improved quality.

The study participants identified a range of challenges that would need to be addressed to pave the way
for more PPPs for laboratory services. Many of the existing collaborations are financed and supported by
donors, while national and sub-national governments in the region are hesitant to commit public funds to
PPPs. This is partly because government procedures for contracting are both time-consuming and
onerous. Additionally, government bureaucrats continue to view PPPs with suspicion. EAPHLN, ECSA
and other stakeholders interested in promoting PPPs in the region, both for laboratory services and health
more broadly, can initiate a number of steps to address these challenges. First, they could put in place a
platform or forum where different actors can share and discuss experience from existing public-private
collaborations, which would in turn create greater awareness about and support for PPPs. Other
measures include creating a practical manual with models of laboratory PPPs, contract templates, etc.,
and setting up prototype laboratory PPPs in each EAPHLN country.




                                                     33
                                            References
Barnes, Jeffrey. 2011. “Designing Public Private Partnerships in Health.” Strengthening Health
         Outcomes through the Private Sector. Abt Associates.
Buse, Kent, and Gill Walt. 2000. "Global Public-Private Partnerships: Part I-a New
         Development in Health?." Bulletin of the World Health Organization 78.4: 549-561.
Center for Health Markets Innovations. “Contracting of Clinical Lab Services.” (Accessed on
         December 1, 2013)
         http://healthmarketinnovations.org/program/contracting-clinical-lab- services.
         _____. “Eastern Cape Hospitals Public Private Partnership.” (Accessed on December 1, 2013)
                   http://healthmarketinnovations.org/program/eastern-cape-hospitals-public-private-
                   partnership
         _____. “Public Private Partnership for Nursing Training in Punjab.” (Accessed on December 1,
                   2013) http://healthmarketinnovations.org/program/public-private-partnership-nursing-
                   training-punjab
Coelho, Carla M.N.F, and Catherine O’Farrell. 2011. “A Pioneering Healthcare Transaction.”
         Handshake Quarterly Journal on Public Private Partnerships. International Finance
         Corporation. Issue 3 (2011).
International Finance Corporation. 2010. IFC Support to Health Public-Private Partnerships.
                   Washington, DC. (Accessed on December 1, 2013)
                   http://www.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/b10f4080498391e2865cd6336b93d75f/IFC_Support
                   2Health_WEB.pdf?MOD=AJPERES&CACHEID=b10f4080498391e2865cd6336b93d75f
Ministry of Health Kenya. 2012. “Engaging the Private Sector in the National Response to
Combat HIV/AIDS.”
         Mitchell, Marc. “An Overview of Public Private Partnerships in Health.” Harvard School of Public
                     Health. http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/ihsg/publications/pdf/PPP-final-MDM.pdf.
                     Accessedon October 25, 2013.
         Montagu, Dominic and April Harding. "A Zebra or a Painted Horse? Are Hospital PPPs
                   Infrastructure Partnerships with Stripes or a Separate Species?." World Hospitals
                    and Health Services; Journal of the International Hospital Federation 48.2
                    (2012): 15.
Nikolic, Irina A., and Harald Maikisch. 2006. "Public-Private Partnerships and Collaboration in the
         Health Sector." An Overview with Case Studies from Recent European Experience.
         World Bank, HNP Discussion Paper.
         Public Private Partnership for Health. “Contracting Clinical Lab Services, Bihar.” (Accessed on
                   December 1, 2013)
                   h`ttp://ppphealth.org/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=115&Itemid=504.
Reich M. 2002. “Public-Private Partnerships for Public Health.” In: Reich M, ed. Public-Private
         Partnerships for Public Health. Cambridge: Harvard Center for Population and
         Development Studies.
Sekhri, Neelam, Richard Feachem, and Angela Ni. 2011. "Public-Private Integrated
         Partnerships Demonstrate the Potential to Improve Health Care Access,
         Quality, and Efficiency." Health Affairs 30.8 (2011): 1498-1507.
Sulzbach S. 2011. “Harnessing the Potential of the Private Sector to Strengthen Health Systems.”
                   The World Bank. 2012. “Public-Private Parnterships Reference Guide.”




                                                   34
      ANNEX A: Details for Identified Partnerships
      Key to the table entries: See next page

                                                OBJECTIVES OF PPP                                     STRUCTURE
               Name                                         Expected                        Private Sector Role                                  Geography
                                         Aspect to be                      Contractual                                 Re-           Partners
                                                          private sector
                                         Strengthened                      Arrangement   Investment   Responsibility   imbursement   involved
                                                             benefits
                                                                                                                                       PuH,
Placement Contracts (No 01 – 12)                  EI         R, Rel            C             PI             S               TP         MoH,        N, SN
                                                                                                                                     NRL, PrM
                                                                                                                                     PuH, PrL,
                                                OS, EI          R              C             N              L               RS                      SN
13. Laboratory Management Voi (KE)                                                                                                      DP
                                                                                                                                       FBO,
                                                 OS           CSR              (N)           N              L              TBD                      SN
14. EAPHLN Gulu Lacor (UG)                                                                                                           MoH, DP
                                                                                                                                     MoH, DP,
                                                 OS             R              (N)                          L              TBD                      SN
15. EAPHLN planned PPP (KE)                                                                                                             PrL
16. Rwinkwavu Hospital Referral
                                                 OS             R              C             N              S               SF       PuH, PrL       SN
System (RW)
17. Nyahururu Hospital Referrals
                                                 OS          R, Rel            N             N              L               SF       PuH, PrL       SN
(KE)
18. Nyeri Hospital Referrals (KE)                OS          R, Rel            N             N              L               SF       PuH, PrL       SN
19. Makueni Hospital Referrals (KE)             OS, I          R               N             N              L               SF       PuH, PrL       SN
                                                                                                                                      MoH,
                                                OS, I           R              C             N              S               SF                      SN
20. ReachOut Network (UG)                                                                                                            PrC, DP
21. UHMG Network (UG)                           OS, I           M              N             EI             S                -       PrC, DP        N
                                                                                                                                     NRL, DP,
                                                OS, I       CSR, M             (N)           EI             L                -                      N
22. Private HIV Reference Lab (UG)                                                                                                     PrC
23. Partnerships w. FBO Facilities                                                                                                    MoH,
                                                 OS           CSR             MoU            EI             L                -                      N
includes Laboratory Aspect (UG)                                                                                                        FBO
24. Schemes of Service w. FBO
                                                                                                                                       MoH,
Facilities                                       OS           CSR             MoU            EI             S                -                      N
                                                                                                                                       FBO
includes Laboratory Aspect (TZ)
                                                                                                                                      FBO,
                                                 OS             M              N             EI             S                -                      N
25. Malaria Diagnostics Subsidy (TZ)                                                                                                 PrC, DP
26. Tuberculosis Reagent Subsidy                                                                                                      FBO,
                                                 OS             M             MoU            EI             S                -                      N
(UG)                                                                                                                                 MoH, DP
27. TB subsidy to private sector                                                                                                      FBO,
                                                 OS            PV              N             EI             S                -                      N
KAPTLD (KE)                                                                                                                          MoH, DP
28. Post Office Sample Transport                                                                                                      NRL,
                                                 OS             R              C             N              S               SF                      N
(UG)                                                                                                                                  PrNH

                                                                                35
                                                                                                                                                       PuH,
                                              OS              R                 C                N                S                  SF                MoH,      N
29. G4S Specimen Transport (KE)                                                                                                                        PrNH
30. Centralized TB reagent supply                                                                                                                      NRL,
                                             I, OS            S                (N)               PI               L                 TBD                          N
(KE)                                                                                                                                                 FBO, PrM
31. Mentorship/ Training, Aga Khan                                                                                                                     MoH,
                                              HR              Rel             MoU                N                L                   -                          N
(KE)                                                                                                                                                 NRL, PrH
32. Informal Knowledge Exchange
                                              HR              Rel               N                N                S                   -              NRL, PrH    N
(KE)
33. Private Sector Staff Training
                                              HR              Rel               N                N                P                   -              MoH, PrC    SN
(RW)
                                                                                                                                                     PrC, PrL,
                                              HR              Rel               N                N                P                   -                          SN
34. Private Sector Staff Training (UG)                                                                                                                SN, DP
35. Thika Hospital & Mount Kenya                                                                                                                       PuH,
                                            HR, EI            SD              MoU                EI               L                  IK                          SN
University (KE)                                                                                                                                        PrNH
36. Regional Laboratory
                                              HR         CSR, Rel             MoU                PI               L                   -              MoH, PrM    N
Modernization (TZ)



                                                        HR    Human Resources                              OS     Operational Services
          KEY




                         Aspect to be Strengthened
                                                         EI   Equipment, Infrastructure                      I    Information
                                                         R    Revenue                                       R     Improved Relationship with Public Sector
                    Expected Private Sector Benefit     PV    Patient Volumes                             CSR     Corporate social responsibility
                                                         M    Marketing (Patient attraction/Retention)
                                                         N    None/verbal                                    C    Formal Contract
                           Contractual Arrangement
                                                         M    MoU                                           (N)   No contract as yet
                                Private Sector Role:     L    Leading/ Management Responsibility              P   Passive recipient of support
                                      Responsibility     S    Service Provision for a fee (outsourcing)
                                                         PI   PPP-related investment                         N    None
                    Private Sector Role: Investment
                                                         EI   Provision of pre-existing infrastructure
                                                        SF    Service for a fee                             RS    Revenue Share
                                     Reimbursement
                                                        MF    Management Fee                                 IK   In-kind
                                                       MoH    Ministry of Health (central)                 PrM    Private Manufacturer/Distributor
                                                       PuH    Public National Referral Hospital            FBO    FBO Secondary Hospitals
                                                       PrH    Private Referral Hospital                     PrL   Private Standalone Laboratory
                                   Partners Involved
                                                       PrC    Private Primary Clinics                     PrNH    Non-health private companies
                                                        DP    Donor funded projects or NGOs                 SN    Sub-National Health Authorities
                                                       NRL    National Referral Laboratories
                                Geographical Scope       N    National                                      SN    Subnational


                                                                                 36
  ANNEX B: Qualitative Sample Composition

                                                                                   Interviews
                                       Public Sector Representatives         RW   UG        TZ   KE
                                                   Senior MoH Officials      1    2         1    1
                                       MoH Official in Charge of PPP         2    1         1    1
   Head of regulatory authority in charge of medical laboratories and        -    1         -    1
                                                        professionals
 Senior hospital managers and laboratory in-charge for tertiary public       1    1         -    1
                                                             hospitals
                         Managers of National Referral Laboratories          1    3         2    1
                                          EAPHLN Country In-Charges          1    1         -    2
                                      Private Sector Representatives
                    CEO or Director(s) of leading private laboratories       2    1         -    1
  Senior hospital managers and laboratory in-charge for large private        2    1         -    1
                                                             hospitals
    Chairpersons of relevant professional and business associations          2    2         3    1
            Managers of NGO projects related to laboratory services,         -    2         -    0
                  Manufacturers/Distributors of Laboratory Equipment         1     -        -    2
                                  Experts and Industry Stakeholders
         Individuals in charge of PPP at multilateral organizations and      -     -        2    1
                                                  development partners
              Individuals in charge of laboratory services in multilateral   -    1         1    0
                                                           organizations
Officers in charge of programs to strengthen the private sector and/or       2    2         1    0
                                                                    PPPs
                             Medical Insurance Company management            1    1         -    1
                    Senior medical consultants (medical practitioners)       1    1         -    0
                                                                 TOTAL       17   20       11    14




                                                         37
This document presents findings from a study conducted to identify and document ongoing public-private
partnerships (PPPs) for improving access to quality laboratory services, especially for the poor, in the
East Africa region. The East, Central, and Southern Africa Health Community (ECSA-HC) coordinated the
study along with the partner states in the East African Community participating in the World Bank funded
East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking Project (EAPHLNP). The authors implemented key
informant interviews in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda, and analyzed the information gathered
from the interviews which is presented in this report.

The study finds that while there are numerous examples of public-private collaboration across all four
countries, the number of formals PPPs remains scarce. The most common form of PPP is placement,
whereby privately owned laboratory equipment in leased by public facilities. Most other instances of
collaboration between public and private partners, did not meet the formal definition of a PPP. Key
stakeholders from both public and private institutions showed a keen interest in learning about and setting
up more, diverse kinds of PPPs. The numerous informal and semi-formal arrangements that currently
exist all represent opportunities for establishing formal PPPs in accordance with global best practices.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage
discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated
organizations or to members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and
the use of material presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies
of papers in this series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries
about the series and submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@
worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                              1818 H Street, NW
                                                                              Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                              Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                              Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                              Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                              E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
