                                             98547




    Assessment of Private Sector Participation in the
                Power Sector of Egypt




-




                      December, 2014
Standard Disclaimer:

This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/ The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in
this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World Bank
or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the
data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information
shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank
concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries.



Copyright Statement:

The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all
of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank
for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of its work
and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with
complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470, http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA,
fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                          2                                           12/05/2014
Contents
I.        Acknowledgments ....................................................................................................................................... 4
II.       Executive Summary..................................................................................................................................... 5
III. Nature of Financing Challenge in the Power Sector .................................................................... 10
IV. Private Participation in the Egyptian Power Sector .................................................................... 11
      Power Sector Structure and Governance ............................................................................................. 11
      IPPs in Egypt to Date .................................................................................................................................... 15
      Renewable Energy Resources and Planned Projects ...................................................................... 16
      Wind ................................................................................................................................................................... 16
      Solar .................................................................................................................................................................... 18
V.        Approaches to Private Power Procurement ................................................................................... 18
VI. The Egypt PPP Regime ............................................................................................................................ 20
      Legal Basis........................................................................................................................................................ 20
      Relationship of PPP Process to Power Projects................................................................................. 21
      Relevant International Examples ............................................................................................................ 22
VII. Barriers to Private Participation in Egypt’s Power Sector........................................................ 25
      Country Risks .................................................................................................................................................. 25
      Institutional governance and capacity .................................................................................................. 25
      Market risk ....................................................................................................................................................... 26
      Renewables...................................................................................................................................................... 28
VIII. The Draft Electricity Law ....................................................................................................................... 29
      Treatment of Renewable Energy............................................................................................................. 30
IX. Renewable Energy Investment Law and Feed-in Tariffs ........................................................... 31
X. Measures to Address Barriers and Ensure Sustainability of Private Investments in the
Power Sector ........................................................................................................................................................ 32
XI. A Blueprint for Gradual Transformation to a New Commercial Framework .................... 40




                                                                                   3                                                                                  12/05/2014
   I.     Acknowledgments


This paper is the result of an extensive collaboration across the World Bank Group. The
report was drafted by a joint World Bank - IFC team comprising Waleed Alsuraih (Sr. Energy
Specialist, Energy & Extractives -- TTL), Aijaz Ahmad (Sr. Public-Private Partnerships
Specialist, Public Private Partnerships), Alejandro Moreno (Energy Specialist, Energy &
Extractives), and Efstratios Tavoulareas (Senior Operations Officer, IFC Clean Energy and
Resource Efficiency Advisory). The report benefitted greatly from the support and
leadership of Poonam Gupta, Acting Country Director for Egypt; Charles Cormier, MENA
Practice Manger for the Energy & Extractives Global Practice, and John Kellenberg, Manager
of IFC Energy & Resource Efficiency Advisory.

The report draws heavily on input and insights from a wide range of power sector and Egypt
country experts, as well the active engagement of numerous organizations and individuals
within the Government of Egypt. The team would like in particular to acknowledge the
contributions and guidance of colleagues Sudeshna Ghosh Banerjee (Energy & Extractives),
Vyjayanti Desai (Trade & Competitiveness), Vivien Foster (Energy & Extractives), Mohab
Hallouda (Energy & Extractives), Ashish Khanna (Energy & Extractives), Nuru Lama (IFC
Infrastructure), Jeremy Levin (IFC Energy & Resource Efficiency Advisory), Sherine Shohdy
(IFC Infrastructure), and Dalia Wahba (IFC Infrastructure); and to thank the report’s peer
reviewers, Sameh Mobarek (Legal, Africa and MENA) and Bryanne Tait (IFC Energy &
Resource Efficiency Advisory) for a wealth of insights that will help guide the
implementation of its recommendations. The team is also exceptionally grateful for the high
level of engagement and support from the Egyptian Ministry of Finance, Ministry of
International Cooperation, Ministry of Electricity and Renewable Energy, Ministry of
Petroleum, the Egyptian Electric Utility & Consumer Protection Regulatory Agency, Egyptian
Electricity Holding Company, Egyptian Electricity Transmission Company, and the Public
Private Partnerships Coordinating Unit, without which the report could not have been
produced. Lastly, the team would like to acknowledge the valuable input received from
private power project developers and financiers in Egypt, whose perspectives were essential
to accurately identify barriers to commercial investment and recommend alternative
approaches.




                                         4                                          12/05/2014
   II.    Executive Summary

    1. The objective of this note is to provide a high level assessment and areas of
improvement of the legal and regulatory framework for private participation in the power
sector in Egypt. The note assesses the current status of the sector, identifies barriers to
private investment, and proposes a suite of possible options to address them. This analysis
of private sector participation in power comprises a component of a broader assessment of
Egypt’s energy sector, and its findings are incorporated into a sector White Paper under
preparation by the World Bank. Consultations on conclusions and recommendations were
conducted with Government of Egypt (GoE) officials over three rounds, as well as with
private power developers and international lenders. The assessment findings formed part of
the recent energy sector White Paper jointly developed by the GoE and the World Bank.

    Sector Status:
    2. Egypt faces a major challenge in financing the expansion of power generation
capacity. A gap is developing between the required investments and the capacity of the
public sector to meet financing requirements from traditional sources. The majority of
existing power generation projects are owned and operated by the Egyptian Electricity
Holding Company (EEHC), with the role of the private sector limited to engineering,
procurement and construction. Private sector investment and ownership in power
generation through PPPs / IPPs, however has the potential to relieve the pressure on public
financing and deliver reliable, efficient, and cost-effective power supply to the sector. Given
Egypt’s world-class solar and wind resources, GoE also has the opportunity to diversify its
generation mix away from thermal power by adding a substantial amount renewable energy
at an affordable cost. This will not only provide environmental benefits, but also reduce
Egypt’s dependence on foreign fuels and the resulting vulnerability to price fluctuations.

   Barriers to Private Participation in Egypt’s Power Sector

    3. Despite GoE’s interest in allowing privately-owned power generation, no private
projects have been developed since 2003. This is in part due to the political circumstances
across Egypt since 2011, which have affected the risk profile for all large investments and
GoE’s capacity to engage with power developers. In particular, Egypt’s deteriorating credit
rating has limited private interest and increased costs of capital. Beyond the country risk
profile, a number of elements of the regulatory framework specific to the power sector may
also serve to further discourage private participation, to a greater or lesser degree
depending on the project. These include:



                                           5                                            12/05/2014
  a. Institutional governance and capacity: the authority to engage the private sector in
     power development is spread across a number of GoE bodies, creating overlapping and
     in many cases duplicative roles. Each of the units responsible for attracting private
     investment has limited experience or is severely understaffed. Building up the same
     technical capacity at multiple organizations is an inefficient use of GoE resources, and
     allowing multiple duplicative processes increases the risk to GoE that any given one
     may not be designed to fairly balance risks or attract private investors. In addition,
     EgyptERA, the power sector regulator, is functionally situated under the Ministry of
     Electricity and Renewable Energy, increasing the possibility that regulatory decisions
     will be made on a political rather than technical basis.

  b. Market risk: it is not clear that EETC will have sufficient revenues to serve as a fully
     reliable off-taker of power for the period that would be covered by any bankable PPA.
     Retail tariffs do not allow EETC to adequately recover its costs, and there does not
     appear to be a technically-based price-setting methodology in place to guide the
     determination or approval of tariffs. Reaching the GoE target of cost-reflective tariffs
     within 5 years will require strong political will to further raise electricity prices, and to
     establish a clear methodology to ensure they continue to rise if costs climb. Sovereign
     guarantees are now available for power projects for the first time since 2003, but the
     initial guarantee language included total liability limits that significantly undermined
     their value. PPAs must also adequately protect investors from currency or fuel supply
     risks in order to be considered bankable.

  c. Renewables: in addition to the above risks, renewable energy projects face unique
     challenges of their own due to their relatively high initial capital costs, the intermittent
     nature of the resource, and the often large area and remote locations of the land
     required. Price support (whether via competitive tenders or feed-in tariffs), a clear
     basis for land allocation, financial incentives such as tax holidays or investment
     subsidies, and direct government assistance to acquiring land and connecting to the
     national grid can all help attract experienced energy developers and with high quality
     projects. The new renewable energy investment law and feed-in tariffs may provide
     adequate support in these areas, although their efficiency in attracting private
     investment will depend in a large part on the details of the regulations and their
     implementation.

Measures to Address Power Sector’s Private Participation Barriers

    4. The WBG has identified a number of measures to address these barriers and establish
a comprehensive and systematic approach needed to attract private investment in the power
sector. The measures introduce certain specific actions and/or institutional arrangements
                                            6                                              12/05/2014
needed to address the barriers in a sustainable manner. The following is a summary of these
measures:
 a. Define institutional roles and build capacity. Clearly defining the methods of private
    power procurement and the respective roles and abilities of each GoE agency will help
    efficiently allocate public resources, predict and monitor GoE liabilities and risk, and
    provide a clear, scalable process that attracts high-quality projects. One specific option
    may be to identify a single, dedicated unit responsible for competitive private power
    generation. Such a unit could take on the role of developing tender documents and
    project contracts, promoting opportunities and attracting bidders, managing the tender
    process, and awarding projects. Regardless of the final institutional structure, GoE
    would benefit from capacity-building efforts in the relevant institutions, in particular
    related to commercial and financial expertise to run effective competitive tenders and
    ensure high-quality projects at fair prices. Beyond the procurement process, increasing
    the political independence and authority of EgyptERA could help ensure that retail
    tariffs will rise to cost-recovery levels and instill confidence in EETC as a reliable and
    creditworthy off-taker.

 b. Ensure access to project guarantees. External project guarantees can provide
    additional security to private developers and lenders when off-taker payment abilities
    are uncertain. In Egypt, one or more guarantees will likely be a critical element in the
    near-term to obtain commercial debt and keep project costs competitive. MoF will
    almost certainly need to provide sovereign guarantees on all projects above a nominal
    size, requiring balancing the needs of private investors against the cost of long-term
    government fiscal commitments. Project risks can also be addressed with additional
    guarantees provided by external parties: both WB and MIGA guarantees are proven
    valuable tools in developing countries, attracting high quality project developers and
    reducing costs of capital, helping to ensure projects are effective and affordable.

 c. Establish clear, replicable tender process and bankable project documents.
    Considering Egypt’s risk profile, it is likely that investors initially will prefer the
    traditional IPP model with long-term PPAs, similar to those signed in the early 2000s.
    For thermal projects, developers should be selected via competitive tenders, based (at
    least in part) on proposed tariff. For renewable projects, developers can either be
    selected competitively, or (for smaller projects) unsolicited proposals can be approved
    and licensed on the basis of a feed-in tariff. For competitively-selected projects, a
    standardized tender process with transparent and predictable stages and evaluation
    criteria will provide certainty to the market and greatly streamline the competitive bid
    process. For many competitions, model project contracts (e.g. Power Purchase
    Agreements or Implementing Agreements) can provide certainty to private developers

                                           7                                           12/05/2014
   and can reduce negotiation time. They can also help developers arrange their financing
   quickly and at the lowest cost. As an interim solution to ensure ongoing projects
   progress while standardized documents and processes are developed, GoE could
   consider providing limited equity in specific project companies. This might help
   provide comfort to developers and lenders while still leaving most of the project
   financing to the private sector.

d. Continue to implement tariff and subsidy reform. The principle of cost-reflective
   tariffs is essential for the long-term viability of the power sector and for attracting
   sustainable private investment. Developers and lenders need to be certain that the
   counterparty to their PPA (EETC) will have the funds available to fulfill its payment
   obligations for the duration of the contract. The July 2014 package of tariff increases
   and subsidy reforms is an important step, but current tariff levels are still substantially
   below cost, and the reform did not include an schedule or automatic trigger for further
   increases to eventually reach (and maintain) cost-recovery levels. A well-considered
   communication strategy also may be beneficial in increasing public acceptance, and
   social protection programs can reduce the impact of price increases on those least able
   to afford them. In addition, a number of measures are needed to improve the financial
   position of EEHC/EETC, including restructuring debt, writing off accounts payables,
   and granting a grace period to new loans. These steps will be discussed in detailed a
   separate chapter of the white paper under development.

e. Enact the draft Electricity Law and develop secondary regulations. A draft
   Electricity Law has been endorsed by the Cabinet and has been in front of Parliament
   since 2008, but has yet to be approved. The proposed law addresses a number of key
   issues that currently stand in the way of large scale private investment in the power
   sector, most critically a fixed tariff-setting methodology and procurement and support
   mechanisms for renewable energy. However, a more detailed review of the Law would
   be necessary to ensure coordination with legislation passed since its first drafting and
   the new Government’s goals and objectives. Particular emphasis should be placed on
   the Executive Regulations which accompany the Law; the particulars of such will
   largely define the allocation of risks and costs between GoE and the private sector, and
   as such will shape whether the sector ultimately attracts investment.

f. Provide additional support to renewable energy and energy efficiency. In addition
   to the policies articulated in the draft Electricity Law, a number of additional measures
   could be taken to support renewable energy development, as well as energy efficiency
   and demand side management. These topics are dealt with in more detail in a separate
   section of the white paper, but public support could include direct tax or investment

                                          8                                            12/05/2014
incentives to tax incentives, enforceable generation or consumption mandates,
regulations that encourage the sale of captive renewable generation back to the grid
(e.g. net metering or energy banking regulations). Energy efficiency measures in
particular can help reduce consumption and improve EETC’s financial position over
time, either through the promulgation of efficiency minimum standards, incentives for
reduced energy consumption, or technical support to identify and finance
opportunities to increase efficiency (e.g. through energy use audits). Demand side
management, for example by encouraging power usage at off-peak times, is another
important tool to reduce generation costs and improve power reliability.




                                    9                                         12/05/2014
III.   Nature of Financing Challenge in the Power Sector
    1.     Egypt faces a major challenge in financing the expansion of power generation
capacity to meet the expected growth in demand for electricity, especially since public
finances are becoming increasingly tight and private financing under the current public-
private partnerships is not applicable. As a result, a gap is developing between the
required investments and the capacity of the public sector to meet financing
requirements from traditional sources. Bridging this gap needs innovative approaches,
both to finding additional finance and to using supply capacity more effectively through
new technologies, demand management, power market regulation and investment
planning. The objective is to revamp the current channels for private financing and
develop a business model that ensures sustainable and streamlined procedures to
reengage investors.

    2.     The financing challenge is significant because, inter alia, investment needs in
the coming period will be much higher than in the recent past, the financial position of
the sector is weak, a framework for private investment has multiple channels that entail
overlapping responsibilities between several stakeholders and lack streamlined
procedures, and the credit market situation is tight. The government of Egypt therefore
has to consider all reasonable options for meeting this challenge.

    3.     The majority of power generation projects were financed through
International Financing Institutions (IFIs), with engineering, procurement, and
construction firms hired to prepare bid packages and oversee contractors, with the
Egyptian Electricity Holding Company (EEHC) as the owner/operator. Due to the large
scale of investments, traditional power plants went over budget, past deadlines, and
resulted in increasing O&M costs. All of these translate into additional financial burden
on EEHC, and the sector at large. However, the potential of leveraging private finance to
increase meet power generaton requirements in a timely manner and deliver value for
money is yet to be realized. Most importantly, private participation in power generation
through PPPs/IPPs has the potential to relieve the pressure on public financing and
deliver reliable, efficient, and cost-effective power supply to the sector.

   4.      The current projections show that about 3GW of electricity generation will
need to be added annually in FY10-20, which amounts to more than the installed capacity
of 24.7GW in FY2010 (exhibit-1). The generation capacity expansion projections
translate into financial investment requirements of about US$3 billion per year on
average, which is significantly higher than in the past. Prior to 2008, the average annual
investments in electricity supply were of the order of US$0.9 billion, growing to about
US$1.5 billion in FY2008 and US$2.4 billion in FY2009. This sharp increase is a

                                       10                                          12/05/2014
                 consequence of the larger capacity addition needs, as well as the effort to scale up
                 development of renewable energy with a target of 7,200MW by 2020. Such an increase
                 in a relatively short period of time will be very challenging to meet and maintain. The
                 Government has also been supporting non-price measures to improve supply side and
                 end-use energy efficiency to reduce the size of investment requirements. However, the
                 legal and regulatory framework for energy efficiency measures is not in place.

                 Exhibit-1 Overall picture of expanding generation capacity and energy mix in 2010-2020

      300,000                                                     60,000

      250,000                                                     50,000

      200,000                                                     40,000
                                           98TWh                                                         23GW
GWh




                                                                 MW
      150,000                                                     30,000

      100,000                                                     20,000

       50,000                                                     10,000

            0                                                            0
                      2010          2012           2020                          2010          2012             2020
       Nuclear   PV     Wind    Hydro   OCGT   Steam      CCGT        Nuclear   PV   Wind   Hydro     OCGT   Steam     CCGT




                 IV.         Private Participation in the Egyptian Power Sector


            Power Sector Structure and Governance

                     5.     The evolution of the governance of the Egyptian power sector over the past
                 half-century falls into two distinct eras (exhibit-2). The first era lasted from the early
                 1960s to the early 1990s during which time the power sector was organized and
                 governed under a traditional state-owned monopoly as an arm of government. The
                 second era has lasted from the early 1990s to the present during which time GOE
                 embarked on economic reforms to improve the efficiency of state owned enterprises as
                 part of overall economic reforms, and started the process of commercializing the
                 business of power supply. However, the critical needs to meet demand growth have
                 diverted the government attention from completing the commercialization process. This
                 process won’t be sustainably completed without reforming the current - power sector
                 governance and corporate governance of the entities that supply electricity and power
                 services to the power market.



                                                                 11                                                      12/05/2014
      Exhibit-2: Timeline of Reforms to Power Sector Governance in Egypt




    6.     Until the mid-1990s, the government was responsible for all aspects of the
power generation and supply, with a monopoly over power generation resting initially
with the Electricity Production Authority and later transferred to the Egyptian Electricity
Authority (EEA). Private participation in generation was first allowed in 1996, with the
passage of Law No. 100 that modified the 1976 sector law to allow IPPs on a BOOT basis.
The following year, a number of incentives that encouraged private power generation
were included in a broader investment law, including a five year tax holiday, full profit
repatriation, currency conversion and protection against nationalization and
expropriation.
    7.     In the early 2000s, the EEA was converted into a holding company, with
generation, transmission and distribution activities unbundled across 13 (public)
subsidiary companies. The new Egyptian Electricity Holding Company (EEHC) was
intended as a step towards eventual partial divestiture of assets across the power sector
value chain, although this privatization has yet to occur. In addition, the New &
Renewable Energy Authority was established to catalyze renewable energy power
generation, with a mandate both to develop its own projects as well as support potential
private development of renewable energy resources.
    8.     The state-owned EEHC owns and oversees seven public generation
companies, nine regional distribution companies, and the Egyptian Electric Transmission
                                       12                                           12/05/2014
Company (EETC). EETC itself owns and operates high-voltage transmission assets, serves
as the system dispatcher, manages imports and exports, and now signs PPAs with
generators as the single buyer of power in the country (exhibit-3). Current law allows
private sector participation, both foreign and local, in generation and distribution. IPPs
are allowed to sell electricity to eligible consumers, as there is non-discriminatory access
to the grid, and set their own prices (Law #8, 1997; Amendment of Law #162, 2000).
However, wheeling tariffs need to be negotiated with EETC.

                         Exhibit-3: Power Sector Structure




   9.      In the case of renewable energy, public wind projects are developed, owned
and operated by NREA. These projects are financed by multilateral and bilateral financing
agencies, as well as national government concessional financing and grants, and are open
to public bidding. The commercial wind program consists of two components: a
competitive bidding large-scale IPP commercial wind program and a commercial wind
program for small-scale IPPs benefitting from a feed-in tariff (FiT). The key features of
the three schemes are described in Exhibit-4. Land allocation is entirely under the
responsibility of NREA while EETC and distribution companies (for specific project size
using the FiT scheme only) will be the off-takers.


                                        13                                           12/05/2014
                                  Exhibit-4: Incentive Mechanisms
           Item                     NREA                  Competitive               Feed-In-Tariff
                                                            Bidding
    Program size        2200 MW                        2500 MW                2500 MW

    Single Wind Farm    Large (100-400 MW)             Large ten modules      Medium and Small below
    Size                                               (each of 250 MW)       or equal 50 MW
    Developer           NREA                           Private(most           Private(focus on local)
                                                       probably
                                                       international)
    Finances            Governmental and soft          Commercial Finance     Commercial Finance
                        financing from international
                        development agencies
    Tariff Setting      Proposed by Egypt Era and      According to the bid   Proposed by Egypt Era and
                        approved by the Cabinet of     outcome                approved by the Cabinet of
                        Ministers                                             Ministers
    Contracting         20 years                       Long term PPA          15 years
                                                       mostly for 20 years
    Off taker           Grid                                                  Grid or distribution system

    O/M                 NREA                           Developer              Developer

    Construction        NREA through EPC               Developer              Developer
    Responsibility
Source: EgypEra

          10.    A draft Electricity Law has been in front of Parliament since 2008, but its
      approval is not expected before late 2015 or 2016. The law would introduce a number of
      competitive reforms and incentives for renewable energy. A separate renewable energy
      investment law is likely to be approved in 2014, which would operationalize the recently
      announced (September, 2014) feed-in tariff program. Furthermore, a new law/decree is
      under development to allow open up the use of public land by the developers of
      renewable energy projects using the FiT program. A decree is also likely to be submitted
      for ratification that would allow NREA to officially enter into joint ventures with
      renewable energy developers.
          11.    The power sector is regulated by the Egyptian Electricity Utility and Consumer
      Protection Regulatory Agency (EgyptERA), which was established originally in 1997 and
      reformed in its present form by Presidential Decree 329 in 2000. In addition to
      upholding legal and technical standards, EgyptERA is responsible for reviewing sector
      planning, ensuring fair costs and utility returns, setting regulations that ensure “lawful
      competition” in the power sector, and issuing licenses for power generation,
      transmission, distribution, and sales projects.1 However, EgyptERA does not have tariff



1   EgyptERA website, http://www.egyptera.org/en/t3reef.aspx
                                                  14                                                 12/05/2014
   setting power, and its board is chaired by the Minister of Electricity and Renewable
   Energy (MERE), subjecting its rulings to direct MERE’s influence.

IPPs in Egypt to Date

       12.      From 1996-2003, three IPPs were developed (SidiKrir, EdF Suez and Port Said,
   with a total capacity of 2048 MW) under a Build Own Operate Transfer (BOOT) scheme
   with 20-year power purchase agreements with EEHC. These plants are steam turbines
   burning natural gas. The selection of the companies was done based on tender and direct
   negotiations for Power Purchase Agreements (PPA) between the Independent Power
   Producers (IPPs) and EEHC. EEHC assumed a number of the important project risks;
   prices were denominated in US dollars, increases in fuel costs were passed through to
   EEHC; and EEHC paid for deemed generation up to a plant utilization rate of 65-70%.
       13.      The PPAs were guaranteed by the Central Bank of Egypt (sovereign guarantee
   for all off-taker’s obligations at the time) and they are protected from future law changes.
   As a result, GoE was able to attract high-quality developers financed by both multilateral
   development agencies and commercial debt from local and foreign banks, and thus
   secured PPA tariffs that were very low by international standards – although the effective
   tariff increased substantially after the devaluation of the Egyptian Pound.
       14.      Despite the currency devaluation and changes in ownership, the three IPPs
   continue to perform well, both in terms of technical and financial performance; capacity
   factors are far above the guaranteed 70% level, and availability is above 92%. The IPPs
   were licensed by EgyptERA, and the regulator monitors their technical and financial
   performance through a benchmarking scheme. With the exception of 265 MW of power
   plants serving captive loads, no additional equity investments have been made in Egypt
   since these three BOOT projects were financially closed.
       15.      In 2009, requirements for pre-qualifications for wind IPPs were published,
   initially for a 250 MW plant in the Gulf of Suez (site potential: 2500 MW). The process
   was administered by EETC, and 10 international bidders were pre-qualified.. The World
   Bank supported the drafting of the Request for Proposal (RFP), including PPA,
   Implementation Agreement, Land Lease Contract, Sovereign Guarantee, Interconnection
   Agreement, and Draft Grid Code for wind farms, but the process was interrupted by the
   Arab Spring in March 2011. The RFP has since been re-issued, and the deadline for
   proposals is currently November 2014 and likely to be extended to March 2015
       16.      In addition, work on the 2,000 MW Dairut gas-fired IPP has resumed, with the
   IFC providing transaction advisory support to EEHC’s BOOT unit responsible for
   conducting thermal generation competitive tenders. The RFP is currently out for bid,
   with the expectation that proposals will be received in first quarter of 2015. A potential
   PPA is under development, with the terms of the fuel supply contract a critical element
   of the eventual allocation of risk (and project bankability).
                                              15                                         12/05/2014
Renewable Energy Resources and Planned Projects
        17.    Egypt has excellent conditions for developing of solar and wind power, which
    – under the appropriate financial and regulatory environment -- can be developed to
    serve both domestic and external electricity markets. However, wind and solar energy
    share only grew from 0.3 percent to 1.2 percent in 2002-2012, which exemplifies the real
    challenge of meeting the target of 20 percent share of renewable energy in the energy
    mix by 2020. Therefore, the GOE has adopted an ambitious renewable energy program,
    which seeks to increase the share of renewable to 20 percent by 2020, consisting mostly
    of wind and hydro, but with the important introduction of solar. GoE has stated its
    intention for 2/3 of future renewable energy capacity to be developed privately, with the
    remaining third developed by NREA. It is not clear, however, by what means NREA selects
    specific sites for its own development and reserves others to bid out for private
    generation.
        18.    Wind power will dominate renewable development and is expected to
    increase from approximately 550 MW by end-2011 to over 7,200 MW of installed wind
    power capacity by 2020. Exploiting the potential of solar energy sources would require
    the right financing incentives to overcome the high capital cost of solar technologies.
    Furthermore, the recently introduced FiT program envisages a capacity of 2GW for wind
    and 2.3GW for solar by 2017 but it does not describe how this wind capacity will be
    aligned with 2020 target.

Wind
        19.    Egypt has world-class wind resources, in particular near the Gulf of Suez. The
    largest wind development to date has taken place in the Zafarana district, where average
    wind speeds measure close to nine meters a second. NREA owns and operates 550 MW
    of wind capacity in the region through a series of linked plants. NREA has also set aside
    approximately 700 km2 in the Gebel el-Zayt region for wind power development. NREA
    has entered into a joint venture where it would share equity with a private company to
    develop wind projects. 2 Funding for NREA projects has been provided by bilateral
    organizations, and NREA has signed 15-year PPAs with EETC after cabinet approval.
        20.    In addition to the Gulf of Suez IPP mentioned above, there are plans for a 400
    MW wind power plant to be developed privately and sell power to a private industrial
    consumer. In part based on this example, a tender process was initiated by NREA in 2013
    for 6x100 MW sites. EETC did not guarantee a PPA, as developers were expected to
    identify their own customers for direct sale. However, in early July, GoE announced that



2http://www.nortonrosefulbright.com/knowledge/publications/74735/renewable-energy-in-egypt-hydro-
solar-and-wind

                                             16                                            12/05/2014
      it had selected a winning bidder. 3 The timeframe of developing these projects has not
      yet been clarified, in particular since land acquisition does not appear to be complete.
          21.    The World Bank (using CTF funds) financed a 280 Km 500 kV double circuit
      transmission line from the backbone of the integrated transmission grid to the Gulf of
      Suez to ensure sufficient transmission capacity for up to 2500 MW of wind capacity.
      Originally, most of these projects Egypt’s competitive bidding program for wind power
      consists of initially tendering a 250MW wind farm on a predetermined site in the Gulf of
      Suez area in 2010, with 2 x 250 MW to be tendered in each of the subsequent three years
      and a final 3 x 250 MW in the year thereafter. However, the first 250MW BOO is now
      three years behind schedule and bidding is not concluded. These 6x100MW were
      originally planned as BOO projects with the grid as off-taker and now they are IPPs for
      captive consumers. Hence, the structure of projects in the Gulf of Suez has changed and
      now the majority will be through donor financing or public projects (exhibit-5) and with
      significant delays.


      Exhibit- 5: Updated operational dates for planned wind farms in the Suez Gulf
      area

    Financier/Sponsor                     Government           Revised              Wind Farm
                                          entity               operation date       Size (MW)
    European Development Partners         NREA                 February, 2014       200
    (EDPs)
    Japan International Cooperation       NREA                 July, 2016           220
    Agency (JICA)
    Spanish Government                    NREA                 July, 2016           120
    Wind BOO, Gulf of Suez                EETC                 December, 2016       250
    Cooperation with Masdar (UAE)         NREA                 January, 2018        200
    European Development Partners         NREA                 2018                 200
    (EDPs)
    Financing options under review      NREA                   2018                 200
    IPP                                 NREA                   2018                 6x100
    Wind BOO, Gulf of Suez              EETC                   2019                 2x250
                                      Total                                         2,490




3 http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-07-02/elsewedy-electric-chosen-to-build-six-egyptian-wind-
farms.html
                                              17                                            12/05/2014
Solar
       22.    Egypt has very high solar irradiation levels, and solar PV and thermal
   technologies could provide substantial generation. The only large scale solar project is a
   20 MW solar thermal (parabolic trough) component of a 140 MW combination solar-
   combined cycle plant at Kuraymat. The solar portion was developed and is owned
   entirely by NREA. This project was supported by the World Bank through GEF
   financing.According to NREA, solar projects are “considered one of the main aspects to
   increase the contribution of renewable energy and the 5th year plan (2012 - 2017)” 4.
   NREA’s project’s pipeline includes 550MW of solar PV projects in the area of Kuraymat
   (50MW), Kom Ombo (300MW of which 10x20MW on BOO basis), and West/East Nile
   (200MW). However, the BOO projects will be managed by EETC but the implication of
   the recently introduced FiT on these projects is yet to be defined.
       23.    In addition, the Ministry of Tourism is planning to competitively tender the
   development of a non-grid connected solar photovoltaic plant to displace diesel
   consumption at certain hotels. However, the project will be procured competitively
   under the aegis of the formal PPP process under the Ministry of Finance (MoF) (described
   in Section III). Feasibility studies are expected to begin in February 2015.


   V.     Approaches to Private Power Procurement


       24.     As is evident from the previous description, the authority to engage the private
   sector in power development is spread across a number of GoE bodies. At least six
   separate processes are currently in place to select private power developers (although
   many are only applicable to renewable energy), with all six undertaken simultaneously
   and for the most part independent of each other or partially coordinated. Five of these
   processes are for renewable energy and one for thermal generation as described below.
   A schematic comparison, with the roles of each GoE organization and the private sector,
   is provided in exhibit-6.
i) NREA Joint Venture: NREA directly (i.e. noncompetitively) selects a company with which
   it establishes a special purpose vehicle (SPV) to share equity and project development
   expertise. The SPV is responsible for site identification, pre-feasibility studies, and
   project development, and sells power under a PPA to EETC.

ii) NREA competitive tender (“IPPs”): NREA identifies the site (officially with input from
    EETC, although the process and criteria for allocating land between the two authorities
    is unclear), performs the pre-feasibility studies, and releases a competitive tender. This



                                           18                                           12/05/2014
   process only applies for wind projects and, in fact, has been introduced in 2013 through
   splitting the originally planned capacity from wind BOO projects into 600MW IPPs and
   750MW BOO projects. The eventual developer will not sign a PPA with EETC, but rather
   is expected to sell power to eligible private customers, with a wheeling charge payable to
   EETC for use of the transmission system. NREA evaluates the bids based on technical and
   financial criteria and receives a flat compensation of 2% of the value of generated
   electricity for the site of land value, whichever is higher.

iii) Feed in Tariff (FiT): FiT regulations were passed in September 2014 that provide
     guaranteed wholesale tariffs and grid access for renewable energy projects under or
     equal 50 MW, with a total cap of 4,300 MW for the program. Private developers may use
     their own land, or else public sites that are allocated to private developers on a first-come
     first serve basis. A FiT unit has been created in EETC to manage the process and conducts
     a technical review of the project prior to commissioning and purchases the power under
     a PPA. However, for those projects using the FiT but which have to connect through the
     distribution system, there is no clear institutional arrangement established.

iv) EETC competitive tender (BOO): Since 2009, a dedicated unit within EETC runs a
    competitive tender for BOO projects (wind and solar) at sites among those allocated to it
    by NREA and where NREA has already conducted a pre-feasibility study. EETC selects the
    developer and purchases the power through a long-term PPA. However, the recent
    changes that relocated 600MW for NREA’s IPP program has led to several adjustments
    to the wind farms site master plan. The implication of these changes is yet to be
    determined, and therefore, a careful review is essential at this stage to avoid any adverse
    impact on the ongoing tenders.

v) EEHC competitive tender (IPPs): A dedicated unit within EEHC runs a competitive tender
   for IPP projects at sites it has identified as part of the long-term power generation plan.
   EEHC selects the developer, and EETC purchases the power under a PPA. Three projects
   are current planned in this process, Dairut (CCGT, 2,250MW), Aiaat (steam, 1,950MW),
   and Qena (steam, 1,300MW).

vi) PPP process (Ministry of Tourism): As dictated by the PPP Law of 2010, the Ministry
    selects the site and performs the pre-feasibility study, which must be approved by the
    Supreme Committee. The Ministry runs the tender with the assistance and approval of
    the PPP Central Unit (PPPCU) and selects the developer. The one project being
    considered under this framework does not plan to sell power to EETC, although there is
    no legal prohibition for doing so. NREA is also in the process of exploring the application
    the PPP procurement process in selected future projects.



                                             19                                            12/05/2014
   Exhibit-6. A comparison of the six approaches to private power in Egypt




   VI.    The Egypt PPP Regime

Legal Basis
       25.    Law number 67 of 2010 (the PPP Law), together with the associated Executive
   Regulations issued by Prime Minister’s Decree No.238 of 2011, established formal legal
   procedures for the procurement and establishment of contracts with private partners
   for the provision of infrastructure and public services. The law establishes a dedicated,
   cross-sectoral PPP unit (the PPPCU) that provides technical supervision to the ministries
   and a Supreme Committee that approves projects and monitors the allocation of funds to
   ensure financial obligations to private partners are fulfilled. While the PPP Law
   represents a significant departure from Egypt’s previous sector-specific concession
   agreements, it is important to note that its passage did not repeal existing concession
   laws. In order to qualify, PPP projects must have a total contract value of at least 100
                                          20                                         12/05/2014
   million EGP ($17.7 million) and involve a concession or off take agreement of five years
   or more in duration.
      26.     The PPP Law indicates a strong commitment on the part of GoE to private
   participation in the provision of public services. The law and its regulations contain a
   number of practices that can help ensure high-quality projects at competitive prices. It
   specifies a clear and systematic competitive procurement process that ensures high-
   quality feasibility studies, appropriate pre-qualifications, feasible technical and financial
   proposals, and a transparent selection process.

Relationship of PPP Process to Power Projects
Benefits of PPP process

       27.     As noted, the PPP process (annex-1) does not currently apply to power sector
   projects as EEHC and EETC, are not considered Administrative Authorities but rather
   government-owned companies. The process, however, would confer certain advantages
   to power projects if available but also contains provisions that are likely unnecessary or
   less relevant, as discussed below.
       28.     The process allows the MoF to seek professional advice to provide fiscal
   support (direct and/or contingent) to IPPs. It requires and funds the use of independent
   transaction advisors and establishes a process to ensure best firms are selected; as the
   PPPCU develops more experience with individual firms- as the case in several countries-
   it will be able to provide even further guidance as to the effectiveness and value of each.
   However, the sector technical knowledge remains in the respective government entity.
   The PPPCU provides guidance on a number of issues important to the ultimate
   bankability of the project, including:
   i) Project guarantees: The Law explicitly suggests (although does not mandate) that the
       MoF may guarantee the payments owed by the AA to the project company, as detailed
       in the Direct Agreements between the AA, the project company’, and the company’s
       financiers. MoF approval via the PPP process may also facilitate the process of
       obtaining sovereign guarantees for a project.

   ii) Lender step-in rights: The law indicates the importance of lender step-in rights,
       suggesting that Direct Agreements may also include provisions whereby lenders can
       assume the role of the project company or appoint a new investor in case of default.

   iii) Dispute Resolution: Disputes would be resolved through arbitration rather than
        through Egyptian courts. Under the new rule, arbitrations would be carried out at the
        Cairo International Arbitration Centre and be based on the regulations and
        procedures of the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law
        (UNCITRAL)
                                          21                                          12/05/2014
Limitations for power projects

       29.     The law, however, only extends to GoE organizations considered to be
   Administrative Authorities, typically only Line Ministries themselves, and thus does not
   apply to EEHC, EETC. Unlike most ministries for whom the PPP process was designed,
   EEHC and EETC have experience in tendering and monitoring private projects. As a
   result, the mandatory approval of every document may be unnecessary and could add a
   number of repetitive steps to the process. Other specific provisions, such as the sealed
   public sector comparator or the mandated 0.5% success fee, are not typical of power
   projects and could add significant expense and delay.
       30.     Instead, as most power projects (using a given generation technology) are
   relatively similar, the determination of how much power should be developed privately
   is taken on a sector-wide rather than project-by-project basis. For a similar reason, the
   approval of each individual project by the Supreme Committee may be revisited. The
   strict selection process may limit the options for tender design, as there are no provisions
   to bid multiple projects as part of an auction (as was done in South Africa, described
   below), nor to adjust the bid evaluation to a more sophisticated or dynamic process as
   the tendering authority gains experience.
       31.     Also, certain provisions to protect either government or private sector may
   not go far enough to ensure their intended purpose: for example, many power project
   developers will look for arbitration in a neutral site with an appropriate legal framework
   (often London or New York); on the other hand, there is no clear procedure to ensure the
   second-best proposal will be developed in case the initial winner is not able to reach
   financial closure (in particular given the timing of the return of the bid bond).

Relevant International Examples

       32.    Egypt is not unique in creating a PPP framework after several IPPs are in place,
   and retroactively trying to reconcile the PPP framework with the legal and regulatory
   framework specific to the power sector. Jordan, for instance, recently enacted a PPP Law
   that envisages covering the power sector, in particular for renewable energy. Jordan
   plans to develop guidelines and toolkits specifically for such projects.
       33.    Many other countries have prioritized private sector involvement in power
   generation over other infrastructure sectors (Pakistan, Colombia, Philippines, etc.). One
   of the reasons driving this is the interest of private investors in power generation —IPP
   are easier to ring fence and finance on a non-recourse basis, and the IPP model is less
   complex to replicate than a concession for a water system, or a toll road, or a port. By the
   time countries figure out that PPPs are worth pursuing in other sectors, the power sector

                                           22                                           12/05/2014
   has already advanced to a point in which they no longer favor PPPs, but a fully liberalized
   and privatized sector—more like telecoms.

International Best Practices

      34.     A quick review of global experience in PPPs shows that key requirements for
   successful PPPs include:
    An adequate enabling environment, which includes legal, regulatory and institutional
      capacity that are conducive to private sector involvement in key infrastructure
      sectors and public services through long-term contractual relationships with
      governments/public sector.

      Availability of long-term private and public capital (debt and equity) for financing of
       PPPs;

      Cost recovery tariffs or a well-structured and predictable subsidy mechanism

      Well-structured projects with a balanced risk allocation so as to meet public sector
       objectives whilst being attractive and bankable for the private sector; and

      Government capacity to implement PPPs and to manage the long-term contracts with
       private sector.

The Case of South Africa
       35.    In December 2010 the Government of South Africa (GoSA) established an
   Inter-Ministerial Committee (IMC) supported by an Inter-Departmental Task Team on
   Energy (IDTTE) to address security of electricity supply and long-term electricity price
   certainty to enable the private sector (as well as the lenders to Eskom) to invest and/or
   lend towards the development of new electricity infrastructure within an affordable
   price path.
       36.    The resulting Renewable Energy Independent Power Producer Procurement
   Program (REIPPPP) has successfully channeled substantial private sector expertise and
   investment into grid-connected renewable energy in South Africa at competitive prices.
   To date, a total of 64 projects have been awarded to the private sector, and the first
   projects are already in operation. Private sector investment totaling US$14 billion has
   been committed, and these projects will generate 3922 megawatt (MW) of renewable
   power.
       37.    The implementation of REIPPPP was done against an historical background of
   institutional shortcomings in the country’s energy sector. The Department of Energy
   (DOE) took control of the program. But DOE also recognized that, like Eskom, it had little
   institutional capacity to run a sophisticated, multi-project, multibillion-dollar
                                           23                                          12/05/2014
international competitive bidding process for renewable energy. As a consequence, DOE
sought the assistance of the National Treasury’s Public-Private Partnership (PPP) Unit to
manage the process. A small team of technical staff from DOE and the PPP Unit
established a project office, known as the DOE IPP unit, which functioned effectively
outside of the formal departmental structure of national government to act as a facilitator
for the REIPPPP process.
    38.    The key success factors in the REIPPPP included:
 The PPP Unit member of the team was familiar with private sector infrastructure
    project

   Dialogue with private sector counterparts on key REIPPPP design and
    implementation issues began almost immediately and continued throughout the
    process

   High standards were set and maintained throughout the bidding process, including
    security arrangements and transparent procurement procedures. Documentation
    was extensive, high quality, and readily available on a specially designed program
    website

   Professional management style was maintained throughout - efforts were made to
    meet most of the program’s announced deadlines

   By successfully accessing funding from sources like the Development Bank of
    Southern Africa (DBSA), donors, and a National Treasury jobs fund - the program was
    able to remain largely off the formal government budget through the first three
    bidding rounds.

   The program was exempt from PPP Regulations, given that Eskom was signing the
    PPAs (and Eskom being a corporate entity is exempt from the application of the PPP
    Regulations

   A final, very important aspect of the program’s management style involved the
    extensive use of private domestic and international advisers to design and help
    manage the program, review bids, and incorporate lessons learned into the program
    as it progressed through the bid rounds

Next steps:

   The program is now extended to include Independent Power Producer Procurement
    Program (IPPPP). In respect of base load/mid-merit capacity IPPs, targets are as
    follows in line with the IRP2010;


                                        24                                          12/05/2014
     2500 MW coal to be connected to the grid between 2014 and 2024;

     2652 MW natural gas (conventional i.e. natural gas and liquefied natural gas as well
      as unconventional gas such as shale gas and coal bed methane) to be connected to the
      grid between 2021 and 2025; and

     2609MW from imported hydro to be connected to the grid between 2022 and 2024.


  VII. Barriers to Private Participation in Egypt’s Power Sector

      39.    While both the Electricity and PPP legal frameworks encourage private sector
  participation in power generation, no IPP projects have been developed since 2003.
  Certain risks, whether project-specific or sector wide, may limit private sector interest
  or make commercial financing prohibitively expensive. Several issues are specific to
  private investment in power generation, whether thermal or renewable-based. Many of
  the issues listed below are interrelated (e.g. the regulator’s lack of independence
  increases the probability of below-cost pricing, which in turn increases the risk of utility
  non-payment). Nonetheless, the key barriers can be considered as follows:

Country Risks

      40.    Some issues are not specific to the power sector, but rather reflect political and
  economic considerations for any large investment in Egypt. In particular, the risk profile
  of the country has increased significantly since the Arab Spring; for example, a number
  of international developers were interested in wind projects prior to March 2011, but
  tenders were removed from circulation as the political situation grew unstable. Even
  now that political stability has been achieved, the lasting effect of multiple, rapid changes
  in government on an investors’ perception of political and regulatory risk will need to be
  considered.
      41.    In addition, Egypt’s deteriorating credit rating has limited private interest and
  increased costs of capital. This, coupled with the lack of liquidity in global financial
  markets, suggest that investors in Egypt may favor shorter terms and higher margins
  than are typically available in power generation. The credit rating has stabilized recently,
  however, and there are signs it may be raised. Recent currency devaluations also make it
  unlikely that foreign investors will accept payment in Egyptian pounds.

Institutional governance and capacity

     42.   Institutional roles: The current multiplicity of processes for procuring private
  power generation create overlapping and in many cases duplicative roles. NREA, EEHC

                                          25                                            12/05/2014
  and EETC are all authorized to release tenders for private renewable energy projects,
  with no clear indication of what would determine which agency is responsible in what
  cases. Creating separate, duplicate processes and building up the same technical capacity
  at multiple organizations is an inefficient use of GoE resources, and allowing multiple
  duplicative processes increases the risk to GoE that one of the other may not be designed
  to fairly balance risks and thus could either provide an undue advantage to the private
  sector or attract no private interest at all. In all cases, the specific activities to be carried
  out by GoE should be clearly assigned to an organization with the mandate and technical
  capacity to carry them out, and the mandates for each organization should reflect their
  skills and core functional role. In particular, allocating both the mandate to develop
  public projects and to competitively procure private projects can cause either a real or a
  perceived conflict of interest, as the private projects can be seen as direct competitors to
  their core business.
      43.     Regulatory independence: As currently structured, EgyptERA is functionally
  under the auspices of MERE; the Minister of Energy serves as the chairman of its board
  of directors and has the power to nominate up to seven additional board members. While
  this situation may give the regulator additional influence it might not otherwise enjoy, it
  also increases the possibility that regulatory decisions will be made on a political rather
  than technical basis. On a sector-wide level, political influence can lead to sudden changes
  in regulatory principles, for example tariff reductions that defy previously-established
  methodologies. The potential of political influence can also increase risks on a project
  level, for example by reducing the transparency of the licensing process.
      44.     Technical capacity: Currently all the units within MERE responsible for
  attracting private investment have limited experience or are severely understaffed.
  Multiple small teams comprise very few technical experts in each of EETC, EEHC and
  NREA. Some of these teams work with advisors but none has taken a private power plant
  to financial closure and successful commissioning since they were established in 2008.
  Even the PPPCU has seen high turnover in the past few years and has a small team with
  limited power sector experience (although more experience dealing with infrastructure
  investments and commercial lenders in recent years.)

Market risk

      45.    Power prices not based on technical, cost-based methodology: Although
  recent sector reforms have included substantial electricity price increases and fuel
  subsidy reform, retail tariffs do not allow utilities to adequately recover their costs, and
  there does not appear to be any technically-based price-setting methodology in place to
  guide the determination or approval of tariffs. EEHC’s average CPT-adjusted tariff yield
  declined over 50% between 1994 and 2011: the current level of average tariff revenue
  yield of about $0.035 billed covers only 40% of the economic cost..
                                            26                                             12/05/2014
    46.     As fuel costs increase and Egypt moves towards renewable energy, generation
costs may increase further: reaching the GoE target of cost reflective tariffs within 5 years
will require strong political will to further raise electricity prices, and to establish a clear
methodology to ensure they continue to rise if costs climb. Prices are currently set by
MERE, however, and the methodology for determining prices is not transparent.
EgyptERA does not have the regulatory authority to set or approve tariffs, whether retail
power tariffs or the wholesale prices received by generators. The agency’s mandate
includes ensuring that costs are fair to all parties and that power prices ensure a fair
return to utilities, but without jurisdiction over individual tariffs themselves, it is unclear
how this responsibility is exercised.
    47.     In addition, the lack of a tariff-setting methodology means that potential IPPs
must negotiate with EETC both the tariffs and the terms of the PPA. This adds time to the
development process as well as considerable uncertainty to developers and financiers,
as IPPs are at the mercy of EETC decisions which are not known in advance and whose
basis may not be entirely clear.
    48.     Utility credit risk: In part due to the setting of electricity prices below costs, it
is not clear that EETC will have sufficient revenues to serve as a fully reliable off-taker of
power for the period that would be covered by any bankable PPA. As of 2011, EEHC (and
now presumably, EETC) suffered both from declining profitability and significant cash
flow obligations (both due to rising costs and large long-term debts to other GoE
agencies, which may have partially accounted for the company’s positive, albeit thin,
profit margins in previous years). Combined with increasing leverage ratios and an
ambitious investment plan, developers and lenders may not be certain that power
generated will be purchased and paid for in a timely fashion. In this case, external project-
level guarantees will be necessary to minimize the risk of default and provide comfort to
lenders. The subsidy reform package announced in July is a step in the right direction,
but EETC is still far from breaking even on revenue alone.
    49.     EEHC’s internal management and governance does not adhere to international
best practices. In addition, dispatch based on factors other than cost increase overall
generation costs. The form of competition envisioned in the draft Electricity Law could
address both issues, although a thorough cost of service study, if it has not already been
done, would be important to identify the true impact of each, and thus the likely efficiency
gains from competition.
    50.     Sovereign guarantees: In many countries, the risk of utility non-payment is off-
set by sovereign guarantees from a separate, solvent, government body with a mandate
and commitment to make up any shortfall from the utility. Such sovereign guarantees
were provided by the Central Bank of Egypt (CBE) to the three existing IPPs, helping
facilitate their development. However, since the new Banking Law No. 82 restricted CBE
guarantees to “public juristic entities” in 2003, CBE is no longer legally allowed to provide

                                          27                                             12/05/2014
  sovereign guarantees to EEHC (a private juristic entity) or its affiliated companies. In
  2013, a law was passed that gives the MoF explicit authority to guarantee EEHC and its
  affiliates, but the language of the initially proposed MoF guarantees included total
  liability limits that significantly undermined their value. Two guarantees were
  announced by the MoF, namely, US$2.5 billion for the Dairut IPP, and US$660 million for
  the first 250 MW wind BOO project Cost uncertainty
      51.     Currency risk: While the three existing IPPs were protected from local
  currency risk, it is not clear whether the same protection will apply to future projects.
  Given the history of devaluation, requiring the private sector to take all currency risk
  would severely constrain private investment, likely limiting interest only to domestic
  companies.
      52.     Fuel supply and price (thermal only): In part due to generous subsidies that
  contribute to consumption inefficiencies, there are concerns regarding the long-term
  supply of natural gas and liquid fuels. As a result, private thermal producers will likely
  require contractual arrangements that shift at least some of the risk of price increases
  either to the consumer (via tariff increases) or the fuel supplier (via long-term purchase
  contracts). If physical availability is an issue, project lenders may also require the off-
  taker (or another GoE body) to guarantee a certain payment level if the plants need to
  curtail generation due to a lack of fuel.

Renewables

      53.    All the issues mentioned above (except fuel supply) are as relevant to
  renewable energy projects as to thermal, and many affect renewables even more as the
  sector has higher technical risk to begin with. However, renewables face unique
  challenges of their own, and additional barriers must be addressed to encourage their
  development. In addition to the NREA institutional overlaps already discussed, these
  include:
      54.    Price Incentives: While NREA currently has the mandate to competitively
  tender renewable energy projects, there is not yet a price incentive mechanism in place
  to help compensate IPPs for the relatively higher cost of renewable energy generation.
  Under a competitive (price-based) tender, financial support would need to be made
  available to the off-taking utility – or else passed on to the end user. Under a feed-in tariff
  regime, prices for certain types of projects (typically smaller projects) are established in
  advance, and the price paid by the off-taker can be directly supplemented by another
  funding source.
      55.    Guaranteed dispatch: As the output of most renewable energy projects varies
  with the strength of the resource and is not under the operator’s control, renewable IPPs
  typically require guarantees that all (or at least most) of their output will be purchased,
  regardless of when it is generated (i.e. priority dispatch), and even if the grid operator
                                           28                                             12/05/2014
has more cost-effective options available. In the case of projects not competitively
tendered (e.g. developed via a feed-in tariff), projects will also need certainty that they
will be connected to the grid.
    56.    Land allocation: For renewable projects, it is not clear what sites will be
allocated to what processes and on what basis decisions will be made. In practice, it is
understood that the majority of the sites expected to be developed by the private sector,
whether through competitive tenders or feed-in tariffs, will be located on land currently
owned by NREA, with the rest coming from a wide range of public land sources. Given
that NREA has to reserve sites for its own developments (and other agencies for their
own uses), it is not clear to potential developers what land will be available for their use
nor how they are expected to identify and choose their preferred sites. The same may
hold true for EETC regarding sites available for them to tender. It is understood that
NREA will prepare a Master Plan which should be designed to clearly resolve these
issues.


VIII. The Draft Electricity Law
   57.     Some, but not all, of the barriers mentioned above could be addressed by the
draft Electricity Law under consideration, and accompanying secondary legislation. The
proposed law has been endorsed by the Cabinet and has been in front of Parliament since
2008, but has yet to be approved. The Law was drafted by the EgyptERA with support
from bilateral agencies and international consulting organizations. The law proposes
Egypt adopt many of the key elements of competitive power markets, including:

i) Bilateral contracts for “eligible consumers”

ii) Third party access to the transmission network

iii) EETC to become an independent Transmission System Operator (TSO), responsible
     for system operation, market operations, and system planning

iv) EgyptERA regulatory approval of monopoly tariffs

v) Transparent and internationally accepted tariff methodology

vi) Updated grid code (although a new grid code is expected to be published in 2014)

    58.     The structure of the market provides for a transition period during which the
existing (regulated) market co-exists with a competitive market (exhibit-7). More
specifically, three stages are envisioned:

i) Stage 1: A mixed market with some bilateral contracts and a regulated market served
   by economic dispatch. The TSO is separated from EEHC and takes the role of the
                                    29                                          12/05/2014
     dispatcher and balancing market operator; high voltage consumers become eligible
     for bilateral contracts; a publicly-traded company buys electricity to resell to
     distribution companies.

  ii) Stage 2: Once Stage 1 has achieved stable operations, the pool of eligible customers
      will expand; balancing is priced-based on market mechanism, and private generators
      can compete.

  iii) Stage 3: Full competition, perceived to be 8 to 10 years into the future. All customers
       can freely negotiate prices with generators in the competitive market, or opt to
       remain in the regulated market subject to regulated prices. Balancing service will be
       provided by the Transmission System Operator at market prices (E.G.: through a
       Power Exchange).

                      Exhibit-7: Competitive and Regulated Power Market




Treatment of Renewable Energy

      59.    The new draft law includes important provisions that will determine how the
  next phase of renewable development proceeds. The law sets out the procedures for the
  construction of grid-connected renewables and the compensation of EETC for the
  purchase of power at higher prices than alternatives. Renewable IPPs are envisioned
  mostly on the BOO (Build-Own-Operate) concept in predetermined sites where wind and
  solar measurements have been carried out before the bidding. Targets are set by the
  Supreme Council of Energy in view of: demand growth, supply growth, and the feasibility
  of alternative energies. GoE, represented by MERE has to fulfil the obligation.


                                          30                                           12/05/2014
     60.    Article 45 of the draft law sets out the process for the procurement of
electricity generated by renewable plants. It provides for several options combining
competitive bidding and feed-in tariff, with the latter targeting (initially) projects smaller
than 50 MWs. Under the competitive bidding system NREA may call for tenders for the
construction and operation of plants to sell electric power to the EETC at a rate proposed
by the regulatory agency and approved by the Cabinet. Alternatively EETC, in
coordination with NREA, can call for public tenders to build, own, and operate plants
under which the successful bidder will agree to a power purchase agreement with EETC.
It is intended, but not specified in the law, that the domestic content will be a part of the
criteria for selection. It is also foreseen that investors may, of their own volition, build
plants and sell to EETC on the basis of a standard PPA of a take-or-pay character valid for
15 years, approved, and announced by the Cabinet.
     61.    Article 46 obliges the holders of transmission and distribution licenses to
connect renewable generators to their own network and to cover the corresponding
investment needed for strengthening them
     62.    Articles 47 - 50 provide for a fund, to be named the "Fund for Development of
Power Generation from Renewable Energies", established by and affiliated to the cabinet
of ministers. The purpose of the Fund is to compensate EETC for the purchase of electric
power from the renewable generators. The Fund will be financed mainly from allocations
of the public budget of the State. The Fund's statutes and governance are to be set by
Decree.


IX.    Renewable Energy Investment Law and Feed-in Tariffs
     63.   A new law currently under consideration by the State Council would provide
additional incentives for investment in renewable energy. A draft of the law is under
preparation, but it is understood a key provision will be to legally implement the
recently-developed feed-in tariff scheme for wind and PV projects under 50 MW, up to a
total cap of 4,300 MW.
     64.   According to discussions with the GoE, the FiT will provide for guaranteed
dispatch, 20 year PPAs for wind and 25-year for solar, and tariff revisions no more than
every two years. The offtaker will be EETC for projects between 500 kW-50 MW, and the
relevant distribution company for projects under 500 kW. Projects are defined as being
on a single (presumably contiguous) site with a single substation connection, on land
either belonging to the developer or leased from a GoE entity through a standardized
usufruct agreement.
     65.   The land owner will receive 2% of the value of the energy as compensation for
the land, but it is not clear what basis specific parcels of land will be identified or defined.
It is understood that, at least for large wind projects, the assumed energy generated for
the purposes of calculating the land fee will be subject to a minimum level implying a
                                          31                                             12/05/2014
   capacity factor of approximately 51%. Much of the land is expected to come from NREA,
   although it is worth noting that it will thus be required to determine the land allocation
   between its own projects, EETC competitive tenders, and feed-in tariff projects. Also
   unclear is whether NREA will receive additional compensation for land where it has
   already performed resource assessments or pre-feasibility studies. In addition, it will be
   important to understand whether standard PPAs have been developed or are under
   consideration, and whether any form of project guarantees are envisioned (and if these
   include sovereign guarantees, whether MoF was consulted in the determination of the
   total capacity cap and rates and is prepared to assume the contingent liabilities they
   entail).


   X.      Measures to Address Barriers and Ensure Sustainability of
           Private Investments in the Power Sector


       66.    Included below are a suite of options to help in addressing the barriers to
   establishing a comprehensive and systematic approach needed to attract private
   investment in the power sector. To the extent the report describes certain specific actions
   or institutional arrangements, these not meant as firm recommendations but rather
   possible approaches requiring further consideration, deliberation, and feedback from
   respective stakeholders.
a) Define institutional roles and build capacity
       67.    Clearly defining the methods of private power procurement and the respective
   roles and abilities of each GoE body (as well as the private developer) will help allocate
   GoE resources efficiently, predict and monitor GoE liabilities and risk, and provide a clear,
   scalable process that attracts high-quality projects.
   1. Clear and distinct mandates: Specifically, GoE would benefit from carefully
       considering which agencies are best placed to execute each public-sector activity in
       the process of procuring private development, including those listed below. The first
       step in the process could involve a review of existing legislation to define and
       circumscribe existing mandates and identify overlaps or gaps.
    Identify sites and lease land
    Perform pre-feasibility studies
    Conduct public tenders and select developers
    Negotiate PPA terms and tariffs
    Develop retail and wholesale tariff methodology and approve final tariffs
    Implement renewable energy incentives
    Administrate renewable energy support funds

                                            32                                           12/05/2014
   Develop permitting process and award licenses for resource exploration and
    development, power generation, and supply
 Develop the grid codes
 Develop standardized contracts and agreements (e.g. PPAs, system use agreements,
    RFPs
1.1 It may be appropriate to have multiple organizations collaborate on a single process,
    or to have more than one approach operating in parallel, but in all cases the roles of
    the agencies in each process must be clear, and the purpose of each approach clearly
    targeted to meet a specific and unique objective. For example, it would be practical to
    design a unique process for private generators who plan to sell directly to commercial
    or industrial customers, as the involvement of -- and risks to – GoE may be much
    lower.
1.2 In addition to the commercial responsibilities described above, MERE has a
    responsibility to conduct technical work in renewable energy, including research and
    development, pre-feasibility studies, resource mapping, technical certification. It is
    worth noting that the technical and commercial skill sets are substantially different,
    and it is rare that a single agency would be expected to both serve as a technology and
    research center and also develop its own commercially competitive projects.
2. Conflict of interest: In addition to a lack of clarity, dual mandates that raise the
    potential for conflict of interest may discourage investment or lead to lower-quality
    projects and/or higher final costs of power. For example, two authorities currently
    responsible for attracting private investment to their competitively-tendered
    renewable projects (EETC and NREA) are also responsible for developing generation
    facilities. NREA in particular is also responsible for determining which sites it
    develops in house (or via a joint venture; whereby NREA may end up carrying the
    same risks as if it were developing the project entirely on its own) and which are
    eligible for private development, either via the FIT or an EETC competitive tender.
    Given that project development is likely a much greater source of revenue than
    leasing land, this could pose a significant conflict of interest.
3. Relation to PPP framework: One particular element that must be considered is the
    role of the PPP Law and PPPCU in the power sector. As described in Section III, the
    PPP framework identifies a number of good practices, and the staff within the PPPCU
    can bring unique skills- experience, and relationships to improve the competitive
    process – and likewise, the unique power sector experience within EEHC and EETC
    can strengthen the PPP process. However,certain elements of the PPP Law may not
    be best suited to power projects. Given that the key entities in the power sector are
    not currently bound by the law, a simple solution may be to agree to follow select
    steps in the formal PPP process or include members from the PPPCU in the
    development and management of power sector tenders. On the other hand, power-

                                        33                                          12/05/2014
      specific guidelines could be adopted that adapt the PPP Law and Executive
      Regulations to the unique circumstances of the power sector or describe a new
      process that shares certain elements with the PPP framework.
   4. Technical capacity: In addition to clarifying organizational responsibilities and
      minimizing duplication, GoE could support strong leadership and capacity-building
      efforts in the relevant institutions. This could come through a mix of training and the
      strategic hiring of both staff and advisors. The most urgently needed technical
      competencies are those related to commercial and financial expertise to run effective
      competitive tenders and ensure good projects at fair prices, including project finance,
      project management and financial analysis skills. Also highly valuable would be
      dedicated point person who can bring together the required competencies and be
      given both the responsibility and resources to bring projects to close.
   5. Dedicated unit: One specific option may be to identify a single, dedicated unit
      responsible for competitive private power generation. Such a unit could take on the
      role of developing tender documents and project contracts, promoting opportunities
      and attracting bidders, managing the tender process, and awarding projects (similar
      to the dedicated IPP unit described in the South Africa example above). Such a unit
      would look to incorporate the wider range of expertise currently found across GOE
      and could integrate staff from EEHC, EETC, the PPPCU, NREA, and other agencies as
      appropriate. Such a unit would almost certainly benefit from the assistance of
      international transaction advisors, including teams of legal and technical consultants,
      but the ultimate decision-making authority would remain within GoE. In addition, the
      engagement of the best international experts could prove an effective way to build
      capacity “on the job” within the new unit.
   6. Regulatory independence: Separate from the considerations of the procurement
      process itself, EgyptERA’s institutional position as part of MERE reduces its ability to
      make difficult political decisions, including raising retail tariffs to ensure EEETC can
      recover its costs and remain financially viable in the long run. This could result either
      in lower private sector appetite for investment, higher financing costs, or the
      prolonged need for sovereign guarantees, While the draft Electricity Law would for
      the first time vest tariff approval authority with EgyptERA, it does not address the
      regulator’s dependence upon MERE leadership for final oversight.




b) Ensure access to project guarantees
      68.    Under the IPP model with long-term PPAs, external project guarantees can
   provide additional security to developers. In cases where off-taker payment abilities are


                                           34                                           12/05/2014
   uncertain, such as in Egypt, one or more guarantees will likely be a critical element to
   obtain commercial debt and keep project costs competitive.
   1. Sovereign guarantees: As discussed above, CBE no longer has the ability to provide
      sovereign guarantees to EEHC and its affiliates. As a result, MoF will almost certainly
      need to provide sovereign guarantees on all projects above a nominal size. The
      provision of sovereign guarantees requires balancing the requirements for private
      investors against the cost of long-term government fiscal commitments. On a project-
      by-project basis, MoF will need to legally commit to guaranteeing EETC payments in
      the event the utility defaults, as well as establish clear procedures to define defaults
      and determine how and when funds would be set aside and transferred to the IPP.
      While such conditions can be negotiated individually in each PPA, a publicly-
      communicated policy applicable to all projects would do far more to attract private
      interest in the sector. On the other hand, offering guarantees to more projects than
      necessary, or to particularly risky projects, can result in MoF being financially
      responsible for significant cash outlays over 15-20 years for energy that is no longer
      the most cost-effective option. Therefore, MoF must work closely with MERE to
      determine which projects should be developed privately and thus be eligible for MOF
      guarantees. One possible approach is for the tendering authority to work hand in
      hand with staff members from the PPPCU (for example as part of the type of joint
      dedicated unit described above) which could evaluate the requests for such
      guarantees and advise the MOF on their need, scale and justification; as well as inform
      the MOF on the cumulative magnitude created by providing these guarantees. PPPCU
      approval could even be required before guarantees would be issued.
   2. External guarantees: Project risks can also be addressed with additional guarantees
      provided by external parties. The World Bank Group in particular can make available
      different guarantees and risk mitigation instruments from. Both the World Bank
      (WB) Multi-lateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) guarantees are proven
      valuable tools in developing countries through attracting high quality project
      developers and reducing costs of capital, helping to ensure projects are effective and
      affordable.

c) Establish clear, replicable tender process and bankable project documents

       69.    The Government of Egypt has shown a commitment to increasing the role of
   the private sector in power generation, and has adopted the best practice of competitive
   tenders as its primary (although not only) selection mechanism.
   1. International Best Practices: For thermal projects, it is best practice to competitively
       select developers through tenders, based (at least in part) on proposed tariff. For
       renewable projects, developers can either be selected competitively, or (for smaller

                                           35                                          12/05/2014
   projects) unsolicited proposals can be approved and licensed on the basis of a feed-
   in tariff. With the introduction of the new feed-in tariff regulations and renewable
   energy law, both processes will exist in Egypt. In all cases, the procurement process
   itself must be run according to international standards, and based on principles such
   as nondiscrimination, efficiency, accountability, risk sharing, and fiscal responsibility.
   Tender documents must include well-formulated eligibility and selection criteria,
   clear financial proposal guidelines, safeguards against conflicts of interest and fraud,
   and environmental and social protection measures. For renewable projects, tenders
   can include a number of provisions that are of particular importance to renewable
   development and can help reduce the cost differential with fossil-fuel plants,
   including pre-acquired permits for land allocation, usufruct lease agreements, initial
   environmental assessments prepared, reduced customs duties, long-term PPAs, and
   guaranteed dispatch. Many of these provisions are in place or planned, either in
   existing tenders or the new FIT process.

2. Standard, replicable tender process: A standardized tender process, with transparent
   and predictable stages and evaluation criteria will provide certainty to the market
   and greatly streamline the competitive bid process. The initial process must be
   developed with broad consultation within government and from potential bidders
   and their lenders, and must get the necessary approvals. Following projects, however,
   can then be bid out quickly and will full confidence that the documents and processes
   are appropriate and supported, saving time and GoE resources. If, for example, a
   dedicated IPP unit were established, one of its first tasks could be to develop such a
   process. As discussed above, the standardized tender process may include certain
   elements from the existing PPP process, as agreed by the EEHC, EETC and the PPPCU.
3. Standardized bankable contracts: A model PPA that follows international best
   practice provides a high degree of risk certainty to private developers and can greatly
   reduce negotiation time. It can also be useful for developers to arrange their financing
   quickly and at the lowest cost. For large IPPs, a certain degree of flexibility to
   negotiate individual terms is likely in the interest of both parties, but a fully
   standardized PPA may be appropriate for smaller renewable energy projects. Model
   documents could include both PPAs and associated project documents (e.g. fuel
   supply contracts, land usufruct agreements, project guarantees). In all cases, all
   project documents must allocate risks clearly between the parties involved in
   language that is precise and legally binding. Statements of intent or those that leave
   any room for alternate interpretations will rarely be sufficient to give developers –
   and especially lenders – the confidence to proceed with a project. Model contracts
   must be developed in a collaborative process between GoE and private stakeholders
   with the input from experienced technical, financial and legal advisors.

                                        36                                            12/05/2014
   4. Provide GoE equity in priority projects already identified: Developing a standard
      tender process and documents may take 1-2 years, a number of high-priority projects
      planned for private development are already in the planning or tender stage. It would
      not necessarily be in the best interests of Egypt to suspend all projects while a new
      process is developed. One option that may be considered, if strong private interest is
      not seen for certain projects, could be for GoE to provide a limited amount of equity
      (minority stake) in the project company. This could help provide comfort to
      developers and lenders while still leaving most of the project financing to the private
      sector. It would need to be clear, however, that such an approach would only be
      considered as an interim solution until fully bankable documents are prepared.

d) Continue to implement tariff and subsidy reform
       70.       The principles of cost-reflective tariffs are essential for the long-term viability
   of the sector and for attracting sustainable private investment. Developers and lenders
   need to be certain that the counterparty to their PPA (EETC) will have the funds available
   to fulfill its payment obligations for the duration of the contract. The ideal way to ensure
   this is for retail tariffs to cover the full cost of generation and supply. As long as sufficient
   revenues are channeled back to EETC to cover its own costs, then prospective investors
   can be comfortable that the off-taker is creditworthy and can pay its debts.
       71.       A significant package of tariff increases and subsidy reforms was announced
   in July 2014, sending a positive signal to the market that GoE is aware of the importance
   of cost-reflective tariffs to the sustainability of the sector. Nevertheless, current tariff
   levels are still substantially below cost, and the reform did not include an schedule or
   automatic trigger for further increases to eventually reach (and maintain) cost-recovery
   levels. In addition, since implementing full cost-recovery tariffs is politically challenging
   and can cause significant cost of living increases among those least able to afford them,
   certain social protection subsidies will be needed appropriate. Given the high proportion
   of subsides that accrue to the middle and upper income populations, a well-considered
   communication strategy also may be beneficial in increasing public acceptance. In either
   case, as much as possible, implicit subsidies such as fuel price reductions should be
   replaced with an explicit, transparent subsidy to directly offset low-income consumers’
   electricity expenditures.
       72.       In the short term, before the tariff reform process is complete, IPPs still need
   to be certain that EETC will have sufficient funds available to pay for the power it
   purchases. If these funds will not come from consumer tariffs, then then GoE should make
   clear the source and amount of available supplemental funding or subsidies, as well as
   the process required for EETC to obtain them. Likely, some form of external guarantee
   will also be needed.


                                              37                                             12/05/2014
      73.     Improve EEHC/EETC financial position. In addition, a number of measures are
   needed, such as restructuring EEHC debt to National Investment Bank of Egypt (NIB),
   writing off much of its accounts payables to increase working capital, and granting a
   grace period on new loans. To the extent such measures have been taken, it would be
   valuable to assess their impact on EETC’s key financial indicators and whether they have
   been sufficient.

e) Enact the draft Electricity Law and develop secondary regulations

       74.    In general, the draft Electricity Law provides a good basis to attract investment
   in IPPs. As discussed above, it addresses a number of key issues that currently stand in
   the way of large scale private investment in the power sector, most critically a fixed tariff-
   setting methodology and support mechanisms for renewable energy projects. As the
   draft Law has been drafted and is in front of Parliament in its current form, it is assumed
   that altering individual provisions would not be feasible at this time. As a result, it is
   suggested that the draft Law be passed quickly and in current form, with any additional
   remaining barriers or uncertainties dealt with on an individual basis after enactment, or
   where possible, through the Executive Regulations.
       75.    However, it is recommended to carry out a more detailed review of the draft
   Law in view of both the legislation that has been passed since its first drafting and the
   new Government’s goals and objectives. Particular emphasis should be placed on the
   Executive Regulations which accompany the Law and specify its implementation in more
   detail. The particulars of such Regulations will go a long way towards defining the
   allocation of risks and costs between GoE and the private sector, and as such will shape
   whether the sector ultimately attracts investment. Examples of Regulations likely to be
   necessary include:
    Precise tariff-setting methodology and regulatory approval process (including the
       authority to refuse non-conforming tariffs)
    Open access/use-of-system regulations (e.g. defining eligible customers,
       transmission charges, contractual relationships between EETC and distribution
       companies)
    TSO charter
    Grid code, including allocation of connection and grid upgrade costs
    Feed in tariff regulation (specifying both tariff levels and grid connection/dispatch
       principles)
    Renewable energy licensing procedures
    Energy efficiency standards and incentives
       76.    A number of studies that provide, information, options and recommendations
   will be required to inform the drafting of Regulations, and it may be useful to have some
                                            38                                            12/05/2014
   completed (or at least begun) before the passage of the draft Electricity Law. Studies
   could address, if they have not already been done, cost of service calculations, the tariff-
   calculation methodology, an assessment of transmission and fuel supply bottlenecks, the
   design of social protection subsidies, the design of the renewable energy support fund,
   feed-in tariff levels, transmission charges, or the phasing of competitive markets.

f) Provide additional support to renewable energy and energy efficiency
       77.      In addition to the policies articulated in the draft Electricity Law, a number of
   additional measures could be taken to support the development of renewable energies,
   including cogeneration and captive power, as well as energy efficiency and demand side
   management. Renewable energy support could range from direct tax or investment
   incentives to enforceable RE generation or consumption mandates. The latter could be
   facilitated through a tradable renewable certificate market, allowing flexibility and
   minimizing the overall costs of compliance. Similarly, regulations that encourage the sale
   of captive renewable generation such as rooftop solar panels to sell power back to the
   grid (e.g. net metering or energy banking regulations).
       78.      Energy efficiency measures in particular can help reduce consumption and
   improve EETC’s financial position over time, either through the promulgation of
   efficiency minimum standards, incentives for reduced energy consumption, or technical
   support to identify and finance opportunities to increase efficiency (e.g. through energy
   use audits). Demand side management, for example by encouraging power usage at off-
   peak times, is another important tool to reduce generation costs and improve power
   reliability.




                                            39                                            12/05/2014
XI.   A Blueprint for Gradual Transformation to a New Commercial
      Framework




                             40                              12/05/2014
41   12/05/2014
Annex-1 PPP Law: Project Selection, Tendering and Contracting


The PPP Law and Executive Regulations set forth a clear and legally binding process for the
selection of projects, tendering of bids, and selection of awards. The key steps are detailed
below:

1. The Administrative Authority (AA) prepares, “under the supervision” of the PPPCU, a
   feasibility study incorporating technical, economic, environmental, social, legal,
   financial aspects, as well as rules and conditions to ensure a high-quality project. The
   study, related project data, information and explanations, and the PPPCU’s
   recommendations, are submitted to the Supreme Committee for approval.

2. Upon approval, the AA has the option to manage the tender itself or delegate the
   process entirely to the PPPCU. The remainder of the process assumes the tender is run
   by the AA.

3. The PPPCU competitively selects and procures independent transaction advisors
   according to principles and criteria specified in the Executive Regulations.

4. The AA prepares an information memorandum with general project information, which
   must be approved by the PPPCU.

5. The PPPCU determines if an Expression of Interest (EOI) is necessary. If so, the AA
   prepares the EOI, which must be approved by the PPPCU.

6. The AA creates a pre-qualification document and draft invitation for pre-qualification,
   which must be approved by the PPPCU

7. The AA publicizes the invitation in a manner specified in the Executive Regulations

8. The AA reviews submissions for pre-qualification and determines preferred bidders.
   Rejected bidders can appeal directly to the PPPCU, which is entitled but not required to
   consult with the AA in its final decision.

9. The AA forms a committee to prepare tender, including at least one member of the
   PPPCU

10. The committee drafts the tender documents, which must include heads of terms of the
    PPP contract. The PPP Law outlines the substantive provisions required in a PPP
    agreement, which include the sale price, regulatory risk, termination rights and
    compensation, insurance, and quality control. Other mandatory provisions include a bid
    fee (capped at 255 he cost of preparing the tender) and a bid bond. The tender
    document and PPP agreement must be approved by the PPPCU.
                                           42                                        12/05/2014
11. PPPCU develops and maintains a website dedicated to the project that serves as the
    data room for the tender

12. The AA and the PPPCU must provide an estimated public sector comparator cost (minus
    financial cost). The AA estimates the technical portion, and is required to hire a
    technical advisor to assist. The PPPCU adds the costs of financing and additional factors
    unique to privately-developed projects. – requires hiring technical advisor. This
    estimate must be approved by the Supreme committee and is sealed until after the bids
    are opened.

13. The AA has the option to elect a two-phase approach to the bid process, with the first
    phase a non-binding technical and financial bid, after which the AA may hold
    competitive dialogue meetings with bidders and request clarification or additional
    information. All bids in the second phase are final and binding.

14. The bidding process must be a sealed, two-envelope bid. Technical proposals are
    opened and evaluated first, and the committee disqualifies any non-compliant technical
    proposals. Technically disqualified bidders may appeal to committee comprising the
    Minister of Finance, the Head of PPPCU, two deputies to the President of the State
    Council, and one outside expert.

15. Once all technical appeals are resolved, the committee opens the financial bids.
    Proposals may evaluated either on a purely financial basis or by weighting technical
    and financial criteria.

16. All bid bonds for non-selected proposals are returned within one day after the financial
    envelopes are opened.

17. Following selection, the AA must provide a copy of all contracts to the all contracts to
    the sector regulator, form a committee to monitor construction and quality of service,
    and issue AA issues a certificate accepting the quality standards of the works, or
    products or services provided, before which no payment can be made.




                                           43                                           12/05/2014
