                                98719




Right to Information
RECENT SPRE AD OF RTI LEGISL ATION
               By Toby Mendel




          POLICY NOTE
RIGHT TO INFORMATION SERIES
The Right to Information Series brings forward current and ongoing research on issues
related to transparency and the right to information. It aims to provide a range of information
on policy, practice, experience, and frontier issues related to public sector openness and
transparency, including the underlying functions and outcomes of open government efforts.

Project leader and Right to Information Series General Editor: Victoria Lemieux,
vlemieux@worldbank.org

Titles in the Right to Information Series

Right to Information: Case Studies on Implementation (2014), edited by Stephanie E. Trapnell
Right to Information: Requests and Appeals Data in RTI Systems (2014), by Jesse Worker
with Carole Excell
Right to Information: Recent spread of RTI legislation (2014), by Toby Mendel
Right to Information: Identifying Drivers of Effectiveness in Implementation (2014),
by Stephanie E. Trapnell

DISCLAIMER – WORLD BANK

© 2014 The World Bank
1818 H Street NW Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do
not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any
territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

RIGHTS AND PERMISSIONS

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the
Office of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA;
fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

AVAILABILITY

This paper is available online at http://www.worldbank.org/publicsector/gpa/transparency.
Contents

Executive summary. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Historical Trajectory.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Normative and Legal Developments. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Key General Drivers for Right to Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Levers for Change at the National Level. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Key Challenges. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Notes.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Toby Mendel is the Executive Director of the Centre for Law and Democracy.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The generous support of the Nordic Trust Fund is acknowledged as having made this study
possible.
                                                     Right to Information
         Recent Spread of RTI Legislation


Executive summary
In the last 20 years, there has been a massive growth in the number of national laws giving indi-
viduals the right to access information held by public bodies (right to information or RTI laws).
The number of countries with such laws has grown from 19 mostly Western democracies in
1995, to some 100 today from all regions of the world. Furthermore, the strength of these laws,
as measured by the extent to which they reflect international standards, has increased signifi-
cantly during this period. Over approximately the same period, RTI has come to be recognized
as a human right under international law, a significant normative development.
     The main global drivers for these changes include the accessibility of the idea behind RTI,
namely that governments hold information not for themselves but on behalf of the wider pub-
lic, growing demands for participation, globalization and changing relations with information
wrought by new information technologies. At the national level, political dynamics also play an
important role, along with international pressure and strong civil society campaigns.
     Despite these positive developments, challenges remain, including the over one-half of the
world’s countries that do not have RTI laws and significant policy-practice or implementation
gaps in many countries with such laws.



Introduction
Laws giving individuals a right to access information held by public bodies, commonly referred
to as the right to information (RTI), are now in force in nearly 100 countries globally. This
paper discusses the recent dramatic growth in the number of these laws, and presents some
theories to explain this development. Originally often referred to as freedom of information
laws (Australia, Norway, United States) or access to information or documents laws (Canada,
Colombia, Denmark), a more recent trend (starting with India in 2005) has been to use the
title RTI laws, reflecting the recognition of RTI as a human right. RTI is a key part of the overall
global trend towards more open government, which includes other elements such as protec-
tion of whistleblowers, providing access to databases in open formats (open data) and requir-
ing senior officials to make asset declarations.


                                                                                                      1
2                                    RIGHT TO INFORMATION: RECENT SPREAD OF RTI LEGISLATION




     Historical Trajectory
     Sweden was the first country in the world to adopt a law giving individuals the right to access
     information held by public bodies, in 1766. It took nearly two centuries before the next law
     was adopted in Finland in 1951. By 1995, only 19 countries around the world had adopted
     what have come to be known as RTI laws. The 15 years from 1980 to 1995 witnessed new RTI
     laws being adopted at an average rate of less than one per year. However, in the wake of the
     revolutions in Central and Eastern Europe in the 1990s and democratization processes in other
     regions, the rate more than quintupled for the next 15 years and appears set to keep that pace
     as 2015 approaches (see Figure 1). Furthermore, while all but four of the first 19 countries were
     Western democracies, the next 79 have been distributed over every region of the world (see
     Table 1 and Figure 2).
         In terms of geographic spread of RTI laws, in 1995, the vast majority (nearly 80 percent)
     had been adopted by Western democracies. Eastern Europe led the way over the next
     decade, with 20 countries adopting RTI laws, representing nearly one-half of all of the new laws
     adopted during this period. Six more Western countries also adopted laws so that, by 2005,
     only a few countries in Europe were still without RTI laws. Between 1995 and 2005, Asia and the
     Americas each added about 10 new laws. Progress in Africa was somewhat more modest, with
     just four new RTI laws over this period. The first law in the Middle East and North Africa came
     in 2007 (Jordan), and the region now boasts three RTI laws. Progress has continued more or
     less apace in Asia and the Americas since 2005 (seven and eight new laws, respectively, in eight
     years), while Africa appears to be picking up steam, with eight new laws in that period (see
     Figure 2 for a graphic representation of the growth of laws broken down by region).1
         The quality of RTI laws has generally been improving over time, as measured by the RTI
     Rating, a methodology for assessing the strength of the legal framework for RTI.2 The Rat-
     ing is based on 61 indicators spread over seven main categories and drawn from established
     international standards and better national practice. There has been a fairly steady and marked
     increase in the quality of RTI laws over time (see Figure 3). The average law adopted by 1995
     scored only 76 out of a possible total of 150 points on the Rating, increasing to an average




     FIGURE 1: Chronological Development of RTI Laws

                 120

                 100

                   80

                   60

                   40

                   20

                    0
                        80




                                     94

                                     96

                                     98

                                     00

                                     02

                                     04

                                     06

                                     08

                                     10

                                     12

                                     13
                             82

                                    84

                                     86

                                     88

                                     90

                                     92
                     19




                                  19

                                  19

                                  19

                                  19

                                  19

                                  19

                                  19

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20

                                  20
                          19

                               19




     Source: RTI Rating by the Centre for Law and Democracy and Access Info Europe.
RECENT SPREAD OF RTI LEGISLATION                                                                    3




TABLE 1: Geographic Distribution of RTI Laws by End-2013

                      Regions                            Number
 Eastern and Central Europe                                  24
 Developed industrialized countries                          23
 Latin America and Caribbean                                 20
 Asia and Pacific                                            16
 Sub-Saharan Africa                                          12
 Middle East and North Africa                                 3
 Total                                                       98

Source: RTI Rating by the Centre for Law and Democracy and Access Info Europe.



FIGURE 2: Chronological Development of RTI Laws by Region

30


25

                                                                    Developed
20
                                                                    E Europe

15                                                                  LAC
                                                                    Asia
10                                                                  Africa
                                                                    Arab
  5


  0
      1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2013

Source: RTI Rating by the Centre for Law and Democracy and Access Info Europe.




score of nearly 94 points for laws adopted between 2005 and 2010, albeit dropping back a bit
after that. The reasons for this overall increase have not been carefully studied, but it seems
likely that a combination of factors have contributed, including better understanding and
experience of what makes a good law, increasingly strong normative standards for these laws,
and a growing movement of organizations and individuals promoting this right.
     While one must always be careful in projecting present trends into the future, it is reason-
able to assume that the growth in the number of laws will continue at least in the near term. A
number of countries are either close to adopting a law or have longstanding campaigns for the
adoption of one, and at least some of these ongoing initiatives are likely to come to fruition
over the next few years. There is certainly room for growth. The Middle East and North Africa
and Sub-Saharan Africa are the two regions of the world with the lowest density of laws, at
around 14 and 20 percent, respectively. Asia has achieved around a 50 percent rate of cover-
age, and there are still some important gaps in Latin America. There is also a relative paucity of
laws among smaller island States in the Caribbean and Pacific, which is no doubt due at least
in part to capacity constraints.
4                                    RIGHT TO INFORMATION: RECENT SPREAD OF RTI LEGISLATION




     FIGURE 3: Average Score of RTI Laws by Year

      95.00

      90.00

      85.00

      80.00

      75.00
          1990      1995     2000    2005     2010     2015

     Source: RTI Rating by the Centre for Law and Democracy and Access Info Europe.




     Normative and Legal Developments
     Roughly coinciding with the growth in laws has been recognition of the right to access informa-
     tion held by public bodies as a human right. The original guarantees of freedom of expression
     found in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights (UDHR) and the International Covenant on
     Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) refer not only to the right to ‘impart’ information and ideas,
     that is, to speak, but also to the right to ‘seek’ and ‘receive’ information. The regional counter-
     parts of these global instruments—namely the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR),
     the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights (ACHPR) and the American Convention on
     Human Rights (ACHR)—employ similar terms.3
          Although these instruments were not originally intended to embrace the right to informa-
     tion,4 in recent times they have come to be understood as having a wider meaning. One of the
     earliest authoritative statements to this effect is found in the 1998 annual report of the UN Spe-
     cial Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression to the United Nations Commission on
     Human Rights, in which he stated: “[T]he right to seek, receive and impart information imposes
     a positive obligation on States to ensure access to information, particularly with regard to
     information held by Government in all types of storage and retrieval systems….”5
          Since then, RTI has been given formal international legal recognition, first by the Inter-
     American Court of Human Rights in the 2006 case of Claude Reyes and Others v. Chile 6 and
     then, in 2009, by the European Court of Human Rights.7 Finally, the UN Human Rights Commit-
     tee clearly recognized the right to information in its 2011 General Comment on Article 19 of
     the ICCPR.8
          It is significant that while the early authoritative statements, for example by the UN Special
     Rapporteur, coincided almost exactly with the beginning of the strong growth in adoption of
     national RTI laws, formal legal recognition came only in 2006, after some 66 national laws had
     already been adopted. The leadership role of the Inter-American Court is also significant, par-
     ticularly in light of the fact that, in a series of cases dating back to 1987,9 the European Court
     had refused to recognize the right to information as part of the right to freedom of expression.
     This is indicative of a wider trend whereby what is often viewed as simply a governance reform
     in Western countries has gained more profound recognition as a human right in other parts of
     the world.10
RECENT SPREAD OF RTI LEGISLATION                                                                    5




Key General Drivers for Right to Information
It is useful to consider what may be the key dynamics or drivers behind these remarkable
developments. The first is the intuitive nature of the premise. The core idea behind RTI reform,
namely that governments hold information not for themselves but on behalf of the general
public, who should then have a right to access that information, is broadly perceived as natural
and is also strongly aligned with democratic norms of accountability. While one can debate the
scope of exceptions, there are almost no persuasive philosophical arguments against the core
idea of government openness, at least if one accepts democracy as the basis of government.
This is reflected in the fact that advocates have always found it relatively easy to kick start
broad-based campaigns for RTI as compared to other human rights campaigns.
      Two of the key benefits of RTI legislation are enabling greater government accountability
and facilitating participation, and both have been drivers for RTI law reform. Although many
countries around the world have had formal democratic institutions for some time, anecdotal
evidence suggests that expectations around participation have increased significantly in recent
decades. Whereas 30 years ago most citizens were largely content to vote periodically in elec-
tions, most now expect to be consulted on a much wider array of social developments, such as
schooling, urban development and social services. This has led to a profound change in rela-
tions between citizens and government, and it has been accompanied by demands for greater
access to information, so that citizens have the information they need to participate. It is no
coincidence that a rough correlation can be found between the presence of RTI laws and more
robust democracies, and that during rapid processes of democratic transition early demands
almost always include the adoption of an RTI law.
      Closely intertwined with this increase in social empowerment has been the technological
information revolution, centered on digital technologies and the Internet. In general, informa-
tion flows much more rapidly and easily in the modern world, and expectations in terms of
accessing information from different sources have grown along with this. These expectations
naturally extend to the large store of important information held by government.
      Also closely intertwined with the spread of RTI has been the pace of globalization. RTI laws
provide important public benefits. With globalization, and a wider democratization of access
to information via the Internet, it is relatively easy for citizens of all but the most repressive
countries to learn about the benefits of RTI, and to demand them for themselves.



Levers for Change at the National Level
Beyond these global trends, a number of specific factors can be identified as key levers of
change for RTI at the national level. As noted above, calls for this right are commonplace
during periods of rapid democratic transition. This is true of post-1990 Eastern and Central
Europe, although only two countries in that region had adopted RTI laws by 1995, with 10
more being added in each of two following five-year periods. This may be partially explained
by the fact that it takes time for laws to be adopted and partially because this was really the
start of global acceleration of recognition of the importance of RTI. This phenomenon can also
be seen in countries like South Africa (2000), Indonesia (2008), Tunisia (2011) and Egypt (yet
to adopt a law but with a developed draft). Less radical—but still major—political shifts also
6                               RIGHT TO INFORMATION: RECENT SPREAD OF RTI LEGISLATION




     provided important impetus to the adoption of laws in countries like Thailand (in 1997, follow-
     ing economic collapse, political renewal and a new Constitution), Mexico (in 2002, following
     a change of government after 65 years of rule by the same party) and the United Kingdom (in
     2000, following a change of government after 17 years of rule by the same party).
         Pressure from other countries, and especially international actors, has also played an
     important role in the spread of RTI. This has played a particularly important role in Eastern and
     Central Europe, where strong pressure came from Western Europe in the form of the large
     carrot of joining the European Union. Pressure has also played a role in countries like Pakistan,
     Brazil and Tunisia, where international actors such as the Asian Development Bank, the Open
     Government Partnership (OGP) and the World Bank were involved in supporting the develop-
     ment and adoption of RTI legislation.
         Active civil society campaigns, backed up by an increasingly influential global civil society
     movement for RTI,11 have also helped create strong pressure for reform. At the same time,
     there are a number of countries—such as Indonesia, Brazil and Nigeria—where it took a very
     long time to enact laws despite strong civil society advocacy. Longstanding campaigns in
     other countries—including Ghana, Malaysia and the Philippines—have yet to bear fruit. This
     suggests that at least some degree of support from local political elites is needed to get a law
     adopted, and that opposition should never be underestimated.



     Key Challenges
     It is reasonably easy to identify the two key challenges in terms of RTI. The first is the fact that
     although estimates suggest that over 75 percent of the world’s population lives in countries
     with RTI laws, less than one-half of the world’s countries have adopted such laws.12 There are
     ongoing campaigns for the adoption of laws in many countries, with formal drafts in advanced
     states of completion in some, alongside many other countries where there is still very little
     movement on this issue. In some cases, there is simply not enough political will to adopt a law,
     while smaller island States may lack the capacity to adopt one.
           Second, there is undoubtedly a significant “policy-practice gap” in many countries with
     RTI laws, in the sense that these countries have failed to implement their laws effectively. This
     is to some extent inevitable, as it takes time and effort to implement these laws. To cite but
     two of the underlying barriers to effective implementation, information systems and archival
     practices may be antiquated and inefficient, and the opaque bureaucratic culture pervasive
     in many public sectors needs to be changed. Put simply, there are too many countries where
     either progress on adopting an RTI law is too slow or where too little effort is being exerted to
     implement the RTI law once adopted.
           These challenges are the first two listed in FOIAnet’s 10-10-10 Statement: Achievements,
     Challenges and Goals on the 10th Anniversary of the Freedom of Information Advocates Net-
     work (FOIAnet).13 Other challenges listed there include a backlash against strong laws in some
     countries, maintaining momentum on RTI, the recent growth in attacks on RTI activists14 and
     openness among intergovernmental organizations.
           It is, of course, far easier to list challenges than to solve them. Overcoming the two
     key challenges requires ongoing commitment and effort, including from the governments
     of the countries that have already enacted laws in terms of implementation measures, the
RECENT SPREAD OF RTI LEGISLATION                                                                             7




international community in terms of both diplomatic pressure and financing of programmatic
interventions, and from civil society groups in terms of advocacy and expertise.
    It is probably too optimistic to expect the next 20 years to witness the same exponential
level of growth in RTI legislation as the last 20 years. Much of the “low hanging fruit” has been
picked, and both domestic and international activists and the donor community are likely to
find themselves working increasingly on the residual tough cases. Yet a threshold has clearly
been crossed in which RTI legislation is no longer the preserve of a few Western democracies
but has become a truly global phenomenon. For all of the normative and instrumental reasons
discussed in this note, the RTI agenda will continue to be a priority on all continents. One can
both hope and reasonably expect that in the future most global citizens will enjoy the right to
access information held by their governments.



Notes
1.	 For purposes of these numbers, Israel and Central Asia are both counted as part of Asia, while Turkey
     is counted as part of Eastern Europe.
2.	 The RTI Rating was developed by the Centre for Law and Democracy and Access Info Europe.
3.	 UDHR: UN General Assembly Resolution 217A(III), 10 December 1948; ICCPR: UN General Assembly
     Resolution 2200A (XXI), 16 December 1966, entered into force 23 March 1976; ECHR: adopted 4
     November 1950, E.T.S. No. 5, entered into force 3 September 1953; ACHPR: adopted 26 June 1981,
     OAU Doc. CAB/LEG/67/3 rev. 5, 21 I.L.M. 58 (1982), entered into force 21 October 1986; and ACHR:
     adopted 22 November 1969; and O.A.S. Treaty Series No. 36, 1144 U.N.T.S. 123, entered into force 18
     July 1978.
4.	 The travaux préparatoires for Article 19 of the ICCPR, meticulously recorded by Marc Bossuyt, do not
     even hint at this idea. See M. Bossuyt, Guide to the “Travaux Préparatoires” of the International
     Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff Publishers, 1987), pp. 373–402.
5.	 United Nations, Report of the Special Rapporteur, Promotion and protection of the right to freedom of
     opinion and expression, UN Doc. E/CN.4/1998/40, 28 January 1998, paragraph 14. The Commission
     has now been replaced by the UN Human Rights Council.
6.	 19 September 2006, Series C, No. 151, available at: http://www.corteidh.or.cr/docs/casos/articulos/
     seriec_151_ing.doc.
7.	 Társaság A Szabadságjogokért v. Hungary, 14 April 2009, Application No. 37374/05.
8.	 General Comment No. 34, 12 September 2011, CCPR/C/GC/34, paragraph 18.
9.	 See Leander v. Sweden, 26 March 1987, Application No. 9248/81, 9 EHRR 433.
10.	 This can be seen in trends regarding constitutional recognition, with only five Western democracies
     among the approximately 60 countries which provide explicit constitutional protection for the right to
     information.
11.	 The Freedom of Information Advocates Network (FOIAnet), which brings together groups and
     individuals working on RTI from around the world, now boasts nearly 250 organizational members, and
     there are also regional networks in Africa, Latin America, the Middle East and North Africa, and South
     Asia.
12.	 Ninety-eight countries have adopted RTI laws, and there are about 193 UN member states and a
     number of other States that are not UN members.
13.	 Available at: http://www.foiadvocates.net.
14.	 See http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Maharashtra-tops-country-in-attacks-murder-of-RTI-
     activists/articleshow/27743408.cms.
1501322
