                                                                              98716

                  Right to Information


   One Step Forward, Two Steps Backward? Does E-
    Government make Governments in Developing
    Countries more Transparent and Accountable?

                              By Victoria L. Lemieux
                                    June 2015




                  Right to Information Working Paper Series
                                 World Bank




The Right to Information Series brings forward current and ongoing research on
issues related to transparency and the right to information. It aims to provide a range
of information on policy, practice, experience, and frontier issues related to public
sector openness and transparency, including the underlying functions and outcomes
of open government efforts.




                                                                                     1
Right to Information Series

Project Leader and Right to Information Series General Editor: Victoria Lemieux,
vlemieux@worldbank.org

Working Papers Series Editor: Stephanie E. Trapnell, strapnell@worldbank.org

Titles in the Right to Information Series

Right to Information: Case Studies on Implementation (2014), edited by Stephanie E.
Trapnell

Right to Information: Requests and Appeals Data in RTI Systems (2014), by Jesse
Worker with Carole Excell

Right to Information: Recent spread of RTI legislation (2014), by Toby Mendel

Right to Information: Identifying Drivers of Effectiveness in Implementation (2014),
by Stephanie E. Trapnell and Victoria L. Lemieux

Designing Right to Information Laws for Effective Implementation (2015), by Toby
Mendel

Managing Records and Information for Transparent, Accountable and Inclusive
Governance in the Digital Era (2015), by Anne Thurston

Guide to the Implementation of Right to Information Laws (2015), by Victoria L.
Lemieux and Stephanie E. Trapnell


Disclaimer
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the
author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank or the
governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.
The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in
this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

© 2015 The World Bank, 1818 H Street NW Washington DC 20433
           Telephone: 202-473-1000, Internet: www.worldbank.org




                                                                                       2
 One Step Forward, Two Steps Backward? Does E-Government
 make Governments in Developing Countries more Transparent
                     and Accountable?
                                 Victoria L. Lemieux
                                    June 5, 2015

Abstract

Many countries are in the process of transitioning from primarily paper-based
administrative systems to digital systems through the application of information and
communication technology (ICTs) as part of e-Government initiatives. Though much
has been written about the positive power of technology and information to support
greater transparency and accountability and, by extension, development, this paper
discusses literature exploring the unintended consequences and downside risks for
transparency and accountability associated with the way recorded information is
produced and managed in digitally enabled developing country public sector
contexts. The implications of these risks for implementation of right to information
laws is discussed, and a call is made for further research and greater attention to the
effects of ICT use in the public sector, especially in regard to digital records and
information creation, use, management and preservation and effects upon the
operation of transparency and accountability mechanisms.


Introduction

Many countries are in the process of transitioning from primarily paper-based
administrative systems to digital systems through the application of information and
communication technology (ICTs) as part of e-Government initiatives. Though much
has been written about the positive power of technology and information to support
greater transparency and accountability (see, for example, Bertot, Jaeger, & Grimes
2010; Jaeger & Bertot 2010) and, by extension, development, this paper discusses
literature on records management, archives administration and transparency
exploring the unintended consequences and downside risks for transparency and
accountability associated with the way recorded information is produced and
managed in digitally enabled public sector contexts in developing countries. By doing
so, the paper seeks to draw attention to an issue that has received relatively little
attention in the wider literature on e-Government. As the body of literature explored
in this paper suggests, in many countries introduction of ICTs has brought about
deterioration in the quality, management and accessibility of recorded information
with concomitant negative impacts upon transparency and public accountability
mechanisms, such as the operation of right to information laws.


Conceptualizing Transparency and Accountability



                                                                                     3
A broad international consensus has developed around incorporating four key
principles – accountability, transparency, participation and inclusion – into the policy,
programs and operations of international development organizations in recent years.
Carothers and Brechenmacher (2014) argue that the emergent consensus began in
the 1990s with an “opening to politics” and the notion that institutions and
governance matter in the context of international development.

Transparency has been characterized in many ways, but essentially it is an element
in the ecosystem of accountability. As a metaphor, it serves as a public value that
citizens demand from government (Ball 2009, Greiling and Spraul 2010). It can be
understood as an institutional relation of monitoring and oversight, as information
exchange over decisions and actions, and as a means of understanding how
governments work and what they achieve (Meijer 2013, 430; Heald 2006, 30).

Accountability has also been defined in many ways. As noted in Migliorisi and Wescott
(2011), it has a number of different definitions, including many that use the same or
similar terminology (e.g., “hierarchical accountability”) in quite different ways. This
paper uses accountability in the sense of the process of holding to account, overseeing
and keeping in check those persons who are entrusted with public responsibilities in
the fulfillment of their tasks or functions (see Schedler 1999; Migliorisi and Wescott
2011), and focuses on literature from the fields of records and information
management, archives administration and transparency research that discusses the
extent to which state institutions and citizens have the capacity to hold public
institutions or branches of government accountable through transparency. Following
Lemieux (2002) and Yates (1993), the argument is made that transparency – in the
sense of access to trustworthy information about decisions and actions - is critical to
the effective functioning of accountability mechanisms of all kinds, as well as to
maintaining internal control needed for the efficient operation of organizational
functions and delivery of services.


The Rise of E-Government and the “Digitalization”1 of Government

A surge in the use of ICTs by government, variously called e-Government, e-
Governance, i-Governance, and Digital Governance, among other labels, started in the
late 1990s with the, then, primary aim of improving government efficiency and the
subsequent aim of making improvements in service delivery and accountability (see,
for example, Heintze and Bretschneider, 2000; Lee and Perry 2002; Grönlund &
Horan 2005; Heeks 2006). Indicative of these drivers for e-Government is this
statement in a 1998 paper by Richard Heeks, “If 'electronic government' means
anything, it means the use of IT to help deliver the goals of public sector reform. These


1This paper uses the term “digitalization” here as a short-form to denote the increasing use of ICTs in
government operations. Digitization, on the other hand, is used elsewhere in this paper to refer to the
technique of transforming information in analog form, such as paper records, into new digital
surrogates.


                                                                                                     4
goals can include decentralisation, higher quality public services … and increased
accountability that will make public servants more accountable for their decisions
and actions” (Heeks 1998, 1). Wong and Welch (2004, 276) write that e-government
is often viewed and promoted as a positive channel for enhancing government
accountability and empowering citizens, with the logic being that “more information
delivered in a more timely fashion to citizens is expected to increase transparency of
government, empowering citizens to more closely monitor government performance
(Redburn & Buss 204). The enhanced interactivity of technology is also expected to
improve government accountability as it makes government more responsive to the
needs and demands of individual citizens.” Tolbert and Mossberger (2006), writing
about the effects of e-Government on public trust and confidence, for example, make
the argument that it can increase process-based trust by improving interactions with
citizens and perceptions of responsiveness.

Development reforms associated with e-Government have typically centered on the
introduction of solutions to improve the performance of core public financial
management systems (FMIS, Tax/Customs, HRMIS/Payroll, e-Procurement), sector
applications (education and health MIS, pension systems, social protection, payment
systems, and more), and e-Services through reliable and sustainable ICT solutions
and governance structures. The World Bank alone has funded somewhere in the
order of 122 financial management systems in 66 countries since 1984, and since
2003 98% of public sector governance activities have included ICT components
(World Bank 2014a). Wong and Welch (2004) note, that in 2000, there were 168
national governments that had their own websites. In more recent times, this agenda
has broadened to also include a focus on citizen participation in democratic processes
and inclusiveness (see, for example, UNDP 2010; World Bank 2014b), reflecting the
merging of the development agenda on accountability, transparency, participation
and inclusiveness with e-Government. This shift has led the e-Government agenda to
go beyond the use of websites to embrace the use of social media and mobile
platforms to promote participation and inclusion, with a number of projects
incorporating this technology to increase citizen engagement (e.g., the use of mobile
technology in participatory budgeting in South Kivu, Democratic Republic of Congo
or for citizen feedback on power service delivery in the Dominican Republic (World
Bank 2014b).

As a result of e-Government initiatives and increasing “digitalization” of government
operations, public sector authorities have come to rely upon a growing array of
communications technologies to create, exchange, and store information – from
traditional paper-based filing systems, to structured databases, “unstructured”
content management systems, social media platforms, web technologies, and mobile
platforms (Katuu 2012a, Van Garderen 2002, Wamukoya & Mutula 2005, Pederson,
2008, Luyombya 2011; Mampe and Kalusopa, 2013). Management of the information
created and contained in these systems has been another matter, with a generally
inverse relationship between the age of the technology used to create, exchange and
store information and the capability of public sector authorities to effectively manage



                                                                                     5
and preserve the information in a trustworthy and accessible form, a key point to
which this paper will return.


Information, Not Technology is the Important Driver

Though technology has often been seen as a key driver of transformative change in
governance and generally has played a prominent role in development programming,
development specialists have also recognized - to varying degrees - the importance
of information. As early as 1998, Heeks wrote, “ . . .IT is not a necessary part of the
accountability equation. The recent mass movements behind government
accountability in India, for instance, have involved citizen meetings, typed reports
and, at their most high-tech, the use of photocopiers - but not a computer in sight.
Why? Because it is information, not technology, that is essential to accountability.
Information about the performance of services and programmes, decisions and
actions must flow from public servants to those who would hold them accountable.
But these information flows do not have to be supported by IT” (Heeks 1998, 2).

A related line of thinking emphasizing information, not technology, has most recently
been articulated in the UN Secretary-General’s Independent Expert Advisory Group
on a Data Revolution for Sustainable Development (IEAG) culminating report A World
That Counts: Mobilising The Data Revolution for Sustainable Development , which
argues that the data revolution – arising from an explosion in the volume of data, the
speed with which data are produced, the number of producers of data, the
dissemination of data, and the range of things on which there is data, coming from
new technologies such as mobile phones and the “internet of things”, and from other
sources, such as qualitative data, citizen-generated data and perceptions data – drives
“more empowered people, better policies, better decisions and greater participation
and accountability, leading to better outcomes for people and the planet”(UN 2014b,
6). The World Bank’s report on Big Data in Action for Development echoes this
sentiment (World Bank 2014c, 19), and its strategy on Citizen Engagement
recognizes the availability of timely, user-friendly, reliable, and comprehensive
information as a necessary (but not sufficient) enabling condition for citizen
engagement.

Though few would argue with the importance of ICT in current times, the emphasis
on information rather than technology remains important. However, the
interconnectedness of technologies, such as the Internet, with contemporary forms
of recorded communication, and the “embeddedness” of recorded communication in
other socio-political and economic processes makes study of the effects of ICTs versus
information created, processed and stored using these technologies in the context of
e-Government initiatives a challenging prospect. This is not least because of the
difficulty of isolating the effects of different variables, such as whether outcomes
result from technology or the often-associated business process re-engineering that
has accompanied the introduction of new technology solutions.



                                                                                     6
Weak Records and Information Management Capacity in Governments

If information drives transformations in public accountability and transparency, then
the state of the government’s administrative records – the containers of the necessary
information – must be investigated. There is certainly plenty of evidence to suggest
that the state of records and information is problematic. For at least the last 15 years,
there have been regular warnings about the impact of the loss of control of records
relating to the full range of government functions, coming from the press, auditors,
academic researchers, and records professionals. In addition, studies of barriers to
effective implementation of right/access to information laws consistently emphasize
that poor records and information management prevents governments from
responding to requests or, if able to respond, slows down the timeliness of the
responses (see, for example, Neuman and Calland 2007). A series of twelve case
studies and a recent report on drivers of effective implementation of Right to
Information Laws in twelve countries (see Trapnell 2014 and Trapnell and Lemieux
2014) underscores previous findings on this point.


ICTs seen as Further Weakening Government Records and Information
Management

Though government recordkeeping was weak in many countries before the
introduction of ICTs, and existing paper-based recordkeeping systems remain weak,
with evidence of a concomitant negative effect on transparency and accountability,
there is mounting evidence to suggest that the situation has worsened, not improved,
with increased use of technology in the conduct of government business. This is not
to make the Luddite’s case that governments would be better off without ICTs.
Rather, the argument is that it may be a case of “one step forward, two steps back,” as
ICTs may not have successfully solved information problems within public
authorities in many developing countries, as some suggest they have, and may, on the
contrary, in a number of cases have made the task of gaining control over recorded
communication to ensure that it is accessible and has integrity much more
challenging. This evidence runs counter to received wisdom that e-Government
initiatives, such as the introduction of IFMIS systems or government portals, which
largely focus on improvements in the efficiency of the execution of specific functions,
such as financial transaction processing or delivery of specific services, generally can
have or has had a beneficial effect in relation to the governance agenda (see, for
example, Redburn and Buss 2004, 163). While the efficiencies of these specific
functions may well have seen improvement, there is evidence that in many cases
these projects have not delivered (see, for example, Wong and Welch 2004; Heeks
and Bailur 2007) and signs that the overall impact of introducing ICT systems on
transparency and accountability may be less than clearly positive.

Contra the general trend, almost from the outset of the e-Government wave, Richard
Heeks (Heeks 1998) raised concerns about records management. Heeks’ wrote then:



                                                                                       7
       Where public managers lack a clear records management strategy,
       computerisation has often been associated with diminution or even loss of
       paper records-keeping. Yet computer records, because of their intangibility
       and malleability are a far poorer basis for accountability than paper records.

       'The medium is the message' and the message of electronic media is one of
       truth, objectivity and credibility. So, when often-inaccurate public sector data
       is produced by computerised accountability systems it gains a mask of
       objectivity and an aura of credibility that it does not deserve. Recipients can
       be led to believe in the validity of invalid accountability information, thus
       undermining the process of accountability.

Heeks’ observations pulled back the veil on two assumptions that underpin the notion
that technology and digital information support transparency and accountability and,
therefore, can drive sustainable development: firstly, that information will be
available for as long as it is needed and, secondly, that it will have sufficient integrity
to be able to support the goals of accountability and transparency.

Both of these assumptions are open to challenge. There is a significant body of
evidence from a wide range of sources that indicates that in large parts of the world
the most basic information management structures and controls are not in place in
either the paper or the digital environments and that the essential enhanced
structures, controls, and skills necessary to manage digital information to ensure
long-term accessibility and integrity have not been introduced. This is as true in well-
resourced countries (see, for example, a report by the Committee on the Future
Career Opportunities and Educational Requirements for Digital Curation (2015)
commissioned by the US National Science Foundation) as much as in less-resourced
countries, though the challenge is greater in the latter.

As an example of the growing problem in developing countries, Justus Wamukoya’s
(1996) study on records management and administrative reform programs in Kenya
was among the first to offer evidence of the problem. Wamukoya's study linked
record keeping and accountability with policy and programming in the area of public
sector reform, and argued that poor record keeping had negative repercussions for
economic development in the country. In the same year, Piers Cain’s (1996, 163)
paper in Information Technology for Development shone a spotlight on the issue. Cain
wrote:

       Wherever computers are used to carry out a function, records are being
       generated either electronically or as hardcopy output. Records are a subset of
       the wider information universe. Their unique quality is that they are the
       sources of information that provide the evidence base for accountability. This
       makes the maintenance of good record keeping systems of particular
       significance to public sector reform. Computers are rapidly being introduced
       in every area of public administration to enhance control of key resources,


                                                                                         8
       notably finance and personnel, and to improve efficiency. National and donor
       governments alike have come to view computers as the solution to the
       management of the information required to deliver effective public services.

       If public sector reform is to be a reality, this thinking needs to be modified. Too
       often, managers regard technology as a panacea for the shortcomings of the
       existing record systems, procedures and communications infrastructure. Of
       course, computerised systems offer significant advantages over conventional
       manual methods because they can manipulate information with great speed
       and precision, but they have limitations. Computers make excellent
       information systems because that was the original purpose of many computer
       applications, but they are much less suited to be record keeping systems. Data
       on a computer can easily become corrupted for one reason or another. Not
       every country accepts computer generated data as evidence in a court of law,
       but those that do, do so only on strict conditions . . . Information systems
       analysts must remind themselves that computerisation alone rarely solves
       problems.

Pino Akotia (1997) has also written on the management of public sector financial
records and their implications for good government. His work focused on Ghana,
showing once again how poor records management can undermine public sector
reform. Barata and Cain (2001) studied the deterioration of records systems that
underpin financial management in the context of Anglophone African countries.
Ironically given that these systems were introduced as part of strategies adopted by
donor agencies and developing countries to promote better financial management
accountability and to reduce the spread of economic crimes, these researchers argued
that such systems, in fact, contributed to the decline of recordkeeping systems needed
to provide trustworthy evidence for accountability purposes. Lemieux (2002)
explored the theoretical and empirical dimensions of the relationships among
records and information, competitive viability and accountability in the context of the
Jamaican financial crisis of the late 1990s and found that poor record keeping had
undermined internal management, as well as external public, financial and political
accountability throughout the Jamaican banking system. Though the Wamukoya,
Akotia, Cain & Barata and Lemieux studies were not all exclusively focused on e-
Government nor the management of information in digital environments, these
studies all mention the unintended side effects that introduction of ICTs have had on
public accountability and transparency.

Nor have these issues been limited to Africa or the Caribbean. As one example, an
article by Lim, Chennupati and Pitt (2003) discusses similar issues in Singapore,
noting the challenges associated with preservation of new digital forms of records
and how to guarantee electronic records’ reliability and authenticity in the future. The
authors suggest that the combined problems of immense volume, unstable storage
media, and obsolete hardware and software present major difficulties and called for
greater attention to and action on the issue. Henriksen and Andersen (2008) describe
a similar scenario in the Punjabi province of Pakistan, but end rather more


                                                                                        9
optimistically with a case study of successful implementation of an electronic
document and records management system (EDRMS) to address the issues. Studies
conducted in Latin America (Argentina, Chile, and Ecuador) and South (Uttar Pradesh,
India) and East (Vietnam) Asia by the International Records Management Trust
between 2002-2004 reveal similar challenges (IRMT 2015).

More recently, a study conducted Kwatsha (2010) of records and information
management within the Presidency of South Africa discusses information problems
within this office brought about by diverse modes of records creation and keeping,
including those enabled by the introduction of ICTs. Kwatsha notes, “The Presidency
. . . inherited various different filing systems, which could all be linked back to
previous changes in Presidential administration. Correspondence was mainly
managed in several Microsoft Access databases that were used to register received
documents. Electronic documents were generally received and dispatched daily via
E-mail within the Presidency. Most official E-mails were dealt with by their recipients,
who did not save them but simply deleted them at their own discretion.” The study
focused on implementation of a system designed to improve management of records
and information with a view to increasing compliance with public records and right
to information legislation, and helping the government meet its commitment to
transparency and democratic accountability (Kwatsha 2010, 10).

David Luyombya (2011) conducted a review of the state of digital records
management in the government of Uganda. His study, which included empirical
research findings based on 23 Government of Uganda (GoU) ministries applying both
quantitative and qualitative analysis approaches, concluded that despite the
existence of the ICT-related policies, a digital records management implementation
strategy was lacking in Uganda. The Records and Information Technology
Department (RITD), which fell under the Ministry of Public Service but with statutory
responsibility for public records across ministries, had not provided advice and
leadership in relation to record-keeping best practices and the management of public
archives. As a result, digital records were being handled at individual ministry level
with unregulated metadata to describe their content, structure and context, leading,
the study noted, to considerable difficulties in planning for digital records
management. The study also noted that senior managers interviewed were not
concerned about digital archives management.

From 1997 to the present day, the International Records Management Trust has been
conducting research into the relationship between good governance and record
keeping. Like Wamukoya and Akotia's research, its study of the management of public
sector financial records in sub-Saharan Africa shows how poor record keeping
practices undermine accountability and public sector management. The IRMT’s
Evidence-based Government Project, which ran from 2002-2004, involved
consultations with government officials and records professionals from 38
developing countries through face-to-face, electronic and video conference
meetings. It also carried out 13 case studies and developed two assessment tools: the
Records Management Capacity Assessment System (RMCAS) and the E-Records


                                                                                     10
Readiness Tool to be used in conjunction with existing e-Government assessment
tools. One of the major findings of this project related to the effects of ICTs on records.
The authors of the report (IRMT 2003, 1-2) wrote ten years ago now:

       Records in electronic form are becoming especially critical as developing
       countries embark on e-government strategies . . . The management of
       electronic records poses special challenges that include:

              the lack of awareness about the importance of e-records and the
               dangers associated with their loss (eg the loss of evidence, risks to
               entitlements);
              the lack of accountability for the management of e-records (who is
               responsible for protecting their integrity and authenticity?);
              complex, fragmented and incompatible information systems and
               standards (eg, computer systems, metadata standards);
              fragile, quickly changing record media, formats and storage systems
               (the e-preservation challenge);
              unconnected or poorly integrated paper and electronic records and
               duplicated e-records (where is the complete file, the right version?);
              the lack of e-records skills (among both users and information
               managers);
              limited collaboration among information professions (records
               managers, archivists, librarians, IT specialists, web content managers,
               etc.)

These challenges, noted the IRMT, are greatest in countries where resources are
scarce, records management systems are weak and technology tools (e.g. electronic
records management software) are unavailable (IRMT 2003).

The Evidence-based Government Project was followed, from 2006-2008, by a project
that focused on fostering trust and transparency in Governance, which produced a set
of training modules related to the management of electronic records (IRMT 2007 &
2008), and a third project on Managing Records as Reliable Evidence for ICT/ e-
Government and Freedom of Information in East Africa (IRMT 2010 – 2011), which
found that records management issues are not being addressed in relation to the ICT/
e-Government and Freedom of Information initiatives that are being planned and
implemented within the region, and that the gap placed these initiatives at risk. The
research consisted of a high level exploration of the extent of integration between
national ICT/ e-Government and Freedom of Information initiatives and records
management (IRMT 2011, 2). The study’s brief to senior management concludes that:

       Poor records management threatens all government programmes and
       processes, including e-government and other service delivery activities,
       economic development initiatives, health care programmes, land reform
       initiatives, environmental projects, and initiatives designed to enhance citizen
       rights. At the core of these issues is the erosion of trust in government


                                                                                        11
       programmes and decision-making where records cannot be found, the
       accuracy of the information in the records cannot be trusted, or the records
       are lost or destroyed.

Concerns about records management are being exacerbated in the current
environment in many countries because of a growing dependency of governments on
records in electronic form (e.g., increasing use of email and text messaging).
Electronic records are fragile, and their integrity is dependent upon a quickly
changing array of hardware and software. Unless records are carefully managed and
protected, governments will be unable to guarantee their availability, authenticity
and usability over time and across sites.

While the problem is not unique or new to e-Government, there is growing evidence
to suggest that e-Government, or the rising use of digital technologies for the creation,
communication and storage of information has created new challenges that
exacerbate previous weaknesses in record keeping systems constraining the
availability and integrity of information for transparency and accountability.


Records and Information Management Strategies in the Digital Era

Though many countries have undertaken extensive digitization programs to convert
old analog (e.g., paper) records into digital formats that can be more easily processed
and exchanged (e.g., Bayissa, Ketema, & Birhanu 2009; Ramatlhakwana 2009;
Hamooya & Njobvu 2010), it is important to note that this technology, in itself, is not
a technology for management and preservation of records and information (Katuu,
2012b). The mistake of thinking that digitization alone solves information problems
has led to a number of poor outcomes for countries, such as loss of access to
trustworthy original records of transactions, uncertainty about the integrity of digital
surrogates, and even loss or irretrievability of digital copies of records (Bayissa,
Ketema, & Birhanu, 2009; Ramatlhakwana 2009; Hamooya & Njobvu, 2010).
Digitization has proven to be no panacea. Nor has it addressed the need to manage
new records and information generated in native digital formats.

With the rise in new digital forms of creating, exchanging and storing “born digital”
recorded communications, new technologies have emerged to manage and preserve
this information. Katuu (2012a) documents the evolution of two main types of
technologies designed for the management and preservation of digital records and
information. The first of these is Enterprise Content Management. These systems
(and the various evolutionary iterations thereof, including Electronic Document and
Records Management Systems) capture, manage, store, preserve and deliver content
and documents related to organizational processes and generally comprise modules
for Document Management (DM), Records Management (RM), Workflow or Business
Process Management (BPM), Collaboration, Portal, Knowledge Management (KM),
Imaging, Digital Asset Management (DAM), Digital Rights Management (DRM), and
Web Content Management (Katuu 2012a.; CMS Watch 2010, 21-86; Kampffmeyer


                                                                                      12
2004, 2006). In the main, public sector organizations have had muted success with
deployment of ECM applications to manage and preserve the array of digital
information they produce and use in their operations. Many ECM systems, even after
great effort and expense, have not been successfully implemented (Heeks 2002;
Kwatsha 2010). Moreover, the scope of these systems is often limited to specific types
of digital information thus leaving large swaths of recorded communications
unmanaged and, ultimately, unreliable and/or inaccessible.

The other main type of technology for management and preservation of digital
recorded communications is Digital Curation (Katuu 2012a). These technologies
consist of a suite of standards, services, protocols and storage platforms and other
technology infrastructure designed “to ensure that digital objects of value to
society...can be meaningfully reproduced over time, despite evolving representations,
mechanisms, rapidly advancing technologies, and continually emerging user
expectations” (Foscarini et al 2010). One of the key elements of such technologies is
the so-called Trusted Digital Repository (Katuu 2012a). With respect to digital
curation, so few public sector organizations have recognized the need for it and put it
in place that it fair to say that long-term preservation of digital records and
information in most countries in the world is at serious risk.


Impact of Weak Digital Records and Information Management on Public
Accountability Mechanisms – The Case of Right to Information

The Right to Information (RTI) is a facet of government transparency, or open
government, which is embedded in the administrative operations of the public sector,
compelling all public officials to consider their roles as caretakers of information,
rather than owners (Trapnell and Lemieux 2014). The successful implementation of
Right to Information (RTI) laws, also called Freedom of Information or Access to
Information laws in some contexts, is dependent upon governments’ ability to create
and maintain – and ultimately make available – trustworthy information about
government actions and decisions. The British Lord Chancellor’s Code of Practice on
the Management of Records (issued under the Freedom of Information Act 2000)
states “FOI is only as good as the quality of the records and information to which it
provides access. Access rights are of limited value if information cannot be found
when requested or, if found, cannot be relied on as authoritative, or the arrangements
for their eventual destruction or transfer to an archives, are inadequate (cited in
Lowry 2013, 25). There is questionable benefit in increasing the number of countries
with RTI laws if governments are unable to produce information when it is requested
or to proactively disclose good quality information. Yet, this appears to be precisely
what is happening in many countries around the world. The weak state of records
management has created a very serious barrier to the right to information. In India in
2014, as just one example, government officials in the Union Home Ministry were
unable to respond to a request for information having destroyed the approximately
11,000 files that would have enabled them to respond to the request. They also were
unable to produce even a list of the files that had been destroyed (“Our


                                                                                    13
Representative” 2014). Lowry (2013), reporting on a research project on Freedom of
information and government records in Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania, observes
widespread records and information management weaknesses in these countries,
and the absence of policies and strategies to address them, concluding that these
weaknesses prevent effective implementation of existing and planned right to
information laws. Scholarly research on the implementation of right to information
confirms that poor records and information management practices have been
preventing effective implementation of RTI laws. Confirming these findings, a recent
survey of information commissioners points to an increasing number of denials of
request for information on the grounds that the information cannot be found or that
it is too costly to produce (ICIEN 2014; Taillefer and Elliot 2015).

As digital technologies have transformed the way in which public officials
communicate with one another and how such communications are recorded and
preserved (e.g., increasing use of social media to communicate) uncertainty prevails
about whether these new forms of recorded communication fall within the scope of
public records and RTI laws, and, if so, how they should be treated. If a member of the
public tweets a public authority does the tweet become a public record and is it in
scope of RTI? Do public officials comply with the records management policies of
their agencies when using such electronic communications, or are they able to ignore
or by-pass them?

Most records and information management policies are built around a framework of
physical documents with inadequate attention to digital recorded communications.
In the US, critical updates to the policy framework have come only after years of
litigation on the question of how emails and other digital forms of recorded
communication should be dealt with under the US Federal Records and Freedom of
Information legislation (Wallace 2001; Baron 2004, 2014; Jimerson 2007). In most
developing countries, however, legislative frameworks have not been similarly
updated and remain inadequate to address digital records and information
management concerns. This leads to great uncertainty about how to treat such forms
of communication in relation to requests for information under RTI laws.
Information commissioners and those responsible for implementing RTI laws are
often at a loss as to how to capture and make available digital information that is
responsive to a legal request for information (ICIEN 2014; Taillefer & Elliot 2015). In
a recent international survey of information commissioners, for example,
commissioners were asked whether requests made using social media would be valid
in their countries. Thirty-five percent felt that generally such requests would be valid,
and 30 percent said they could never be valid. Many commissioners had not yet had
to deal with an appeal regarding refusal of such a request, which perhaps explains
why 25 percent said they did not know if they were valid or not (ICIEN 2014).

Given recent developments in the use of digital forms of communication to conduct
government business, especially with the growth of e-Government, there is a need for
information commissioners to have better guidance on how digital information
should be captured and treated under public records and RTI legislation. A clearer


                                                                                      14
understanding is needed as to whether national records laws provide sufficient
guidance to public officials on the treatment of digital recorded communications as
public records and to what extent the use of newer forms of recorded communication,
such as email, texts, and social media fall within the meaning of information in RTI
laws and related policies. A better understanding also is needed of whether public
officials, national archives officials and information commissioners have sufficient
authority and capacity to make digital communications accessible and to address
poor recordkeeping practices by public officials by, for example, conducting
independent investigations and taking measures to strengthen laws and policy
guidance when necessary.


Records as Boundary Objects and Sites of Contestation

In October 2003, as reported by Wamukoya and Mutula (2005), a meeting of
Ministers responsible for records and archives management in East and Southern
Africa held in Cape Town, South Africa, underscored the importance of good records
and archives management practices and called for a collaborative action in a number
of areas relating to the management of records and archives including the need to
build electronic records capacity. As Wamukoya and Mutula (2005 69) note, “The
Ministers affirmed the need for governments, records management and archival
professionals, multilateral organizations and donor agencies to give full support to
endeavours of national and other archival institutions to better manage official
records irrespective of media.” In spite of this call, very little has changed in the
intervening years and broader support for improvements to digital records and
information management has not been forthcoming.

Why is management and preservation of new forms of digital recorded
communications not being addressed? The literature on the topic suggests a number
of reasons. The availability of the technical solutions for digital records management
was a barrier early on (see for example, the reports produced by the IRMT for its
Evidence-based Governance project, 2002-2004 [IRMT 2015]). Now, however, the
necessary technologies exist to achieve these objectives (Katuu, 2012b; Thurston,
2015) even if they continue to evolve. Mutiti (2001 & 2002) points to the fact that
many countries may have no specific legal or administrative framework within which
to operate an electronic records management programme. Another obvious reason is
lack of resources. Ngoepe and Keakopa (2011), in their comparative analysis of the
state of records and archives management in South Africa and Botswana cite studies
by Mnjama (2005), Kemoni and Ngulube (2007), Keakopa (2007), Tough (2009) and
Lovering (2010) that point to archival institutions in the East and Southern African
region a being seriously under-resourced. “This under-resourcing of archival work,”
the authors note, “resulted in inadequate and unintegrated planning; a low skills base
among personnel, inadequate records management in government ministries and
departments and absence of clear career paths for staff . . . The findings of research
by scholars . . . point unambiguously to archival systems that are under severe strain
in the ESARBICA region.” (Ngoepe and Keakopa 2011, 146). This lack of capacity


                                                                                   15
resulting from chronic under-resourcing is also noted in Wamukoya and Mutula
(2005). However, lack of resources is not universally seen as the major barrier (see,
Aas 2014). Some hold that view that resources could be obtained if the management
and preservation of digital records and information were seen as a national priority.

One factor that may explain the lack of priority accorded records and information
management and the preservation of digital information relates to increasing
distance between public agencies and officials with responsibility for public records
management, on the one hand, and those with authority for decision-making
concerning government spending on digital technologies, on the other hand. The
above-noted survey of Information Commissioners suggests that digital recorded
information has become a “boundary object” (Yeo 2008) between two distinct sets of
actors operating within two distinct institutional frameworks – records and archival
professionals and IT professionals. According to Yeo (2007, 2008):

       If a report or a procedure manual can be seen both as a record and as an
       information product, it can be denominated a “boundary object.”

Sociologist Susan Leigh Star developed the concept of boundary objects in the 1980s.
They are entities shared by different communities of practice. Each community may
interpret or use them in a different way, but “the acknowledgement and discussion of
these differences . . . enable a shared understanding to be formed . . .. The boundary
object serves as an interface among these communities” (cited in Yeo 2008, 131). Yeo
continues:

       The status of a boundary object need not be limited to items claimed by the
       recordkeeping and information management disciplines. Boundary objects
       straddle many different communities of practice; any given object could be
       claimed by two or more communities. A website is a boundary object because
       it could be interpreted as (among other things) a record, a computing
       resource, a sales platform, a corporate management tool, and a manifestation
       of contemporary culture; a visual item could be interpreted as a record, a
       photograph, an artifact of aesthetic design, a symbolic object, and an economic
       asset. Each community brings its own perspective to the table (Yeo 2008, 131).

The institutional world of records – where recorded information, at least in theory, is
controlled in a way designed to support accountability, and thereby, transparency,
participation and inclusion - still tends to operate quite separately from the world of
data, the IT world - where recorded information is processed, but not necessarily
managed or preserved with a view to providing trustworthy evidence of government
policies, decisions, and actions (for example, see Wamukoya and Mutula 2005).

The relationship between records and information professionals and IT professionals
is a complex one. Records and information management officials rely upon IT officials
to provide the technology to help them manage and preserve records and
information; but at the same time, they must compete with them for budgetary


                                                                                    16
resources in public sector contexts. Indignation often runs high on the part of records
professionals, who may perceive their traditional role as being threatened by the
shifting ground of technologies and institutions for the production, communication,
use and storage of recorded information. The threat is not without some basis in fact:
a 1996 survey showed that in 71% of developing countries the national archives had
an active role in the management of records in government agencies (Roper 1996).
Fast-forward 20 years, and the picture looks very different, at least anecdotally, with
responsibilities for the management of recorded communications falling less to
traditional actors (e.g., national archives) and much more to ICT authorities. At times,
records and archival professionals perceive IT officials as casting them in an
anachronistic and “non-technical” light, and obstructing any perceived encroachment
into ICT territory with jargon that many within the records and archives world do not
comprehend (White 2004; ARMA 2009). For many IT officials and senior government
decision-makers, records and archival professionals are simply invisible. These
officials exhibit little awareness of their legal obligations under, for example, the
public records laws and policies which national archives administer, and the
priorities and concerns of managing and preserving records (see, for example,
Wamukoya and Mutula 2005; Liu and Murphy, 2014; Jordan and de Stricker 2014).

The schism between the two groups is made manifest and visible in the organizational
structures of many governments. Typically, IT is managed by one agency, and the
national archives by another, with functions concerning the management of current
records sometimes falling to one or another of the existing agencies concerned with
recorded information or into a third “middle ground” between the two. For example,
in Estonia – where digital records and information management is recognized
globally as being very good - IT is within the purview of the Ministry of Economic
Affairs and Communication, whose Deputy Minister functions as the government’s
Chief Information Officer. The National Archives, which is the body responsible for
the enabling legislation overseeing the country’s public records, falls within the
Ministry of Education and Research. A department of Information Society Services,
established in 2011-2012, sitting within the Ministry of Economic Affairs is now
responsible for the establishment of guidelines related to information services and
governance (Thurston 2015). Ngoepe and Keakopa (2011, 157) note the following
with respect to organizational placement of the records and archives function in
South Africa and Botswana:

       The results of the survey also indicate that in South Africa the archives services
       resort [sic] under the Department of Arts and Culture whereas in Botswana it
       resorts [sic] under the Ministry of Youth, Sports and Culture. These
       placements compromise the transversal regulatory role of services provided
       by public archives in both countries. For example, the corporate identity of the
       institutions is hidden within the departments. As a result, the exercising of
       authority by the heads is diminished and frustrated by bureaucracy and
       adherence to hierarchical controls.

This organizational records/data schism constitutes a new form of “digital divide.”


                                                                                      17
Yeo also observes that the boundaries between different categories – like records and
data and the institutions they represent - are fuzzy, and serve as points of contact
between worlds. This may cause dissent, according to Yeo. There is some anecdotal
evidence of such dissent in reported cases of contestation between records
professionals seeking to establish control over new digital objects to ensure their
preservation and integrity, and those who, for various reasons seek to resist such
controls by denying that the digital objects they have created or that are found within
their information systems are records (see, for example, Lemieux 2001 1980; Baron
2014; Fares 2015) These contestations express enactments of power relations
between the two worlds, complete with border skirmishes (Lemieux 2001; Foucault
1980). Indeed, the subject line of one recent post on the records management listserv
concerning whether a particular object should be considered a record read: “This is
war!” (Fares 2015). Often under-resourced and increasingly marginalized records
managers and archivists seeking to fulfill their official mandate as keepers of the
record in a digital world, feel besieged as they engage in efforts to gain control over
new forms of digital recorded communication.

Such statements signal a second factor that may be in play as a barrier to addressing
management and preservation of digital recorded communications: incentives. In
many contexts, politicians and senior government officials have a vested interest in
maintaining a status quo that makes it difficult (or at least not easy) to find the
information needed to hold them accountable for their decisions and actions. The
issue is illustrated by a recent report about missing Cabinet documents from Jamaica
(Goffe 2015) where a commission of enquiry into a security operation that had led to
the deaths of over 70 people drew attention to practices around the handling of
ministerial, Cabinet records and investigative records. Terrance Williams,
Commissioner of the Independent Commission of Investigations, is reported to have
commented that there was a history in Jamaica of documents related to cases of
prosecutions of the police disappearing by the time the case reached court, with such
disappearances being attributed to rats, fires or water damage (Goffe 2015). Further
testimony before the commission suggested that problems with records were
widespread throughout the Caribbean region. The Jamaican case is not unique, nor is
it limited to the paper-based records featured in the report, as a recent Canadian case
involving alleged destruction of digital records responsive to a request under a
provincial right to information law attests (Taillefer and Elliot, 2015).


The Need for Good Data to Study the Effects of e-Government on Records and
Information Management in relation to Transparency and Accountability

Much of the evidence about the negative side-effects of increasing use of ICTs as part
of e-Government initiatives on recordkeeping and, by extension, government
transparency and accountability, derives from professional literature in the field of
records and information management and archives administration, with some
further evidence coming from transparency research. This body of literature has the


                                                                                    18
advantage of being written by practitioners very close to the ground of what is
happening within the public sector. It remains largely qualitative in nature, however,
and geographically uneven in coverage. Consequently, it is very difficult to generalize
from the findings of this literature: robust claims about effects and causality are
difficult to make. To advance the discussion, comparative data is needed about the
state of records and information management in countries that could be used to
analyze the relationship between the quality of recordkeeping, on the one hand, and
levels of ICT usage in public administration and other governance and development
indicators, on the other hand, in order to allow more robust conclusions about effects.
Currently, no such up-to-date comparative data exist. In 1995, the International
Council on Archives (ICA) undertook an “International Survey of Archival
Development,” gathering statistical and qualitative information from national
archives around the world (Roper, 1996). This survey is now nearly 20 years out of
date, and was completed before many countries began digitization programs or to
create and store records in digital form. The study by Ngoepe and Keapoka (2011)
covers only East and Southern Africa. There is thus a need to establish a baseline
picture of the current state of records and information management and archives
administration in countries as a first step to identifying how such systems have been
changed by the introduction of ICTs and what effect this is having on public
accountability and transparency.


Conclusion

This paper has discussed literature on the unintended consequences and downside
risks associated with the way recorded information is produced and managed in
digitally enabled public sector contexts, with particular focus on developing countries
and the international development agenda. The literature has been drawn primarily
from research conducted in the fields of records and information management and
archival administration, as well as from research on transparency. Though the paper
discusses a wide body of literature, it is not a bibliometric analysis and thus makes no
claim to comprehensiveness or robust generalizable conclusions about the coverage
of the literature on this issue. Such a study is still needed. In addition, there is also a
need for research that collects and analyzes comparative quantitative data about the
effects of e-Government initiatives records creation, use, management and
preservation, and, by extension, transparency and accountability, as such research
would support more generalizable and theoretically robust conclusions. Even based
on the available evidence, however, it is possible to observe that the introduction of
ICTs as part of e-Government initiatives has had unintended consequences and
introduced downside risks for records and information management and
preservation. These risks, in turn, have tended to undermine the evidence base
needed for the operation of effective transparency and accountability mechanisms
such as right to information regimes.

With discussions on the post-2015 Strategic Development Goals now underway,
which includes the goal of promoting peaceful and inclusive societies for sustainable


                                                                                        19
development (United Nations 2014a & 2014b), providing access to justice for all and
building effective, accountable and inclusive institutions, the conclusions to be drawn
from the research discussed in this paper suggest that it will be difficult to achieve
progress on development if evidence to bring bad actors to justice is missing and if
public officials continue to create and keep digital records and information as they
have done in the past and are doing now. In light of this evidence, it would seem
overdue to move the creation and handling of records up the global development
agenda by gathering data to better understand the effect that technology is having on
recordkeeping in developing countries, provide more support to governments to
strengthen records laws and bring records – especially new digital ones - under
effective control, and to clarify the status of all types of records and information vis a
vis requirements to preserve and make them available in the public interest.


Acknowledgements

The author would like to thank Anne Thurston and Shadrack Katuu for providing
sources and feedback that have contributed to the development of this paper.

References

Aas, K. (2015). Case Study of Digital Record Keeping in Estonia. Open Discussion
Forum on Transparency and Information Management, World Bank, December 4.
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTPUBLICSECTORANDG
OVERNANCE/0,,contentMDK:23585462~pagePK:148956~piPK:216618~theSitePK
:286305,00.html.

Akotia,, P (1997). "The Management of Public Sector Financial Records- The
Implications for Good Government. " PhD Thesis. University of London.

ARMA International (2009). Records and Information Management for Information
Technology Professionals. Prairie Village, KS: ARMA International.

Ball, C. (2009), What is transparency? Public Integrity 11(4): 293-308.

Barata, K & Cain, P. 2001. Information, not technology, is essential to accountability:
electronic records and public-sector financial management. The Information Society
7(4):247-258. http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/utis20.

Baron, J. (2004). All the President's E-mail: Electronic Recordkeeping Policies and
Practices in the Executive Office of the President. In ERPANET Workshop on Audit &
Certification in Digital Preservation.

Baron, J. (2014). President Signs Law Modernizing Federal Information
Management Practices. ARMA International Washington Policy Brief News and
Analysis of U.S. Legislation Affecting IM, December 10.


                                                                                       20
http://www.arma.org/r1/news/washington-policy-brief/2014/12/10/president-
signs-law-modernizing-federal-information-management-practices.

Bayissa, G., Ketema, G., & Birhanu, Y. (2010). Status of digitization process in
selected institutions of Ethiopia: A baseline stakeholders’ analysis survey report.
Ethiopian Journal of Education and Sciences, 5(2).

Bertot, J. C., Jaeger, P. T., & Grimes, J.M. (2010) Using ICTs to create a culture of
Transparency: E-government and social media as openness and anti-corruption
tools for societies. Government Information Quarterly, 277(3), 264-271.

Bolívar M., Muñoz L., Hernández A. (2014) Scientometric Study of the Progress and
Development of e-Government Research During the Period 2000–2012. Information
Technology for Development. Published online: 24 June 2014

Cain, P. (1996) Making the transition to the electronic age. Information Technology
for Development, 7(4), 159-67.

Cain, P. and Barata, K. (2001). Information, not technology, is essential to
accountability: Electronic records and public-sector financial management. The
Information Society 17(4), 247-258.

Carothers, T. and Brechenmacher, S. (2014). Accountability, Transparency,
Participation and Inclusion: A New Development Consensus? Washington, DC:
Carnegie Endownment for International Peace.

CMS Watch. 2010. The ECM Report 2010
http://replay.waybackmachine.org/20090524222117/http://www.cmswatch.com
/ECM/Report/

Fares, A & N. (2015). This is war! Message sent to the Records Management Listserv.
January 14. http://lists.ufl.edu/cgi-bin/wa?A2=ind1501B&L=RECMGMT-
L&P=R4666.

Foscarini, Fiorella, Yunhyong Kim, Christopher A. Lee, Alexander Mehler, Gillian
Oliver, and Seamus Ross. 2010. On the notion of Genre in digital preservation. Paper
read at Automation in Digital Preservation, July 18-23, at Dagstuhl.

Foucault, M. (1980). Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings,
1972-1977. Pantheon.

Greiling, D., & Spraul, K. (2010). Accountability and the challenges of information
disclosure. Public Administration Quarterly, 338-377.




                                                                                        21
Goffe, S. (2015). Secrecy, Protocol And Dumping Gov’t Documents. Jamaica Gleaner.
March 1. http://jamaica-gleaner.com/article/focus/20150301/secrecy-protocol-
and-dumping-gov’t-documents.

Grönlund, Å., & Horan, T. A. (2005). Introducing e-gov: history, definitions, and issues.
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 15(1), 39.

Hamooya, C., & Njobvu, B. (2010). Digitization of archival materials: The case of
national archives of Zambia. ESARBICA Journal: Journal of the Eastern and Southern
Africa Regional Branch of the International Council on Archives, 29(1).

Heald, D. (2006). Varieties of transparency. In Proceedings of the British Academy.
(Vol. 135, p. 25). Oxford: Oxford University Press Inc.

Heintze, T., & Bretschneider, S. (2000). Information technology and restructuring in
public organizations: does adoption of information technology affect organizational
structures, communications, and decision making?. Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory, 10(4), 801-830.

Heeks, R. (1998) Public Sector Accountability: Can IT deliver? COM-NET IT Forum.

Heeks, R. (2002). Information systems and developing countries: Failure, success, and
local improvisations. The information society, 18(2), 101-112.

Heeks, R. (2005). Implementing and managing eGovernment: an international text.
Sage.

Heeks, R., & Bailur, S. (2007). Analyzing e-government research: Perspectives,
philosophies, theories, methods, and practice. Government information quarterly,
24(2), 243-265.

Henriksen, H.Z. Andersen, K.V. (2008). Electronic records management systems
implementation in the Pakistani local government. Records Management Journal 18
(1), 40 - 52

ICIEN (Information Commissioners International Exchange Network) (2014). In the
Experience of Information Commissioners: The Information Commissioners’
International Exchange Network Survey. Centre for Freedom of Information,
University                             of                             Dundee.
http://www.centrefoi.org.uk/news/images/98364000_1415912545.pdf

IEAG (United Nations Secretary-General’s Independent Expert Advisory Group
on a Data Revolution for Sustainable Development) (2014). A World That Counts:
Mobilising The Data Revolution for Sustainable Development. NY: United Nations.
http://www.undatarevolution.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/A-World-That-
Counts.pdf.


                                                                                      22
IRMT (International Records Management Trust) (2003). Electronic Government and
Electronic Records: E-Records Readiness and Capacity Building: An Electronic
Discussion Paper, 19. London: IRMT.

IRMT (International Records Management Trust) (2007). Fostering Trust and
Transparency in Governance: Investigating and Addressing the Requirements for
Building Integrity in Public Sector Information Systems in the ICT Environment.
Annual Report, March 2006-April 2007. London: IRMT.

IRMT (International Records Management Trust) (2008). Fostering Trust and
Transparency in Governance: Investigating and Addressing the Requirements for
Building Integrity in Public Sector Information Systems in the ICT Environment.
Annual Report, May 2007-June 2008. London: IRMT.

IRMT (International Records Management Trust) (2011). Managing Records as
Reliable Evidence for ICT/ e-Government and Freedom of Information. White Paper
for Senior Management. London: IRMT.

IRMT (International Records Management Trust) (2015). Research Reports:
Evidence   Based    Governance      Project   (2002   to    2004).    Website.
http://www.irmt.org/portfolio/evidence-based-governance-project-2002-2004.

Jaeger, P. T., & Bertot, J. C. (2010). Transparency and technological change: Ensuring
equal and sustained public access to government information. Government
Information Quarterly, 27, 371-376

Jimerson, R. C. (2007). Archives for all: professional responsibility and social justice.
American Archivist, 70(2), 252-281.

Jordan, I. and de Stricker, U. (2014). Information Management in the Canadian Federal
Government: Principles, Practices and the Role of Information Professionals.
https://curve.carleton.ca/system/files/frp/27422_2.pdf

Kampffmeyer, U. (2004). Trends in Record, Document and Enterprise Content
Management. Project Consult, 28th September 2004. http://www.project-
consult.net/Files/ECM_Handout_english_SER.pdf.

Kampffmeyer, U. (2006). Enterprise Content Management. Project Consult.
http://www.project-consult.net/Files/ECM_White%20Paper_kff_2006.pdf.

Katuu, S., (2012a) Enterprise Content Management and Digital Curation
Applications: Maturity Model Connections.
http://www.unesco.org/new/fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/CI/CI/pdf/mow/VC_Ka
tuu_28_D_1130.pdf.



                                                                                      23
Katuu, S. (2012b). Enterprise content management (ECM) implementation in South
Africa. Records Management Journal, 22(1), 37-56.

Keakopa, S. M. (2007). Policies and procedures for the management of electronic
records in Botswana, Namibia and South Africa. ESARBICA Journal: Journal of the
Eastern and Southern Africa Regional Branch of the International Council on
Archives, 26(1).

Kemoni, H. N., & Ngulube, P. (2007). Records and archives legislation in Kenya and
management of public sector records: a SWOT analysis approach. African Journal of
Library, Archives and Information Science, 17(2), 89-102.

Kwatsha, N. (2010). Factors affecting the implementation of an electronic document
and records management system, MPhil Thesis. University of Stellenbosch.

Lee, G., & Perry, J. L. (2002). Are computers boosting productivity? A test of the
paradox in state governments. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory,
12(1), 77-102.

Lemieux, V. (2001). Let the Ghosts Speak: An Empirical Exploration of the" Nature" of
the Record. Archivaria, 1(51).

Lemieux, V., (2002) Competitive Viability, Accountability and Record Keeping:
A Theoretical and Empirical Exploration Using a Case Study of Jamaican
Commercial Bank Failures. PhD Thesis. University College London.

Lim S. L., Chennupati K.R., Pitt K.W. (2003). Problems in the preservation of electronic
records. Library Review 52(3), 117 – 125.

Liu, X.M. and Murphy, D. (2014). Document Explosion in the World of Big Data–
Curriculum Considerations. 12 (6), 83.

Lovering, T. J. (2010). British Colonial Administrations’ registry systems: a
comparative study of Northern Rhodesia and Nyasaland. Archival Science, 10(1), 1-
23.

Lowry, J. (2013). Freedom of information and government records in Kenya, Uganda
and Tanzania. Archives and Manuscripts, 41(1), 23-32.

Luyombya, D. (2011). ICT and digital records management in the Ugandan public
service. Records Management Journal, 21(2), 135-144.

Mampe, G., & Kalusopa, T. (2013). Records management and service delivery: the case
of Department of Corporate Services in the Ministry of Health in Botswana. Journal of
the South African Society of Archivists, 45, 2-23.



                                                                                     24
Migliorisi, S., & Wescott, C. (2011). A Review of World Bank Support for
Accountability Institutions in the Context of Governance and Anticorruption.
Independent Evaluation Group (World Bank, IFC, MIGA), Working Paper Series.

Meijer, A. (2013). Understanding the complex dynamics of transparency. Public
Administration Review, 73(3), 429-439.

Mnjama, N. (2005). Archival landscape in eastern and southern Africa. Library
Management, 26(8/9), 457-470.

Mutiti, N. 2001, The challenges of managing electronic records in the ESARBICA
region, ESARBICA Journal, 20: 57-61.

Mutiti, N. 2002. Computerisation of archives and records in the ESARBICA region.
ESARBICA Journal, 21: 114-119.

Neuman, L. and Calland R. (2007). Making the Access to Information Law Work: The
Challenges of Implementation. In A. Florini, (Ed.), The Right to Know. NY: Columbia
University Press.

Ngoepe, M., & Masegonyana Keakopa, S. (2011). An assessment of the state of national
archival and records systems in the ESARBICA region: a South Africa-Botswana
comparison. Records Management Journal, 21(2), 145-160.

“Our Representative” (2014). RTI reply suggests Union Home Ministry destroyed
11,100 files in July casually, without caring for rules. Counterview. September 1.
http://www.counterview.net/2014/09/rti-reply-suggests-union-home-
ministry.html.

Peterson, T. H. (2008). Temporary courts, permanent records. Wilson Center.
http://www.wilsoncenter.org/sites/default/files/TCPR_Peterson_HAPPOP02.pdf.

Redburn, F. S. and Buss, T.F (2004). Modernizing Democracy: Citizen Participation in
the Information Revolution. In Farazmand, A., Ed. Sound Governance: Policy and
Administrative Innovations. Westport, Conn.: Praeger, 155-169.

Ramatlhakwana, D. (2009). Challenges to digitizing the African heritage: some
reflections. ESARBICA Journal: Journal of the Eastern and Southern Africa Regional
Branch of the International Council on Archives, 28(1).

Roper, M. (1995). The present state of archival development world-wide,” Janus
Archival Review, pp. 11-47.

Schedler, A. (1999). Conceptualizing accountability. The self-restraining state: Power
and accountability in new democracies, 13-28.



                                                                                   25
Sichalwe, ED, Ngulube, P & Stilwell, C. 2011. Managing records as a strategic resource
in the government ministries of Tanzania. Information Development 24(4):264-279.

Taillefer, T. and Elliot, N. (2015). Promoting Legislated Duty to Document for
Government Accountability. Open Discussion Forum on Transparency and
Information Management, World Bank, June 4.
http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTPUBLICSECTORANDG
OVERNANCE/0,,contentMDK:23585462~pagePK:148956~piPK:216618~theSitePK
:286305,00.html

Tale, S & Alefaio, O. 2005. Records management in developing countries: challenges
and threats − towards a realistic plan. National Archives of Fiji.
http://www.acarm.org/documents/issue37/37.6%20Records%20Management%2
0in%20D

Thurston, A. (2015). Managing Records and Information for Transparent and
Accountable and Inclusive Governance in the Digital Era: Lessons from the Nordic
Countries. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Tolbert, C. J., & Mossberger, K. (2006). The effects of e‐government on trust and
confidence in government. Public Administration Review, 66(3), 354-369.

Tough, A. G. (2009). Archives in sub-Saharan Africa half a century after independence.
Archival Science, 9(3-4), 187-201.

Trapnell S. (2014) Right to Information: Case Studies on Implementation.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

Trapnell S. and Lemieux, V. (2014). Right to Information: Identifying Drivers of
Effectiveness in Implementation. Right to Information Working Paper. Washington,
DC:                                 World                                  Bank.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/PUBLICSECTORANDGOVERNANCE/Resources
/285741-1343934891414/8787489-1344020463266/8788935-
1399321576201/RTI_Drivers_of_Effectiveness_WP2_26Nov2014.pdf.

UNDP (United Nations Development Program) (2010). Fostering Social
Accountability:       From         Principle    to       Practice.       UNDP.
http://www.undp.org/content/undp/en/home/librarypage/democratic-
governance/oslo_governance_centre/analysis_and_learning/fostering_socialaccount
abilityfromprincipletopractice.html.

United Nations (2014a) The road to dignity by 2030: ending poverty, transforming all
lives and protecting the planet: Synthesis report of the Secretary-General on the post-
2015                  sustainable                 development                  agenda.
Http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=A/69/700&Lang=E.
Accessed January 2, 2015.


                                                                                    26
United Nations (2014b). Open Working Group proposal for Sustainable Development
Goals.            Sustainable      Development        Knowledge        Platform.
Http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgsproposal.

Van Garderen, P. (2002). Electronic Records Strategy: Final Report.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTARCHIVES/Resources/WB_ERS_Phase_1.p
df. ———. 2012. Archivematica at the City of Vancouver Archives [cited 17th
September 2012].

Wallace, D. A. (2001). Electronic records management defined by court case and
policy. Information Management Journal – Prairie Village, 35(1), 4-15.

Wamukoya, J. (1996)        Records Management and Administrative Reform
Programmes in Kenya. " PhD Thesis. University of London.

Wamukoya, J., & Mutula, S. M. (2005). Capacity-building requirements for e-records
management: the case in east and southern Africa. Records Management Journal,
15(2), 71-79.

White, B. (2004). RM and IT -- Working Together and Clout. Message sent to Records
Management Listserv. June 3. http://lists.ufl.edu/cgi-
bin/wa?A2=ind0406&L=RECMGMT-L&P=R4700.

Wong, W. and Welch, E. (2004), Does E-Government Promote Accountability? A
Comparative Analysis of Website Openness and Government Accountability.
Governance, 17, 275–297.

World Bank (2014a).       Stocktaking exercise – digital governance projects
(forthcoming report).

World Bank (2014b). Strategic Framework for Mainstreaming Citizen Engagement
in World Bank Group Operations: Engaging with Citizens for Improved Results.
Washington, DC: World Bank Group.

World Bank (2014c). Big Data in Action for Development. Washington, DC: World
Bank.
http://live.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/Big%20Data%20for%20Developmen
t%20Report_final%20version.pdf.

Yates, J. (1993). Control through communication: The rise of system in American
management (Vol. 6). JHU Press.

Yeo, G. (2007). Concepts of record (1): evidence, information, and persistent
representations. American Archivist, 70(2), 315-343.



                                                                               27
Yeo, G. (2008). Concepts of record (2): prototypes and boundary objects. American
Archivist, 71(1), 118-143.




                                                                              28
