98723
Right to Information
Managing Records and Information for
Transparent, Accountable, and Inclusive
Governance in the Digital Environment:
Lessons from Nordic Countries
Anne Thurston
International Records Management Trust

Victoria L. Lemieux
Series General Editor
ii 	




       Managing Records and Information for Transparent, Accountable, and Inclusive
       Governance in the Digital Era: Lessons from Nordic Countries
       By Anne Thurston, International Records Management Trust



       Disclaimer
       The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s) and
       do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the International Bank for
       Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank or the governments they represent.

       The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The bound-
       aries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply
       any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the
       endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

       © 2015 The World Bank
       1818 H Street NW
       Washington DC 20433
       Telephone: 202-473-1000
       www.worldbank.org
	                                                                                                    iii




Right to Information Series
The Right to Information Series brings forward current and ongoing research on issues related
to transparency and the right to information. It aims to provide a range of information on policy,
practice, experience, and frontier issues related to public sector openness and transparency,
including the underlying functions and outcomes of open government efforts.

Project Leader and Right to Information Series General Editor:
Victoria Lemieux, vlemieux@worldbank.org

Working Papers Series Editor:
Stephanie E. Trapnell, strapnell@worldbank.org



Titles in the Right to Information Series

Right to Information: Case Studies on Implementation (2014),
edited by Stephanie E. Trapnell

Right to Information: Requests and Appeals Data in RTI Systems (2014),
by Jesse Worker with Carole Excell

Right to Information: Recent spread of RTI legislation (2014),
by Toby Mendel

Right to Information: Identifying Drivers of Effectiveness in Implementation (2014),
by Stephanie E. Trapnell and Victoria L. Lemieux

Designing Right to Information Laws for Effective Implementation (2015),
by Toby Mendel

Managing Records and Information for Transparent, Accountable and
Inclusive Governance in the Digital Era (2015),
by Anne Thurston

Guide to the Implementation of Right to Information Laws (2015),
by Victoria L. Lemieux and Stephanie E. Trapnell
	                                                                                                                                                           v




Contents

Right to Information Series................................................................................... iii
Acknowledgments................................................................................................ vii

Overview.................................................................................................................. 1
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 1
Harmonizing Goals for Openness, Digital Governance, and High Quality
     Digital Information ......................................................................................................................... 2
High Quality Digital Information ........................................................................................................ 3
Key Issues for the Future ..................................................................................................................... 5


Estonia: Information Governance and the Information Society ......................... 7
Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 7
Digital Governance Environment ....................................................................................................... 8
Legal Framework.................................................................................................................................. 9
Administrative Framework ................................................................................................................ 10
The Move to Information Governance............................................................................................. 13
Challenges ......................................................................................................................................... 14
Conclusion ......................................................................................................................................... 16
Appendix A. List of Key Records Management Standards Used in Estonia.................................. 16


Finland: Transparency and Citizen Participation................................................ 19
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................ 19
Legal Framework ............................................................................................................................... 20
Administrative Framework ................................................................................................................ 21
Challenges ......................................................................................................................................... 27
Conclusion ......................................................................................................................................... 28


Norway: Information Integrity and Access to Information ............................... 29
Introduction ........................................................................................................................................ 29
Legal Framework ............................................................................................................................... 30
Administrative Framework................................................................................................................. 31
Challenges.......................................................................................................................................... 35
Conclusion.......................................................................................................................................... 37


List of Relevant International Standards............................................................. 39
Records Management/Information Governance and Risk Related Standards.............................. 39
Data Management Standards........................................................................................................... 45
	                                                                                                 vii




Acknowledgments
This study could not have been completed without the warm and generous support of officials
in relevant agencies across the three countries studied—Estonia, Finland, and Norway. They
agreed to be interviewed, patiently answered questions, provided valuable reference material,
and reviewed drafts of the studies, correcting any misconceptions that they identified. Their
open and honest assessment of challenges of providing high quality information in the digital
environment has brought a fresh perspective to a key aspect of achieving transparency, account-
ability, and social inclusion that is often overlooked. Their assistance is deeply appreciated.
                   Overview

Introduction
This set of three case studies explores the intersection of openness, digital governance, and
high quality information in Estonia,1 Finland, and Norway with the aim of identifying lessons
that will support the same objectives in lower resource countries. Openness, a key aspect of
the international agenda for increasing transparency and accountability, for reducing public sec-
tor corruption, and for strengthening economic performance, rests on the principle that citizens
have a right to know what their governments are doing and to benefit from using government
information. Goals for open, accountable, and inclusive governance rest on the assumption that
trustworthy information is available and can be shared meaningfully through strategies for digital
governance. This assumption needs to be examined. Does reliable and complete information
exist across lower resource countries? Can it be accessed readily? Will it survive through time?
    The three Nordic countries are distinguished by and highly respected for their commitment
to openness and social justice, low levels of corruption, and advanced use of technology to
support economic development and high quality customer service provision. These countries
also are distinguished by their recognition that high quality information is an essential resource
for national development and that managing digital records and data effectively is an essential
state function. Their experience offers valuable insights into the means of meeting international
expectations for using information to support openness and economic growth. The case studies
seek to answer four basic questions: What is involved in managing digital information? What are
the benefits? What are the risks of not managing this resource? What are the challenges for the
future?




                                                                                                     1
2	                    Managing Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                      
                      Lessons from Nordic Countries




     Harmonizing Goals for Openness,
     Digital Governance, and High Quality
     Digital Information
     Nordic societies share the political goal of encouraging strong social cohesion based on the
     core values of equal opportunities, social solidarity, and security for all. They emphasize social
     rights and the principle that everyone, including vulnerable groups in society, is entitled to equal
     access to services, particularly health and education, and to social justice. The three govern-
     ments also share a strong focus on maximizing opportunities of digital government, with an
     emphasis on interoperability solutions for public administration and for sharing, coordinating,
     and reusing information to inform strategy-setting and long term planning. Poor quality infor-
     mation and difficulties in exchanging it between information systems limits their ability to use
     information resources effectively. In particular, Finland and Estonia share a strong commitment
     to using digital governance solutions to facilitate high quality services for citizens and to facili-
     tate cross-border information flow.
         All three countries support the importance of high quality public sector as the evidence base
     for policy and decision-making and cross-organizational services. They are able to demonstrate
     accountability and transparency by enabling citizens to access trustworthy records and data that
     demonstrate what the government has promised, what it has done, and how it has spent public
     funds. Each of the three countries has moved beyond simply managing technology to managing
     integrity and access.
         The case studies explore the range of information management issues involved in achieving
     a reliable and sustainable evidence base of government information and using it effectively as
     a basis for openness and digital governance. Experience in the three countries highlights the
     requirement for effective legal and administrative control frameworks and for standards as the
     basis for achieving quality and integrity. The information management issues that these coun-
     tries are addressing are generic, and the innovative solutions that they are developing have
     significant international implications.
         Although the precise approach differs, all three countries invest in managing digital records
     and data as part of a whole, with the aim of harmonizing the way information is produced, shared,
     and used across government; supporting smarter governance; and increasing the efficiency and
     cost effectiveness of public services. The issues are common across the three countries, but each
     has particular lessons to share, and each faces challenges in its own context. The findings are
     complementary. Together, they form a coherent picture of a crucial global set of issues that must
     be addressed as a key aspect of supporting development in the digital environment.
Overview	                                                                                                  3




High Quality Digital Information
Establishing Quality Controls

Experience in the three countries demonstrates that building high quality evidence involves
an interface between interconnected laws, standards, well-defined metadata architectures, and
technology systems. All three countries practice lifecycle or continuum information manage-
ment and apply clear standards in order to achieve consistent controls as a core aspect of digital
governance. As the expectation of benefits from information systems grows, it has become
increasingly important to link together public records, data, and the systems used to create and
manage them. This means, for instance, that data entered directly into a database will need to
be maintained according to standard requirements for protecting evidentiary value, for instance
those governing appraisal, destruction, or transfer to secure long-term storage. This holistic
approach, known as information governance, maintains the legal requirement to protect the
integrity of records and data, while broadening the approach to managing information required
as evidence, regardless of form or structure.
     All three countries apply guidelines and mandatory requirements as the means of achiev-
ing high quality information and ensuring that digital records can be shared across systems.
Interoperability initiatives within and between governments require the ability to exchange
information effectively, and this in turn requires standardized information structures. By speci-
fying clear requirements for creating and structuring records generated by digital systems, the
governments are able to produce reliable records as evidence of policies, actions, transactions,
expenditure, precedents, and rights, and to use them as a basis for openness.
     Metadata capture through registration systems, the traditional basis for maintaining control
of public sector information in many European countries, remains central to digital records and
information management strategies. Metadata registration makes it possible to link the content
and context of the records, to describe them in a meaningful way, and to manage them securely.
It provides the foundation for building information integrity and legal authority in the public sec-
tor, because once a record is registered and its context is fixed, it is difficult to alter it or delete
it without authority. Metadata documents how the records were created, managed, and used
and their relationship to other records. Any subsequent changes and anything that happens to
the record also are doumented through metadata, thus providing an audit trail of context and
changes in status that makes it possible to identify fraud or illegal actions.
     The records and information management standards in use in the three countries include
data models, as well as requirements for records structure and metadata, and for functional-
ity in Electronic Records Management Systems. They describe arrangements for registration,
filing, and retention, and they define XML-scheme for exporting records from records systems
to secure long-term storage. Norway and Finland have developed their own standards, while
Estonia uses MoReq®, a specification of modular requirements for digital records systems devel-
oped by the DLM Forum, a European wide organization of national archives, enterprises, and
research organizations with an interest in digital records management
4	                    Managing Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                      
                      Lessons from Nordic Countries



     Benefits of Digital Records Management

     The benefits of effective digital records management are illustrated in the case studies and
     summarized here.
     •	 The public can have confidence in the credibility, authenticity, and integrity of the infor-
        mation, and public sector agencies can use them effectively for planning and monitoring
        programs, activities, and expenditure.

     •	 It is possible to rapidly trace, relate, and compare policies, decisions, actions, and expendi-
        ture accurately over long periods of time as a basis for an informed and socially just society.

     •	 Accountability and transparency are safeguarded. An audit trail of any changes or unautho-
        rised use of the records makes it possible to detect and trace corruption.

     •	 Records can be opened to the public systematically and privacy rights can be protected. Any
        restriction on opening records can be justified and documented.

     •	 Right to Information requests can be met rapidly and reliably. Documents can be tagged
        when there is a legal restriction on publication.

     •	 Records can be migrated to new formats and software and hardware environments as nec-
        essary.

     •	 Standardized interoperability rules can be applied effectively, making it possible to interface
        dispersed information systems, such as document management systems, accounting sys-
        tems, or information systems specific to an organization’s activities, and to reuse information.

     •	 Records can be securely and systematically extracted from diverse digital systems and trans-
        ferred to long-term digital custody, where they can continue to meet meet legal, administra-
        tive, fiscal, or other evidentiary needs through time.

     •	 Information loss is minimized. The high risk of holding digital records outside secure man-
        aged storage decreases.


     Implications for Data Management

     The same issues apply to data management. There is growing awareness of the value of data
     for improving policy decisions and service provision, as well as for research, planning, and mon-
     itoring, and for public use, and there is recognition that data should be better managed and
     used. Open data is seen as a key aspect of information management/information governance
     strategies. Achieving better quality data and more effective use of data involves the same man-
     agement principles that apply to records and a clear understanding of the relationship between
     these two forms of information. Where public sector data has not been protected and pre-
     served systematically, it often has been lost inadvertently and cannot be exchanged and reused
     effectively.
          As is the case with records, the ability to understand, use, and preserve databases requires
     continuous use of standardized metadata to document the origin and use or the database and
     the way it has been managed. Data models, processing rules, and guidelines for standardized
     structures and mandatory metadata fields are being defined in standards. Control mechanisms
     are being strengthened to provide quality, enable traceability, protect privacy, and support
Overview	                                                                                                         5




access through time. These include clearly defined interfaces for converting datasets from rela-
tional tables to XML files, making it possible to bring records contained in databases to secure
long-term storage.


Key Issues for the Future
The case studies describe challenges the three countries have identified for managing records
and information in relation to rapidly escalating technological change and citizens’ growing
expectations for access. All three countries are addressing all of these challenges, but each has
its own approach in relation to its history and national commitments. Estonia is building the reg-
ulatory framework and system functionality needed to create seamless data exchanges across
functions, while simultaneously addressing legacy issues arising from the rapid transition to dig-
ital governance. Finland is redefining laws, regulations, roles, and responsibilities for managing
records and data in relation to the intersecting requirements for digital governance, access to
information, and records and data management. Norway is in the process of defining simpler,
cheaper automated means of extracting records and metadata from records systems to enable
greater benefits for society.
     These challenges are inevitably the same for all countries aspiring to use digital records and
data effectively to support openness and economic growth. The longstanding role of the national
archives, as the agency with statutory responsibility for managing and protecting the evidentiary
value of records, is ongoing. However, the laws, administrative placement, and responsibilities
for information management must now be reconsidered, broadened, and extended to support
a coordinated approach to goals for openness and digital governance, including access rights.
Logical coherence in metadata structures across record generating systems, advanced search
functionality based upon defined criteria, and easy to master user interfaces will offer enormous
advantages for future ability to strengthen transparency and accountability, anti-corruption
strategies, citizen engagement, and economic development. Countries that do not develop
requirements for managing digital records will be at a significant disadvantage in the digital
environment.
     Less well-resourced countries, where these principles may not yet be applied, have an
opportunity to consider the value of the essons learned in the Nordic countries in relation to
their own development goals. They may wish to begin by carrying out a simple risk analysis to
determine whether relevant laws are in place and have been harmonized, and whether clear
manadatory requirements have been developed and implemented for creating, structuring,
using, and preserving trustworthy records generated by digital systems. The answers to these
questions will be help to determine whether trustworthy digital information is available to meet
international development goals for open, accountable, and inclusive governance or whether a
deeper approach is needed to move beyond simply managing technology to managing integ-
rity and access.


Note
1. Estonia may be known as a Baltic or as a Nordic country. In this study it is referred to as a Nordic country
because of the goals and strategies that it shares with countries in the Nordic region.
                    Information Governance and the
                    Information Society
                    Estonia

Introduction
Estonia is distinguished by its cutting edge use of technology to support economic and social
development and its parallel commitment to managing digital information as the evidence base
for an effective modern public sector and high quality service delivery. Its innovative strategies
for sharing information across government and making it available to citizens and the private
sector illustrate the benefits of an integrated approach to digital governance, openness, and
information management.
    A small country in Northern Europe, Estonia is strategically positioned as the gate-
way between Europe and Russia; for centuries it experienced wave after wave of occupiers.
Annexation by the Soviet Union in 1940, disrupted briefly by German occupation, lasted until
1991 and resulted in large-scale deportation, execution, or immigration of Estonians. Through
these experiences, Estonia developed an orderly, highly adaptable culture that is deeply com-
mitted to freedom, self-determination, and preservation of national identity. Within a short time
of reaching independence, the nation committed itself to using technology to support democ-
racy, services to citizens, and sustainable economic growth.
    In 1991 Estonia had very little IT infrastructure and few resources for large scale IT develop-
ment, but from the mid 1990s onward, its IT infrastructure and skill base developed rapidly. The
Government invested in centralized development of core components and support systems to
keep costs low, and this resulted in highly innovative and efficient solutions. After Estonia joined
the European Union in 2004, and was eligible for technical support, it was able to increase the
pace of its rapid advance. The values of innovation, openness, and transparency, deeply rooted
in Estonian administrative culture, are expressed in Estonia’s concept that public sector informa-
tion should be available to the public without the public having to ask for it.




                                                                                                       7
8	                    Managing Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                      
                      Lessons from Nordic Countries



          The initial focus on information technology has broadened to incorporate a growing empha-
     sis on high quality digital information as an integral component of the ICT management environ-
     ment. Estonia’s approach to managing the quality and accessibility of information is to apply the
     internationally agreed records management principles of authenticity and integrity to any type
     of public sector information that can serve as evidence, whether it is paper based, a relational
     database, or system generated digital records.
          Estonia joined the Open Government Partnership in the spring of 2012. Its main goals in
     joining were to draw attention to the quality of state governance and learn from the experience
     of other states, while sharing its own good practices, especially in the areas of e-governance and
     public sector ICT use.


     Digital Governance Environment
     Interoperability and an emphasis on free and open use of the Internet are cornerstones of
     Estonia’s technology development. Interoperability rules were introduced at the end of the
     1990s, before most government systems were established, and today most public databases
     are interoperable. European Union investment, including training, has had a major impact on
     IT development, and if the EU were to cease funding development, the rapid progress to date
     could be difficult to sustain. However, the achievements are not simply a result of funding. Even
     after European Union investment in technological development began, the government con-
     tinued to emphasize centralized core systems and principles across the public sector. This has
     helped to keep ICT expenditure lower than in other European countries and to produce effec-
     tive results.
         Estonian citizens have benefitted significantly from technological developments. For over
     a decade, they have been using on-line services for banking and for communicating with the
     state, which is now virtually paper-free in many areas of public administration. All core informa-
     tion services for citizens are available on the web. For instance, 98% of Estonians use online tax
     declaration; any doctor, with a patient’s consent, can consult a medical history, and it is possible
     to establish a business rapidly and deliver all reports electronically. Estonia has an e-tax board,
     e-police, e-school, e-health, e-business, and an e-voting system. Information systems are aimed
     increasingly at users and services and at linking the whole Estonian information system into a
     common logical unit comprising public records, data, and the systems used to create and man-
     age them.
         As Estonia has moved rapidly toward digital governance, it has become increasingly clear
     that a high level of service provision must be underpinned by well-developed structures for man-
     aging the integrity and preservation of system generated records and data, and for accessing
     and preserving them through time. Linking information management to efficient, quality service
     provision is increasingly seen as a key aspect of developing fully electronic processes, improving
     reporting, increasing transparency, and protecting the evidentiary value of records on any media
     for as long as they are required.
         While there is a long way to go in terms of widespread awareness raising and developing
     practical tools and guidelines, the importance of managing information for the transition to
Estonia: Information Governance and the Information Society	                                            9




the information society is spreading. Given that most public records in Estonia are created,
exchanged, and received electronically, the Government works to ensure that digital information
can be shared securely and efficiently. Once information has been gathered from citizens, agen-
cies across government are able to reuse it. At present, records management and archival man-
agement are administered separately but collaboratively. However, there is a growing awareness
that they are part of a whole.


Legal Framework
Constitution1

The Estonian Constitution guarantees all citizens free access to public information by making all
government agencies and local authorities and their officials legally responsible for providing
information about their activities to any citizen of Estonia. The only exceptions are where the law
prohibits disclosure or where the information is intended exclusively for internal use.

Public Information Act2

Estonia’s Public Information Act was passed in 2000 to underpin democracy, the social rule of
law, and an open society. It ensures that all citizens are able to access public information in order
to exercise their rights and freedoms, meet their obligations, and monitor the performance
of public duties. The Act creates a presumption of openness unless there is a reason for legal
closure, for instance in relation to personal privacy. It requires information holders to ensure
access to the information in the quickest and easiest manner possible. Access must be granted
without charge unless the law prescribes payment for direct expenses relating to the release of
the information.

Archives Act3

The Archives Act, which was passed in 2011, defines a record as information on any medium
created or received in the course of the activities of an agency or person; it defines an archival
record as one that has been determined, through appraisal, to contain evidence of facts or
activities of long term value to the nation. The Act requires that agencies and persons perform-
ing public duties ensure the preservation and usability of archival records by transferring them
to the National Archives when the records are no longer needed for the performance of their
duties, or within 10 years of their creation or receipt. The Act addresses the appraisal, acquisi-
tion, organization, and preservation of archival records, and it mandates that access to them
must be unrestricted unless legal restrictions apply, for instance under the Public Information
Act, the Personal Data Protection Act, or the the State Secrets and Classified Information of
Foreign States Act.
10 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries




       Administrative Framework
       Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications4

       The Ministry is responsible for secure technological development and innovation policy, as well
       as for establishing a user-friendly service environment. It drafts and implements economic policy
       and evaluates its outcomes, providing high-level coordination of information technology and
       interoperability issues, and taking political actions where necessary. The Ministry is a member
       of the DLM Forum, a community of public archives and interested parties from government,
       commercial, academic sectors that are interested in information governance. Founded by the
       European Commission in 1996, the Forum is a not-for-profit foundation providing industry speci-
       fications and serving members from across Europe and the rest of the world.5
           Two key structural divisions of the Ministry, the Department of State Information Systems
       and the Department of Information Society Services Development, play an essential role in
       information governance. The Information System Authority,6 a separate agency that reports to
       the Ministry, develops and has day-to-day oversight of a range of interconnected information
       systems.

       Department of State Information Systems7

       The Department is responsible for coordinating the development and administration of the
       national information system through the Information System Authority, with the aim of providing
       the best possible services to citizens. This includes providing the basic infrastructure for con-
       necting important state information systems and their data; advising public service providers
       on managing their information systems; implementing policies for maintaining the core IT infra-
       structure, including interoperability and open data regulations; coordinating state IT-policy and
       development plans for state administrative information systems; developing and implementing
       IT-related legislation; managing government IT projects, budgets, and procurement; and over-
       seeing IT standardization.

       Information System Authority

       The Authority is in charge of implementing requirements developed by the Ministry, including
       oversight of a range of a range of interconnected systems:
       •	 Administration System of the State Information System.8 This overarching information
          system provides information on the state’s information systems and databases, the data
          collected and processed in the various information systems, the services provided, and who
          is using them.

       •	 Data Exchange Layer X-Road.9 This is a platform-independent secure central infrastruc-
          ture that enables trustworthy communication between public sector information systems.
          Launched in 2001 to support the Public Information Act, the X-Road enables secure and cost
          effective Internet-based data exchange between databases belonging to the state informa-
          tion system. It allows public institutions, private sector enterprises, and citizens to securely
          access and exchange data to facilitate service provision. It connects over 1000 institutions
Estonia: Information Governance and the Information Society	                                           11




   and several hundred information systems, and it facilitates several thousand machine-to-ma-
   chine and web services.

•	 Public Key Infrastructure.10 The infrastructure enables secure digital authentication and
   signing. It supports solutions for establishing electronic identity and forwarding data using
   an encryption key pair: a public encryption key and a private decryption key. While the state
   undertakes to assure the existence and functioning of a public key infrastructure, a large
   part of the serice is purchased from the private sector, for instance, certification and the
   infrastructure for distributing the public key.

•	 Document Exchange Centre.11 This is a secure, virus and spam free infrastructure for trans-
   mitting documents (for instance, letters, draft legislation, financial documents, electronic
   forms) together with metadata, using the secure data exchange layer X-Road. It makes it
   possible to interface dispersed information systems, including, for instance, document man-
   agement systems, accounting systems, or information systems specific to an organization’s
   main activities. The DEC also supports the transfer of documents to appropriate long-term
   repositories. It is based on the entity model described in ISO 23081-2 Records Management
   Processes.12 Citizens and entrepreneurs can use the state portal13 service, Minu postkast (My
   Mailbox), to send and receive letters to and from any state or local government agency that
   uses DEC.14 Smaller agencies that process their documents mainly in a document manage-
   ment system often provide electronic forms that citizens can complete and submit via Minu
   postkast. In the future, the forms will be pre-filled with the data already existing in the state
   information system, and citizens or entrepreneurs can monitor the progress of an application
   process.


Department of Information Society Services Development15

The Department is in charge of policies for effective information society services, records man-
agement, and information governance. It links digital records management to service provision
to support electronic handling and procedural processes, improve reporting, increase transpar-
ency, and safeguard and preserve information on any media as evidence. The aim is to increase
citizens’ and officials’ awareness of and satisfaction with state digital services, strengthen the
potential for the information society, and enhance the efficiency of state policy formulation
through high-quality information and data usage. 
     The Department has issued a series of guidelines, for records managers in state and local
government agencies and for service providers, to support user-friendly and efficient infor-
mation services.16 These guidelines are being translated into English. In December 2014, the
Department published ‘Guidelines on Minimum Requirements for Estonian Public Sector
Document and Records Management Systems’ to enable agencies to describe, evaluate, and
compare the strength of document and records management systems within the state infor-
mation system. The aim is to improve management and administration processes, enhance the
interoperability of records management systems, and facilitate document and data exchange.17
The Guidelines support the provisions of the Archives Act and the Public Information Act for
ensuring the preservation and usability of records. They rest on international records and infor-
mation management good practice standards18 that define requirements for managing digital
12 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



       records. In addition, the Department of Information Society Services Development and the
       National Archives have jointly prepared a standardized set of minimum metadata requirements
       based on an extensive study of metadata requirements in countries including the UK, Germany,
       Canada, and Norway.19
            Estonia has achieved significant progress in managing its records and information. Functional
       classification schemes have been designed, and retention periods defined. Electronic registers
       are maintained across government agencies and are available on agency websites, enabling
       citizens to find and read the records they need. Access restrictions on records are described
       explicitly, and the registers include descriptions of sensitive records closed for legal reasons so
       that citizens will know that they exist and can make enquiries about them.
            The guidelines and metadata requirements, which are used increasingly for structuring and
       describing records, are beginning to make a fundamental contribution to national goals for
       digital governance. They help ensure that records held in records management systems are
       trustworthy and easy to find and that they remain reliable over long periods. They make it pos-
       sible to use records as evidence of facts or activities by documenting their content as well as
       their context in terms their creation, management, use, and relationship to other records. The
       standardized metadata greatly enhance the ability to search across public document registers,
       to exchange records between organizations and information systems via DEC, and to archive
       and reuse information.
            A Records Management Board has been established to determine the main directions of
       digital records management development, review and discuss legal issues, and to develop
       guidelines to regulate records management and support their implementation. Ultimately, the
       aspiration is to manage the information lifecycle/ continuum as a whole under one ministry, with
       a common approach and common rules. The Board includes the records management officers
       of all ministries, along with representatives of local governments, the National Archives, and the
       Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications.

       National Archives20

        Since 2012 the National Archives has been a subordinate agency of the Ministry of Education
       and Science. Its main tasks are to ensure the preservation and usability of society’s written mem-
       ory for future generations, and to provide access in order to facilitate comparative research and
       an historical context for development. The Archives collaborates directly with many ministries,
       most importantly with the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communication, on issues relating
       to the information society. The Archives, which has extensive experience in digital information
       management, supports the appraisal, extraction, transfer, ingest, and preservation of digital
       information to the Archives repository.
           Records management is not within in the scope of the Archives Act, but the Archives has
       contributed to guidelines, principles, and standards for digital records management issued by
       the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communication as part of the national legal framework.
       The Archives works to ensure that everything that can be opened is open, that government
       agencies are supported in protecting information integrity, and that records and data in any
       format that have long-term evidentiary value are transferred to the Archives.
           All Estonian public archives are part of a common information system, with common access
       tools and a common digital repository service. The Archives has developed excellent access to
Estonia: Information Governance and the Information Society	                                             13




its holdings. It maintains over 20 databases of archival descriptions that facilitate easy access
to state archives, including paper and digitized records, film archives, maps, audio recordings,
moving images, photos, and genealogic materials.21 Digitized records form the bulk of this
material, but the volume of born digital holdings is growing. The databases provide access to
approximately 7.8 million description units, organized according to international professional
principles and accessible through keyword searches. There is no charge for access to records
preserved in the National Archives, and access is unrestricted unless there are specific restric-
tions established by law.
     The Archives stays at the leading edge of professional development through its ongoing
involvement with international and European professional programs. The E-ARK research proj-
ect,22 funded by the European Commission ICT Policy Support Programme, is particularly sig-
nificant. In co-operation with commercial systems providers, research institutions, and other
European national archives, the project is developing a scalable pan-European methodology for
reducing risk of information loss by synthesizing existing national and international good prac-
tices for keeping records and databases authentic and usable through time. The Archives also
participates in APEx, a Europe network of excellence that supports the Archives Portal Europe
and includes information from nearly 900 European archival institutions.22 The National Library
of Estonia participates in the EU funded ‘Collaboration to Clarify the Costs of Curation (4C)’
project,24 a Pan European Initiative that addresses the issues of risk, quality, and sustainability in
digital; the National Archives intends to use the outcomes.


The Move to Information Governance
In 2013, a Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications’ Green Paper on the organization of
public service delivery described the need to move from records management to a more holistic
approach to information governance. Implementing this concept is part of the Government’s
Digital Agenda 2020.25 The aim is to support smarter governance and help increase the effi-
ciency and cost effectiveness of public services. An analysis of current developments and
experiences in records management and information governance has been completed, and
a changeover strategy is being prepared to plan the necessary measures, activities, and priori-
ties.26 This will not change the essential importance of managing records as evidence, but it will
involve a broader approach to managing information across government, regardless of its form
or structure, according to internationally agreed information governance principles. This will
mean, for instance, that data entered directly into a database will need to be maintained accord-
ing to standard requirements, for instance those governing appraisal, destruction, or transfer for
long-term storage to a digital repository.
    Open data is an essential part of the growing emphasis on information governance, and the
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications has made it a key focus area. The view is that
the government has an abundance of data created through its information systems, but the data
could be better used to improve poicy decisions and service provisions. The aim is to signifi-
cantly increase public sector capacity to apply data analytics solutions and make high quantity,
precise, trustworthy data available to the public as well as to the private sector as a basis for
developing new services or products. The precise means of relating open data to information
governance is being defined.
14 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



             National collaboration on open data is managed through a cross-government board led
       by the Ministry. The Board is working on priorities on defining the new laws, procedures, and
       structures that will be needed to govern data collection, management, and public release. There
       are issues to be resolved in terms of developing the open data portal, and as yet there are few
       practical arrangements in place. Half a dozen institutions have published data to the portal,
       including the Ministry of Finance, which has released budget data, and the statistics Office. The
       National Archives, which is represented on the Board, is one of the first large-scale open data
       providers, having released all of the archive description databases.27 The aim is to open all public
       registers as live data during 2015, although it is not yet be possible to make new metadata avail-
       able daily as is done in Norway. Although the aim is to open all public data as rapidly as possible,
       the Data Protection Agency and the Ministry of Justice have started to analyse potential threats
       to individuals’ rights and state security if all data were to be published as open data. The study
       will help to define the pace at which data is opened.
             The transition from records management to information governance is at an early stage,
       and there are still more questions than answers. For the transition to succeed, it will be essential
       that all relevant parties, including top management, IT personnel, and information managers,
       understand the significance of the change and their role in supporting it. The maturity of records
       management and information governance is variable from agency to agency, and success will
       require ongoing state of the art research, widespread dissemination of guidelines, and training.
       It is likely that it will be several years before information governance principles are implemented
       practically throughout the Estonian public sector.
             Several Information governance initiatives are already underway. For example, the Ministry
       of Economic Affairs and Communication has analyzed some of the best-used public services
       in relation to information governance and, based on the results, it has prepared guidelines for
       managing and evaluating information quality in relationship to public sector e-services. In paral-
       lel, the National Archives has started to create practical guidelines for classifying and appraising
       information held in relational database systems to support agencies in extending their records
       retention plans beyond traditional systems.


       Challenges
       When European Union funding made it possible to kick start extensive work on ICT innovations
       at the beginning of the century, new systems were introduced as funds became available. Many
       aspects of long-term information management and of semantic and technical interoperability
       tended to be neglected. Now as the IT systems are more than a decade old, legacy issues are
       beginning to be visible. In the same way that information systems often were not properly doc-
       umented initially, the functionality needed to support information retention, destruction, and
       export for transfer to long-term repositories often was left out of the equation, with long term
       consequences.
            As an example, the security algorithms in the digital signature format set up in the early
       2000s to keep signatures secure are becoming obsolete, making digitally signed records poten-
       tially vulnerable to hacking. A new format was introduced in January 2015 to add higher security
Estonia: Information Governance and the Information Society	                                             15




levels, but now many agencies now must address the legacy problem of what to do with infor-
mation signed digitally over the last 15 years and still held in live agency systems. Had retention
and disposition rules been in implemented, these digitally signed records could have been sys-
tematically destroyed when they ceased to have value or transferred to the National Archives
where they could have been decrypted. A re-signing mechanism is being developed to ensure
the authenticity of records through time, but it will be costly to implement. In the meantime,
the content of the records will be accessible, but the older algorithms may not be available to
validate the signatures, which will undermine the authenticity of the records. The challenge for
the future will be to develop longetivity principles for government systems that allow taking up
new standards and formats as they emerge without major costs, including the timely destruction
and transfer of legacy records.
     A related issue involves the lack of standardized metadata requirements in the early records
management systems. At the time that many of the systems were set up, ad hoc metadata
structures and data models were developed. This has made the uptake of standardized interop-
erability rules more challenging and time consuming than it would have been had metadata
requirements been standardized early on. It also has undermined the ability to mange the lifecy-
cle/ continuum of the records systmatically. However, in general, the public sector has acknowl-
edged the need for standardized rules, and the situation is gradually improving as metadata
rules are now commonplace when systems are replaced or updated.
     The lack of explicit rules on the quality and extent of record descriptions also presents a chal-
lenge. While the public sector now generally accepts the requirements for publishing descrip-
tions of records on their websites, agencies sometimes use generic titles and descriptions to
divert attention from the records’ content. Where this happens, users find it difficult to track an
issue through the agency registers. This has an impact on the agencies’ ability to open records
and data proactively. Also, agencies sometimes try to set unjustified restrictions on data to avoid
publishing it openly. This has an impact on the reuse and research value of the information.
However, the Estonian Data Protection Agency is constantly working on this issue, and the sit-
uation is gradually improving as public sector institutions employ new staff members who have
grown up in the networked environment and recognize the importance of establishing data
quality.
     As a final example, the interoperability of structured data information systems (public data-
bases) has led to a situation where an agency maintaining a database is not necessarily the
information creator, because when databases are connected to the X-Road, virtually any other
agency can use the data and mash it up into new services. As new data is added there are
difficulties in reflecting the provenance and distributed context of the data, which in turn has
consequences for classification and appraisal. Work on this issue is at an early stage, but it will
need to be solved before information governance can become a reality.
16 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries




       Conclusion
       Estonia is making one of the most rapid transitions to an information society of any country in the
       world, and Estonians are experiencing substantial benefits. However, like other technologically
       advanced countries, the Government of Estonia is starting to experience challenges in manag-
       ing the authenticity and integrity of its digital information. It is in the process of studying and
       applying internationally agreed standards and is drawing on experiences from other countries
       that also are defining new solutions for managing records and data as a national resource. As
       Estonia moves toward enhanced interoperability, security, and digital continuity through greater
       standardization, enhanced information governance is making an increasingly important contri-
       bution to achieving openness, transparency, and self-determination. Other countries, whether
       they are wealthy or less well resourced, will have much to learn from Estonia’s bold and creative
       approach to the issues involved.


       Appendix A.
       List of Key Records Management Standards
       Used in Estonia
       Estonian records professionals have studied international records management standards care-
       fully and used them as the basis for moving forward quickly and effectively in managing digital
       records.
       •	 Information and Documentation. Records Management.
            Part 1: General (EVS-ISO 15489-1:2004)

       •	 Information and Documentation. Records Management.
          Part 2: Guidelines (EVS-ISO 15489-2:2004)

       •	 Information and Documentation. Records Management Processes.
          Metadata for Records. Part 1: Principles (EVS-ISO 23081-1:2006)

       •	 Information and Documentation. Records Management Processes.
          Metadata for Records. Part 2: Conceptual and Implementation issues
          (EVS-ISO 23081-2:2011)

       •	 Information and Documentation. Work Processes Analysis for Records
          (ISO/TR 26122:2008)

       •	 Information and Documentation. The Dublin Core Metadata Element Set 
          (EVS-ISO 15836:2011)

       •	 Information and Documentation. Vocabulary
          (EVS-ISO 5127:2004)

       •	 Requirements of Information Technology in Estonian Language
          and Cultural Environment (EVS 8:2008)
Estonia: Information Governance and the Information Society	                                                   17




•	 Information and Documentation. Elements of Records and Requirements
   for Record’s Layout. Part 1: Letter (EVS 882-1:2013)

•	 Information and Documentation. Principles and Functional Requirements for
   Records in Electronic Office Environments. Part 1: Overview and Positions 
   (EVS-ISO 16175-1:2013)

•	 Information and Documentation. Principles and Functional Requirements for
   Records in Electronic Office Environments. Part 3: Guidelines and Functional
   Requirements for Record in Business Systems (EVS-ISO 16175-3:2012)

•	 Modular Requirements for Records Systems (MoReq2010)



Notes
1. Constitution: https://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/eli/530102013003.
2. Public Information Act: https://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/eli/ee/Riigikogu/act/510072014004.
3. Archives Act: https://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/eli/ee/Riigikogu/act/526092014003.
4. https://www.mkm.ee/en.
5. http://www.dlmforum.eu.
6. https://www.ria.ee/en/.
7. http://riso.ee/en.
8. https://www.ria.ee/administration-system-of-the-state-information-system/.
9. https://www.ria.ee/x-road/.
10. https://www.ria.ee/en/?id=27307.
11. https://www.ria.ee/dec/.
12. http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=43390.
13. www.eesti.ee.
14. In February 2015, 660 agencies were using the DEC.
15. https://www.mkm.ee/en/objectives-activities/information-society/information-society-services
16. https://www.mkm.ee/en/objectives-activities/information-society/information-society-services;
16.     https://www.mkm.ee/en/objectives-activities/information-society/records-management-information-
governance.
17. The guidelines draw on international standards listed in Appendix A, particularly the Modular
Requirements for Records Systems (MoReq2), ISO 16175-1:2010 Information and Documentation—
Principles and Functional Requirements for Records in Electronic Office Environment; ISO 23081-2 Metadata
for records. Part 2: Conceptual and Implementation issues.
18. See Appendix A.
19. https://www.mkm.ee/sites/default/files/records_management_metadata_en.pdf.
20. http://www.ra.ee/en/national-archives/.
21. http://www.ra.ee/vau/.
22. http://www.eark-project.com/ February 2014 to January 2017.
23. www.apex-project.eu.
24. http://4cproject.eu/.
25. https://e-estonia.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/04/Digital-Agenda-2020_Estonia_ENG.pdf.
26. https://www.mkm.ee/en/objectives-activities/information-society/records-management-information-
governance. The information governance analysis and the strategic plan are being translated into English and
will be available in 2015.
27. In January 2015 the National Archives published all its public archival descriptions at http://opendata.
ra.ee/.
                    Transparency and
                    Citizen Participation
                    Finland

Introduction
Government transparency, social inclusion, and public access to information are long-estab-
lished traditions in Finland. The Swedish Access to Public Records Act of 1766, the oldest FOI
law in the world, was applied in Finland while it was part of the Swedish Kingdom (until 1809).
As early as 1859, the archives of the Finnish Senate, which evolved into the National Archives,
were opened to the public. Finland’s approach to social inclusion was evident as early as 1906,
when it became the first nation in the world to give full sufferage to all adult citizens. Finland
published its first explicit strategy for an information society in 1995, with an emphasis on quality
of life, knowledge, and competitiveness.1 When a new wave of transparency reforms began in
the late 1990s, law and policy concerning transparency and secrecy were updated to enable
private individuals to monitor public authorities’ actions and expenditure, and the relationship
between openness and the need for information management was articulated. In parallel, the
National Archives began to develop practical guidance aimed at making information integrity
and openness a reality in the digital environment.
     Finland remained a largely agrarian country until the 1950s, but thereafter it developed rap-
idly as an advanced, industrialized economy, one of the strongest in Europe. Simultaneously, it
built an extensive Nordic-style welfare state. In the 1990s, the structure of Finland’s economy
changed more profoundly than in any other OECD country in the same period. Finnish industry
rapidly became technology-intensive, production became highly specialized driven by the infor-
mation and communications sector, and Finland transformed itself into a knowledge economy.
Finland’s public administration successfully supported this remarkable transformation, and in
the process it became a vehicle for economic development and service development, and for
realizing Finnish values of social solidarity, eqality, and openness. Finland joined the European
Union in 1995, and it was the only Nordic nation to adopt the Euro currency from its inception in
1999, although use began in 2002. Finland joined the Open Government Partnership in 2013 to
work with others towards active citizen participation and open government.  The cross cutting
theme of its OGP National Action Plan is citizen participation.




                                                                                                        19
20 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries




       Legal Framework
       In Finland, public sector information management is a significant aspect of public adminstration
       and is guided by a series of interrelated laws. Underpinned by the Constitution, the princi-
       ple of the openness of government activities and administrative processes as the basis for an
       informed and just society, runs through all of these laws. It is promoted and encouraged in par-
       ticular through the Act of Openness of Government Activities, the Archives Act, and the Act on
       Information Management Governance in Public Administration.

       Constitution of Finland (731/1999)2

       Section 12 of the Constitution notes specifically that documents and recordings in the possession
       of the authorities are public, unless their publication has for compelling reasons been specifi-
       cally restricted by an Act. Everyone has the right of access to public documents and recordings.

       Archives Act3 (831/1994)

       The Act specifies the duties of the National Archives as a government body under the Ministry
       of Education. It defines a record as a written or pictorial presentation that can be read, heard,
       or otherwise understood with the aid of technical equipment; it defines an archive as records
       received or produced by a records creator in the performance of its duties. The Act has wide
       coverage, including government offices at the national and municipal levels; courts of law
       and institutions applying the law; government and municipal enterprises; and collective bod-
       ies, organs, and persons carryings out public duties. The bodies covered include, for instance,
       the Bank of Finland, the Social Insurance Institute, some universities, and the Greek Orthodox
       Church of Finland and its congregations. The Act makes record creating agencies responsible
       for organising the practical aspects of records and archives management in relation to specific
       rules and regulations. Significantly, Section 7 of the Archives Law supports the right of private
       individuals and institutions to obtain information from records open to public inspection, pro-
       vided that the legal rights and privacy are protected. The National Archives responsibilities are
       specified in closer detail in the Decree on the National Archives Service (832/1994).

       Freedom of Information Legislation

       Finland’s long history of freedom of information legislation has evolved continually from the 18th
       century. There have been two principle acts.
           Act on the Openness of Public Documents (83/1951). The Act established the openness
       of all records and documents in the possession of officials of the state, municipalities, and regis-
       tered religious communities. Exceptions to the basic principle could only be made by law or by
       an executive order for specific enumerated reasons such as national security.
           Act on the Openness of Government Activities (621/1999).4 The act identifies the require-
       ments for openness in relation to good information management practice in terms of availability,
       useability, integrity, and data protection. The Ministry of Justice is the responsible ministry. The
       act lays down provisions for access to information based on the principle that everyone has the
       right to official documents in the public domain unless prohibited by law, and any exception
FINLAND: TRANSPARENCY AND CITIZEN PARTICIPATION	                                                       21




must be justified. Secret documents and records include, for example, those concerning the
Government Foreign Affairs Committee, criminal investigations, military intelligence, and state
security. Decisions to withhold information can be appealed to an administrative court, the
Chancellor of Judiciary, and the Parliamentary Ombudsman. Otherwise, the law specifies that
the record normally should be provided within two weeks. However, the law is long and complex
and can be difficult to apply, so legal experts sometimes have to be called in to interpret its
application, and this can cause delays in providing documents.
    The Act has a number of unusual features. It extends the principle of openness to corpo-
rations that perform legally mandated public duties, such as those relating to pension funds
and public utilities. It identifies good practices in managing information, which is not typical for
European laws, and it encourages the publication of government records as far as possible. It
combines freedom to access and state secrets norms in one legal act. Authorities are obliged
to provide information on matters that are in preparation, although this remains controversial.
Europe’s anticorruption commission has noted that effective freedom of information legislation
in Finland is one of the key factors in low level of corruption in the country.
    The Act is supported by the Decree on the Openness of Government Activities and on
Good Practice in Information Management (1999).5 The decree includes requirements for ensur-
ing good practice in information management, right of access, obligation to disseminate infor-
mation, and protection of personal data and sensitive data. It highlights the need to protect
the usability, integrity and quality of data, particularly when used as the basis for decisions.
It addresses risks for the availability, usability, quality and protection of data; for the security
of information systems; for classification of specially protected information; and for access to
information systems. It obliges authorities to prepare a description of the information system
they maintain, indicating the purpose of the information system and the data contained therein.

Act on Information Management Governance in Public
Administration (2011)

The Act gives the Ministry of Finance overall responsibility for steering information management
in public sector authorities and for promoting and safeguarding public sector information tech-
nology interoperability and security across across sector borders to improve service provision.
Public authorities are obliged to plan and specify their information governance strategies, and
compliance is required to support effective access to information through administrative pro-
cesses as well as to protect information integrity.


Administrative Framework
Ministry of Finance

With the passage of the Act on Information Management Governance in Public Administration,
the Minisistry of Finance took on a vital national role in steering information technology and
information management, which it coordinates through a Public Sector ICT Unit. The Ministry
also set up several advisory bodies: an Advisory Committee on Public Sector Information
Management, an IT Coordination Group, and a Government Information Security Management
Board. These bodies have played an important role in coordinating development, information
22 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



       exchange, and networked collaboration. Cooperation in the field of government information
       security is considered to have been particularly successful.
           With the increase of information networks in all public services, there has been a growing
       emphasis on harmonizing operational procedures across the public administration through an
       overall information management architecture and by providing common structures for infor-
       mation systems. A common Public Sector ICT Strategy for central and local government was
       developed by 20126 led by the Ministry of Finance with cross-government input. The focus is
       on customer oriented public services, good IT governance, interoperable processes, reuse of
       public sector information, harmonized ICT infrastructure, data security, and fully functional gov-
       ernment in all circumstances.
           The aim is to develop seamless but flexible cooperation between public sector managers
       and senior information personnel in managing information to facilitate evidence-based cross-or-
       ganizational service provision and to break down policy silos and fragmentation between insti-
       tutions. Finland’s approach emphasizes open information, effective information management,
       and evolving technological solutions. It includes safeguarding the reliability of the public sector
       and trust in public services by investing in data protection, information security, and contingency
       planning. It also identifies the need for joint use of information through clear information man-
       agement structures and a reliable cost effective ICT infrastructure. The intention is that informa-
       tion and communications technology should become an everyday part of municipalities’ and
       authorities’ operations and management.
           The Ministry of Finance is responsible for issuing Public Administration Regulations (JHS
       regulations) on ICT information management to state and municipal agencies. A JHS Regulation
       can be a uniform procedure, definition, or instruction to be used in public administration. The
       JHS system aims to improve the interoperability of information systems and the compatibility of
       data within them, to facilitate cross-sector process development, and to make the use of existing
       data more efficient. The recommendations also aim to minimize overlapping development work,
       guide the development of information systems and facilitate good common practices in public
       administration. The aim is to ensure that that Finland’s public sector information systems and
       networks work together to support efficiency and quality in terms of interoperability, processes
       and procedures, data and data structures, architectures and ecosystems, information policy,
       access to information, open data, and data reuse. There are JHS Regulations covering aspects
       of digital records and data management, including registering, keeping, handling, retrieving,
       and transferring documents; email; and IT procurement.
           Led by the Ministry of Finance, the Open Data Programme (May 2013 to June 2015) has
       been working to eliminate obstacles to reusing of public data and to create the preconditions
       for making data open within the public administration. A range of organizations, including state
       government ministries and government agencies, municipal governments, enterprises, NGO’s,
       and citizen bodies are collaborating to implement the program. Moreover, a systematic process
       for opening data has been adopted as a part of the budgetary framework process. Since 2012,
       the Ministry of Finance has asked ministries to draw up and submit plans for open data and to
       assess the impacts on the budgetary framework. The goal is to develop a systematic process for
       releasing open data.
           In addition, open data is being linked to work on enterprise and information architecture
       emerging from the the Act on Information Management Governance in Public Administration.
FINLAND: TRANSPARENCY AND CITIZEN PARTICIPATION	                                                        23




The approach is that rules and practices for public sector information integrity and longevity
should be applied to open data. At present, there are no special measures for managing open
data through time, but the Ministry is starting a project on common long-term data archiving
services for public sector. Open data, which is released through Finland’s open data portal,7 must
be re-usable,  free of charge, machine-readable, and licenced openly. The Ministry of Finance
has issued a JHS Regulation indicating that public sector agencies should use the Creative
Commons 4.0 BY as the licence for open data.
    The Ministry of Finance has launched a program (2014 to 2017) to create a uniform National
Digital Services Architecture to support interoperability between services, databases, and infor-
mation registers. This includes building a National Data Exchange Layer that will integrate infor-
mation systems and should be in production by the end of 2015. Finland is cooperating closely
with Estonia, with which it shares a commitment to digital governance reform aimed at maximiz-
ing service provision.8 Estonia’s X-Road technology, which enables different information systems
to exchange data safely via the Internet, also will be used in Finland. The aim is that Estonia and
Finland will work together to develop X-Road further in the future.

National Archives

The National Archives has been responsible for the memory of the nation since 1816, when it
was created as part of the Senate of Finland. It became a central government agency in its own
right in 1939. Today, under the Ministry of Education and Culture, it coordinates seven provin-
cial archives as regional administrative authorities. The Archives’ responsibilities include deter-
mining the value of the records of state authorities as permanent archives, disposing of those
without ongoing value, preserving and making available those of long term national signifance,
and providing research and information services. It also obtains and preserves private archives
of importance for society. It operates an extensive program to digitize documents for permanent
storage and preservation as a Digital Archive. Digitization began in 2009, and by 2013, there
were over 18 million files in the Digital Archive, a number that continues to grow steadily.9
     The National Archives’ broad remit for preserving the memory of the nation inevitably
includes playing a key role in protecting and preserving information integrity in the digital envi-
ronment, where decisions at the point of creation affect the ability to manage the records and
data and to preserve and use them through time. Although the Archives law was enacted in
1994, before it was imperative to address digital issues, the Archives is committed to protecting
the integrity, authenticy, and accessibility of essential public records in digital format. It recog-
nizes the importance of managing digital information consistently from the point of creation,
and consequently it has developed in-depth knowledge and specialized skills in defining and
documenting content and context and in managing long-term digital preservation.
     International standards and operating practices play an ever more important role in plan-
ning and executing the Archives’ operations, making its contribution to managing information
in the in the information society increasingly vital. It contributes not only in terms of its high
quality preservation services but of its specialized understanding of the management controls
needed to protect the quality, integrity, and longevity of digital information, and access to it. The
Archives’ active participation in regional and international professional activities creates oppor-
tunities for developing and continuously upgrading information and storage systems. The close
24 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



       collaboration between national archives in the region means that strategies are continously
       enriched through shared experiences.
           Life cycle planning, or the continuum of management responsibility for records and data from
       the point of creation, is at the core of Finnish records management just as it is for international
       good practice. Extensive international collaborative work on professional standards has demon-
       strated consistently that this is the safest and most effective means of establishing and retaining
       control of the quality, authenticity, and trustworthiness of public sector records. The National
       Archives has successfully related this understanding to public administration requirements.
           Traditionally, Finnish record keeping was achieved through registry systems that enabled
       metadata capture for incoming and outgoing records in registers. The principle of registration
       and metadata capture remains central to Finland’s digital records management strategy. When
       a record is registered, it is linked to an an aministrative process. Everything that comes into and
       leaves a government agency goes through the registry office and is recorded. Registry officers,
       who tend to be very well educated, make sure that no electronic record goes through the registry
       without being attached to an Electronic Document and Records Management System (EDRMS).
       Registration captures information about what ‘cases’ are open, what actions that have been
       taken in any particular case, and what records have been created as a result of these actions.
       This supports the ability to trace records required for Freedom of Information requests and to
       demonstrate transparency and accountability. The National Archives has been offering educa-
       tion and guidance to public sector agencies on lifecycle/ continuum management for records
       and data, including issues of secrecy and openness. This has helped to address concerns by staff
       in government agencies who do not yet fully trust digital information and are worried that it will
       not be possible to preserve it permanently.
           At present, the National Archives has statutory authority to issue detailed and binding reg-
       ulations for managing records and metadata of permanent value to the nation across state and
       municipal public sector agencies in the context of electronic services and communications. Its
       SÄHKE Records Management Standard, and the closely related VAPA Service for receiving and
       storing digital records and data, are particularly important contributions to the ability to demon-
       strate an unbroken chain of custody and demonstrate authenticity.

       SÄHKE Records Management Standard

       As early as 2001, the National Archives initiated the SÄHKE project to define a framework for
       managing records produced by electronic records management systems (ERMS). The require-
       ments were published in 2005 as the SÄHKE Standard, which came into force in 2006. The cur-
       rent version, the SÄHKE2 Standard, was published in 2009.
            Government authorities determine their own approach to managing their digital records
       and data but are required to use SÄHKE-compatible digital records management systems if
       they want to preserve records with permanent value in electronic form. The National Archives
       determines which public records and data are to be preserved permanently, about 10 to 15% of
       all public authority records. The longer term aim is to keep much more and to preserve complete
       record systems, registries, and databases. In 2010, the Ministry of Finance led an attempt to
       build common records management systems but was not successful because ministries felt that
       their needs were unique and wanted to make their own rules about how their records and data
FINLAND: TRANSPARENCY AND CITIZEN PARTICIPATION	                                                      25




were managed. The Archives now is encouraging common systems within each ministry and the
agencies under it.
    The SÄHKE requirements concentrate on building and maintaining records management
schedules and associated metadata. They provide a set of record-keeping metadata elements,
with defined metadata fields, to enable a standardized approach to capturing and describing
content and context as a basis for access control, usability, integrity, and authenticity, and for
managing secrecy and openness. The requirements specify that each authority must have a
records management schedule defining arrangements for registration, filing, and retention. Far
more than a passive list of retention periods, the schedules are in effect life cycle plans. Public
authorities must determine how long the records need to be retained so that they will not need
to be appraised afterwards. As far as possible, the system assigns the metadata automatically,
guided by default values in the records management schedule.
    The SÄHKE requirements are unique to Finland, but they were not developed in isolation.
Early work on the de facto European standard, MoReq,10 provided a source for SÄHKE devel-
opment, although there was no intention to produce a MoReq compatible regulation. The
two standards use different data models, elements, and functional requirements, but both set
requirements for functionality and metadata in Electronic Records Management systems and
both define an a XML-scheme for exporting records from information systems.
    The Archives has developed an interface for consistently transferring digital records to long
term custody from diverse electronic records management systems. This involves a standards
compliant delivery check using the SÄHKE2 metadata model. The standard also acts as an
accreditation framework for electronic storage systems, and suppliers of systems can apply for a
SÄHKE compliance certificate.

VAPA Service

In 2011, the National Archives launched the VAPA service for receiving and storing digital records
and data identified as having permanent value. Free of charge for government organistions, the
service is intended to safeguard the storage of digital materials reliably and securely for several
centuries through changing technologies. Ultimately, the aim is to extend the storage facility
to cover the entire public administration enabling smooth transfers to the Archives’ repository.
VAPA, which complies with the internationally accepted OAIS specification,11 supports essen-
tial preservation functions, including ingest, archival storage, data management, access, and
dissemination. It also defines digital preservation responsibilities for organizations. It can be
adapted to changing circumstances and upgrade paths, and modular components can be
added flexibly as required.
     VAPA is harmonized with SÄHKE2. Record and data creating agencies develop submission
information packages as defined by the standard and send them to VAPA. SÄHKE structured
metadata and accepted file formats are validated automatically in the ingest workflow, and
signatures and checksums are used to ensure the integrity of the information. The material is
safeguarded against viruses and unwanted access and alteration, with firewalls protecting gov-
ernment servers and access channels being secured through cryptography. Digital signatures
are decrypted at the point of ingest, as it would be impossible to update and renew certificates
for the growing number of documents. However, the information in the digital signature is doc-
umented in metadata, which is transferred to digital storage with the document. 
26 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



       Database Management

       Thousands of registers and databases had been maintained in the public administration over
       the last several decades, often to support official functions, such as personnel administration.
       Large national databases and registers have provided unique source material for studying mac-
       ro-level effects and complex causal questions. However, much if not most of this information has
       not been protected and systematically preserved and is at risk of being lost inadvertently.
             In 2012, in response to a growing demand for solutions to preserving information in data-
       bases, the National Archives began developing techniques, tools, methods, and practices for
       ensuring and protecting the authenticity, integrity, and usability of information in databases and
       registers. It started by studying relevant international standards and good practices. Notably,
       it drew on the Swiss Federal Archives’ SIARD-standard (Software Independent Archiving of
       Relational Databases), a widely used standard in database preservation, and on the Norwegian
       Archival Service’s standard for technical metadata, ADDML (Archival Data Description Markup
       Language). ADDML is used to describe data files such as tables, fields, variables, codes, their
       relationships and their meaning by providing a technical and structural data description in stan-
       dardized format.  Finland’s National Archives is cooperating with the Norwegian and Swedish
       National Archives to continue developing the ADDML standard.
             Preserving databases presents a range of challenges. Databases are generally used for sev-
       eral years and updated regularly. They usually are not self-documenting, and without accurate
       and consistent metadata and contextual information, the data can be unclear and may have
       little or no value. If a database has been in operation for a long period, fields and codes may
       have changed, and older data may differ from newer data. Frequently, database documentation
       does not include information about changes. Older data are often poorly described, and docu-
       mentation may be completely lost or available only in paper format. Moreover, many databases
       are maintained jointly by several authorities, although still owned by a single office, and this can
       make documentation difficult to trace. Preserving databases requires a description of the data-
       base along with the obligatory metadata elements needed to understand the data, including
       its content, the context of its creation and use, its classification structure, and any restrictions.
             The Archives strategy is to preserve the data and its description, but not its functionalities
       or data processing rules and algorithms. The data is extracted from a database and converted
       to XML or CVS format, and the ADDML standard is applied. The binary images extracted from
       the database are converted to PDF/A format12 and preserved. Documentation covering the con-
       text, data origin, database management system, data models, processing rules, and usability
       guidelines is described using a standardized structure and metadata, as defined in SÄHKE2. It
       is attached as an integral part of the submission package and preserved with the data to sup-
       port future users needs. At present, the Archives only accessions older databases, where data
       is no longer altered, and these are not yet publicly available. However, this is an area where the
       Archives’ investment of time and expertise will have significant benefits on the future.
FINLAND: TRANSPARENCY AND CITIZEN PARTICIPATION	                                                         27




Challenges
The primary challenge for managing information in the digital environment in Finland is the
need to clarify management responsibility. At present, the management of digital records and
data is governed by several different laws enacted over the last 20 years and by guidance from
three different ministries: Finance, Education, and Justice. Because of this, the relationshhips,
roles and responsibilities of the different authorities involved, particularly the Ministry of Finance
and the National Archives, tend to overlap and to be unclear. There is collaboration, but the
structure does not yet support a unified strategy. The challenges of managing and preserving
digital information require a new model to define how the strengths of the agencies involved
can come together as part of a holistic approach.
     For this reason, an initiative is under way to develop a new act that will cover the entire
lifecycle or coninuum or information. Initially, the focus was on revising the Archives Act, but it
has become clear that a new act is needed to introduce a coordinated approach to information
management across state and municipalitity authorities in relation to goals for openness and
digital governance. The aim now is to combine and harmonize the different laws and regulations
concerning information management, including provisions for access rights. Finland follows the
principle that international standards should be used where they exist, and the new law will
provide a basis for harmonizing relevant standards, for instance those for interoperability and
security and for records and data management.
     Under the new law, the Archives’ role in defining requirements will change. There has been
concern that the SÄHKE Standard is in some senses too demanding, for example when applied
in the municipalities, and that it should be effectively harmonized with all aspects of digital gov-
ernace. The standard is, therefore, being re-examined as part of the process of redesigning the
approach to information management. From the end of 2015, the Archives no longer will have
the power to prescribe the SÄHKE2. After that, records and data management will be defined
through the JHS Regulations issued through the Ministry of Finance. It is not yet clear how the
VAPA service will be managed.
     A Public Sector Recommendation, JHS 176, will replace SÄHKE. The JHS 176 Working
Group is defining the functional requirements for an ERMS, including how to build systems and
how to transfer or destroy records. It also will deal to a a certain extent with open data issues,
including data and its preservation, particularly personal data. In addition, the issue of record
secrecy and openness, central to the SÄHKE2 standard, and will be an essential part of the JHS
176 regulation. National Archives staff, whose indepth expertise in international good practice
and experience of the practical realities of managing, accessing, and preserving digital records
and data, will have an invaluable contribution to make, and their input has been welcomed.
Once the new regulation is accepted and formalised as a standard, it may become a decree.
Given the powerful role of the Ministry of Finance, the scope and contribution of records and
data management controls could be greatly enhanced.
28 	                       anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                          M
                          Lessons from Nordic Countries




       Conclusion
       Finland views information management as an integral aspect of its approach to maximizing the
       opportunities of digital government and enabling openness. Its network of information man-
       agement-related laws contributes fundamentally to its ability to deliver its values of social sol-
       idarity and equality in a technically complex digital environment. Finland is now in the process
       of harmonising its laws and practices for managing records and data in relation to its goals for
       customer oriented public services, good IT governance, interoperable processes and services,
       reuse of public sector information, and data security. Its aim is to facilitate evidence-based cross
       organizational service provision.
           As part of the process, the roles of the Ministry of Finance, the National Archives, and the
       Ministry of Justice are being harmonized and reconfigured to draw on their mutually comple-
       mentary expertise in the areas of ICT development, information integrity and access, and social
       justice. Finland’s innovative approach to developing a new model for information management
       highlights the need for a fresh approach to meeting the challenges of protecting and preserving
       high quality information in the digital environment and for maximizing its value for citizens. All
       countries will need to address this essential issue if goals for digital governance and openness
       are to succeed, and Finland’s bold approach will demonstrate the opportunities for change. 


       Notes
       1. http://e.finland.fi/netcomm/news/showarticle7dfc.html?intNWSAID=9989.
       2. http://www.finlex.fi/en/laki/kaannokset/1999/en19990731.pdf.
       3. http://www.arkisto.fi/uploads/Arkistolaitos/Tehtävät%20ja%20toiminta/The-Archives-Act-831.pdf.
       4. http://www.finlex.fi/en/laki/kaannokset/1999/en19990621.pdf.
       5. http://www.finlex.fi/fi/laki/kaannokset/1999/en19991030.pdf.
       6. http://www.slideshare.net/mikaelvakkari/public-sector-ict-strategy.
       7. See a catalog of open public sector datasets at avoindata.fi.
       8. OECD Public Governance Reviews Finland: Fostering Strategic Capacity across Governments and Digital
       Services across Borders, March 2015, http://vm.fi/documents/10623/1107144/key-findings-finland.pdf/
       b991582d-fc08-4b0c-b57f-21bea5e6eb3f.
       9. http://digi.narc.fi/digi/?lang=en_US.
       10. MoReq® is a records management specification of modular requirements for electronic/ digital records
       systems. First published in 2008 by the DLM Forum, a European wide organization of national archives,
       enterprises and research organizations with an interest in electronic records management, it is intended
       for users and suppliers of electronic records management systems and services, and for educators. It can
       also be used to provide a basis for auditing existing electronic records management systems or services,
       and as a resource for academic or commercial trainers. The latest edition of the MoReq® specification is
       MoReq2010®. See http://moreq.info.
       11. The OAIS reference model (ISO 14721:2003) addresses a full range of archival information preservation
       functions including ingest, archival storage, data management, access, and dissemination. It also addresses
       the migration of digital information to new media and forms, the data models used to represent the
       information, the role of software in information preservation, and the exchange of digital information among
       archives. It identifies both internal and external interfaces to the archive functions, and it identifies a number
       of high-level services at these interfaces. See http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=24683
       12. PDF/A is an ISO-standardized version of the Portable Document Format (PDF) used for the preserving
       digital documents. It identifies a ‘profile’ that ensures that the documents can be reproduced consistently in
       years to come. A key requirement is for PDF/A documents to be 100% self-contained; all of the information
       necessary for displaying the document in the same manner is embedded in the file.
                    Information Integrity and
                    Access to Information
                    Norway

Introduction
Norway, one of the most open governments in the world, has achieved a remarkably high
degree of information integrity and accessibility in the digital environment. In common with
other Nordic countries, Norway’s aim is to make government as accountable, transparent, and
democratic as possible. Its comprehensive national ICT policy, launched in 2000, makes using
information technology effectively a national priority, and its long term commitment to manag-
ing digital information, makes it possible to use the records and data produced by digital sys-
tems as high quality evidence for making decisions, providing services, and empowering citizens
through a unique and advanced approach to Freedom of Information/ Right to Information.
Norway was the first country, in 1984, to define and implement a fixed set of model requirements
for managing digital information systems.
     Norway’s leading edge approach to openness is achieved through a powerful combination
of interconnected laws, standards, well-defined metadata architectures, and technology systems.
Among the most striking aspects of its approach are the emphasis on protecting the security,
content, and context of the information, and on reducing the time between creating records
and public access. This has enabled Norway, through right to information laws and policies, to
give its citizens rapid, almost real time, access to reliable records as evidence of policies, actions,
activities, and expenditure, making openness real and concrete, not just a vision for the future.
Norway’s citizens are able to monitor what their government is doing, claim their rights effectively,
and play a significant role in influencing the affairs of state. Journalists can regularly track and
report on what the government is doing on the basis of in-depth, reliable, and readily available
evidence. Public sector agencies are able to plan and monitor programs, activities, and expendi-
ture on the basis of consistently trustworthy information and citizen feedback.
     Norway was one of the eight Open Government Partnership founding members. Norway’s
action planning for open government has emphasized the necessity for financial openness in
connection with income from the petroleum sector. In addition Norway has been committed to
sharing knowledge on, and experiences of, developing an open and well functioning public sec-
tor.  In the next phase of its OGP Action Plan, Norway will follow up in areas including improving
access to information, facilitating democratic participation in government, and enhancing fiscal
transparency and financial integrity.
                                                                                                          29
30 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries




       Legal Framework
       The Constitution, the National Archives Act, and the Freedom of Information Act work together
       to provide the legal basis for Norway’s unique and powerful approach to right to information
       and the means of ensuring transparent evidence-based government.

       Constitution

       Adopted in 1814, Norway’s consitution is the second oldest written constitution in the world.
       Founded on the principles of sovereignty of the people, separation of powers, and human rights,
       the constitution has been amended over the years to reflect an ever-deepening commitment
       to openness and transparency. In the most recent version, adopted in 2014 at the Constitution’s
       bicentenary, Article 100 emphasizes citizens’ right to trustworthy information:
            Everyone has a right of access to documents of the State and municipalities and a right to
       follow the proceedings of the courts and democratically elected bodies. Limitations to this right
       may be prescribed by law to protect the privacy of the individual or for other weighty reasons.
       The authorities of the state shall create conditions that facilitate open and enlightened public
       discourse.1

       National Archives Act

       Norway’s National Archives, established in 1817, is almost as old as the constitution. In Norway,
       ‘archives’ means the whole lifecycle of the records, from the point of creation through to pres-
       ervation and future access. The Archives Act of 1992 sets out the National Archives’ responsi-
       bilities for overseeing the creation, management, and preservation of records, in any form, that
       document public institutions’ functions and exercise of authority; provide information of general
       interest to society; and document the obligations and privileges of people and organizations.
       The Archives Act requires public organisations to register all incoming, outgoing records, and
       internal records that generate or document official activity, in a national records management
       system, ‘Noark’.

       Freedom of Information Act

       The Act Relating to Public Access to Documents in the Public Administration (the Freedom of
       Information Act) (1970) mandated that case documents of the public administration were public
       insofar as no exception was made by or pursuant to statute. Any person could demand to be
       apprised of the publicly disclosable contents of the documents in a specific case. Government
       administrative agencies were required to keep registers pursuant to the provisions of the
       Archives Act and its regulations.
           The Act Relating to the Right of Access to Documents Held by Public Authorities and Public
       Undertakings (the Freedom of Information Act) (2006) established the basic principle that every-
       one has the right to access to state and municipal documents unless the records are legally
       restricted by this or another act, for instance the National Security Law, Personal Data Act, the
       Environmental Information Act, or the Public Administration Act. The law requires all govern-
       ment adminstrative agencies at the state, county, and municipal levels, unless exempted from
Norway: Information Integrity and Access to Information	                                              31




the Act, to make case documents,2 journals and similar registers, and email publically available
for access, as soon as they are produced, received, or transmitted, available to the public by the
means of an electronic journal available on the Internet, pursuent to the rules of the Archives Act
and associated regulations.


Administrative Framework
National Archives

Noark Standard

In the 1980s, the National Archives, working in collaboration with the Governmental
Rationalization Directorate,3 recognized the importance of managing digital records as evi-
dence and began to define good practice requirements. First introduced in 1984, the Norwegian
Model Requirements for Electronic Records Management Systems (Noark), have evolved to
structure the way government agencies capture, protect, and provide access to official records
in digital form. When Noark was launched, the National Archives also introduced ‘Guidelines for
Implementing Computerized Registering Systems’ and ‘Instructions for Records Management
in the Governmental Sector’. Initially, the Rationalisation Directorate was legally responsible for
Noark, and Noark 2, published in 1987, was also a result of collaboration between the Archives
and the Directorate. Responsibility for Noark was transferred to the Archives in 1990.
    As was the case in many European countries, public sector records in Norway had long
been managed through registry systems that captured metadata about incoming and outgoing
correspondence and gave the records their legal authority. Once registered, records could not
be altered without authorization and evidence of change. From the outset, the Noark Standard
used the concept of metadata management, which was already established in Norwegian law,
as the foundation for building information integrity. Noark mirrored principles defined in the
Norwegian Governance Act (1967) and the Norwegian Freedom of Information Act (1970), which
together defined a set of core metadata elements (date of registration, record number, sender/
recipient information, description of content or subject, document date, classification code,
date, and method of processing). The first version of Noark retained and broadened these meta-
data elements to support integrity in government systems.
    Under the Freedom of Information Act of 1970, each government agency was required to
produce a public register (‘offentlig postjournal’) of metadata for incoming and outgoing doc-
uments, and from the beginning, Noark included a records system requirement to generate a
public register electronically. Not only did this provide a basis for locating digital records and
protecting their integrity, but the registers were printed and made available through govern-
ment press centers, marking a major step toward transparency. Noark and the public register,
both of which are fundamental to Norway’s approach to the right to information, were twinned
developments from the outset.
    Noark was not mandatory for government agencies until 1999, but it quickly became a de
facto standard for Electronic Document and Records Management Systems (EDRMS) for gov-
ernment bodies. Noark compliant systems were recognised as having better functionality and
stability than other records and document systems, and long before Noark became mandatory,
records created in government agencies were largely compliant with the Noark requirements. By
32 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



       1990, when responsibility for the Noark Standard was transferred to the National Archives, more
       than 90 government institutions, including all ministries, were using Noark-systems.
            As it developed, Noark secured the principles of governance, transparency, and predictabil-
       ity by setting requirements for fixity, predictability, consistency, traceability, and searchability.
       The resulting consistency, including the common set of metadata, has enabled a standardised
       approach to public access to government information. The launch of Noark 3 in 1994 marked
       another major step toward transparency. Now the mandatory public register of metadata was
       uploaded regularly from government agencies to a web-based, password-protected platform
       known as the Electronic Records Registry (EPJ). This made it possible to provide newspapers
       and television agencies with regular access to public information.
            Noark 4, introduced in 1999, specified a complete, mandatory electronic records manage-
       ment system, integrated with e-mail and general case handling systems. It now became man-
       datory for public bodies to use a Noark-based system for electronic recordkeeping. Once the
       government endorsed the Noark Standard, vendors were permitted to sell only Noark compli-
       ant electronic records and archives systems in the public sector. After Noark 4 was launched in
       1999, the Archives began to supervise digital recordkeeping, working with IT departments and
       vendors, to support Noark compliance.
            Until Noark 5 was introduced in 2008, government agencies with non-standardized systems
       did not have to comply with Noark. These included large nationwide systems such as those
       operated by the Bureau of Statistics and the National Tax Authority. Little was known about the
       content or the structure of these systems, making it very difficult to trace and capture the rela-
       tionship between metadata and records and to preserve it systematically; a lot of information
       was lost or later became inaccessible. Noark 5 defines a core of minimal mandatory require-
       ments for records structure, metadata, and functionality. It does not specify how these require-
       ments should be met in system development, but it does require that obligatory metadata be
       included when records are exported from a records system and that the extraction must follow
       a defined structure. Extraction from the non-standardized systems is possible using the Archival
       Data Description Mark-Up Language (ADDML), a de facto standard for developing technical and
       structural data descriptions as flat files.4
            The Noark requirements have evolved steadily in response to the growth of electronic com-
       munication between public sector agencies and between them and the public, across sectors
       and regions. The National Archives has taken a highly practical and pragmatic approach to
       Noark development. Its computer engineers and records professionals work from their differ-
       ent perspectives to define and address the challenges of capturing and preserving trustworthy
       records in relation to constantly changing developments in platform complexity, system port-
       folios, and functionalities. The Archives works closely with international colleagues and staff in
       government agencies to ensure that the Standard takes account of international good practice
       and practical needs. This farsighted approach continues to evolve and to remain at the cutting
       edge of international good practice for ongoing access to high quality information.
            The Noark requirements have a range of benefits for users across government. The pre-de-
       fined structure for capturing context and content means that information elements and objects
       follow a predictable pattern that essentially eliminates unauthorised deletion, alteration, or
       manipulation of metadata and documents in government organisations. They make it possible
       to rapidly retrieve, disclose, present, and communicate high quality evidence of government
       policies, practices, and transactions across the public sector, enabling public sector agencies
       to plan and monitor programs, activities, and expenditure effectively. For instance, it would be
Norway: Information Integrity and Access to Information	                                               33




possible to determine how many records are pending decisions, and to identify cases similar
in nature that require similar actions, thus supporting the principles of precedence and com-
mon practice. In addition, the requirements describe routines for security backups and support
recovery functions when there is interference such as a hardware failure or a powercut, making
government information continuously available.

Trusted Digital Repository

In 2009, the National Archives launched a project to develop a digital repository system that would
meet the highest level of international good practice based on the principles of international
IT security and appropriate elements of the Open Archival Information System (OAIS)5 and the
Trusted Repository Audit and Certification Checklist.6 The aim was to secure contextual authentic-
ity, making it possible to demonstrate that what is stored in the repository has the same structure
and relationships as what was produced in the creating agencies. At the beginning of 2014, the
Archives launched an open source Trusted Digital Repository system, developed by a Swedish
supplier and adapted for national and municipal use in Norway. This provides a technology-neutral
means of preserving public sector records using standardised digital preservation models. The
system also is implemented in the National Archives of Sweden.
     Legally, records and associated metadata must be transferred to the National Archives digital
repository after 25 to 30 years. However most central governmental agencies make submissions
when a new EDRMS is introduced or when organizational changes require an alteration of the
classification system, generally within ten years of the record’s creation. Transfers include struc-
tured extractions from the Noark databases in government agencies, including the associated
metadata and relational context logs documenting records’ creation and any subsequent alter-
ations. This audit trail of context or changes in status enables traceability and helps ensure that
the records continue to meet legal, administrative, fiscal, or other evidentiary needs through
time. The metadata, which is structured according to Noark and is compliant with other interna-
tional metadata standards such as Mets, Premis, Mix, EAD and EAC, also provides the means of
locating, interpreting, and interrelating the information, and of facilitating migration and conver-
sion to new formats and software and hardware environments as necessary.
     Records and metadata transferred to the digital repository pass through a validation process
to ensure that the submission package complies with the and digital signatures are removed as
precribed in the Archives Act. The Archives uses checksums to ensure that the records in the
submission package have not been altered. It holds the transferred material in quarantine while
it performs extensive virus-scans before the transfer is formally brought into the repository.
     At present, there is limited access to recent digital information held in the Archives reposi-
tory, which is still used primarily to make digitized historical documents available, although some
of the earlier Noark submissions can be accessed. This is partly because if any records in a series
are closed under Freedom of Information restrictions, the entire series is closed and is likely
to remain closed until all the records in the series can be opened. It is also because there are
time lags in accessioning records from government agencies. In the future, there are significant
opportunities for sharing digital records through the Archives’ repository. For instance, in 2011
and 2012, the Archives developed two smartphone apps for access to its holdings, creating the
possibility that the repository could eventually become a public transparency portal for digital
records and data through smartphones and other mobile devices.
34 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



       OEP (Offentlig Elektronisk Postjournal)

       Norway’s revised Freedom of Information Act of 2006, implemented in 2009, took access to
       information to a new level. Rooted in a commitment to protect transparency and citizens’
       rights through access to public sector information, the law required government agencies to
       upload, daily, standardized metadata for incoming and outgoing documents to the Electronic
       Records Registry. The Registry was updated with advice from the Norwegian Press Association
       and re-launched in May 2010 by the Agency for Public Management and e-Government, the
       Directorate for Governance and ICT (Difi) as the OEP.7 The OEP searchable database is no lon-
       ger password protected and can be used by anyone, anywhere in the world, who has Internet
       access. All that is needed is a description of the information wanted.
            Managers and case handlers8 in government agencies must ensure that everything that can
       be opened is opened. This involves a high level of scrutiny, and normally the section head or
       an adviser makes a final check. Records are tagged to prevent publication of metadata where
       there is a legal restriction on publication, and without exception, sensitive personal information
       is masked, for example, information about an individual’s health, personal finances, or criminal
       record. About one fifth of the records are classified for security reasons and are not listed in the
       register.
            The OEP, which has become a core part of the Norwegian Government’s approach to trans-
       parency and democracy in the public sector, has enabled a remarkably generous degree of
       openness unknown elsewhere. It is a powerful tool for providing access to public records online
       by enabling searches across all state public sector agencies, which use common search terms.
       It is easy, for instance, to access records regarding an event, a political incident, or expenditure
       in areas such as as fisheries, health, or the oil industry. The most common search terms used are
       report, complaint, inspection, demand, revision, supervision, deviation, work accident, evalua-
       tion, illegal, and allotment letter.
            Having located relevant records, users submit FOI access requests through the OEP, which
       forwards requests to the responsible agencies. The agencies have five days to respond to infor-
       mation requests, but they often reply within two or three days. They send copies of the records
       to the users by email, fax or regular mail, often choosing to provide not just the one document
       requested but also related documents. There are no restrictions on reuse and there is no charge.
       Citizens can appeal any refusal of information or partial release by approaching the agency
       immediately superior to the agency from which the information was requested. The agency
       has ten days to justify refusal. Failure to respond to an appeal can result in a complaint to the
       Parliamentary Ombudsman.
            The OEP provides a very significant tool for the press in Norway, enabling journalists to
       track the way public authorities develop and implement public policy and to keep the public
       informed.9 The Norwegian Press Association’s Freedom of Information Commitee even provides
       a website called called offentlighet.no (freedomofinformation.no),10 with a link directly to the
       OEP.
            By the end of 2012, the OEP contained over five million registry entries published by 105
       government agencies. The OEP was processing about 20,000 information requests a month,
       with the greatest number of requests coming from journalists (50%); citizens and businesses
       made up 22% of requests, public employees 21%, and researchers 3%.11 The Government is con-
       sidering the possibility of providing direct access to digital records direct from the OEP with the
       aim of making administration more open and transparent and enabling government agencies to
Norway: Information Integrity and Access to Information	                                                 35




work more efficiently. The Norwegian Press Association, which continues to work with the OEP
management, supports the goals of publishing entire documents on the OEP and extending
OEP requirements to municipalities, which are not covered at present. There is no direct link
from the OEP database to the Archives’ digital repository, but this may be possible in the future.


Challenges
Although Norway has achieved an unparalleled level of information transparency, the National
Archives faces immense challenges in its ongoing efforts to manage and preserve digital records.
Norway’s digital agenda calls for common solutions for digital governance in public administra-
tion, with digital communication as the basis for management. In this rapidly changing envi-
ronment, the Archives’ administrative positioning is a crucial factor in its ability to contribute its
immense knowledge and experience to national aims for sharing information more efficiently
and providing enhanced digital services.
    The National Archives is part of the Ministry of Culture. While preserving culture is one of its
legal responsibilities, protecting ‘rights documentation’ is another. In the past, the emphasis was
on serving the needs of historical researchers rather than on supporting transparency and public
services. Today these priorities are changing, not only to enable good e-governace but also to
ensure that an historical and cultural record will survive for the future. Enabling accountability,
monitoring state performance, and supporting citizens’ rights and needs requires that digital
information should be managed in as an aspect of digital governance, which is the responsibility
of the Ministry of Modernisation. There is a need for a new approach to roles, responsibilities,
and strategies. It is significant that the Archives has been included on some of the boards work-
ing on new e-governance solutions and architecture, and that Norway’s National Archivist comes
from the electronic governance sector. The National Archives will be performing a detailed map-
ping of electronic systems in all 3500 state government agencies in 2015, which should provide
valuable information for planning purposes.
    The principal challenges are to develop and implement new strategies for protecting and
preserving public sector digital information, extending access to it, and incorporating interop-
erability functionality in Noark 6, which is already being planned. The issue of email, which is
increasingly urgent as more and more of the official workflow is conducted by email, also needs
to be addressed in the new version of the Standard. In theory all email into and out of gov-
ernment agencies is to be captured in the Noark system, with metadata recorded as for other
documents and available through the OEP. However, capture is not automated as part of agency
records systems, and often employees do not want to spend time registering email. This thorny
issue was emphasized in the 2015 report of the national SAMDOK Project, (The Consistent
Documentation of Society Project) coordinated by the National Archives, and there is increasing
recognition of the importance of addressing it.12
    One of the most significant challenges is the difficulty of making transfers from record cre-
ating agencies to the National Archives’ secure digital repository. Agreements on transfer are
worked out through appraisal negotiations when an extraction is agreed. These negotiations may
not happen for several years after the records are created, but even when they do, the agencies
and the Archives have limited capacity to follow up, and there can be a further long gap before
the transfer actually occurs. There are cases where records are up to 15 years old before they
transferred. The result is that a large backlog of digital records and databases remain on agency
36 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



       servers, where there is a diminishing ability to protect their integrity and preserve them as time
       passes and errors in their description become increasingly difficult to rectify.
           The primary reason for the delays is the scale of effort and cost involved in extracting and
       transferring records from record creating systems to the National Archives. Creating a submis-
       sion information package compliant with Noark requirements is difficult and time consuming.
       There are approximately 3500 record creating agencies at the state level, each with a digital
       records system. The time and skill level required to carry out an extraction is so great that Noark
       system vendors or consultancy firms have to be hired to do the work at a high cost. The process
       is particularly time consuming and technically difficult where specialized systems are not Noark
       compliant.
           Over the last several years, the search for solutions has stimulated new questions about the
       systems needed to extract and protect the quality and authenticity of records created in gov-
       ernment agencies.13 It has become increasingly clear that there is a critical need for a simpler,
       cheaper automated means of extracting the records and metadata in such a way that it can
       be used effectively to benefit society. The approach needs to be easy to apply, so that even
       those with little or no IT competence can make an extraction and wrap it in data description
       markup language to structure the metadata and make it possible for the records and databases
       to searched and used reliably in the future. The proposed solution is to develop an intermediate
       eArchive, linked to the long-term digital repository, or to clusters of repositories. The Archives’
       projected timeframe is 2015 to 2018.14 Funding is not yet adequate to fully develop the new
       framework and associated tools, but hopefully as the benefits become clear, progress will be
       more rapid.
           Creating the eArkive will involve building a standardized application programing interface,
       linked an upgraded Noark 6, to enable continuous mandatory data transmission from the cre-
       ating agencies to the eArkive. The eArkive will enable the Archives offer timely guidance and
       meaningful feedback on the means of rectifying systemic errors while staff still are familiar with
       content and before the errors multiply. Simplifying and streamlining processes will prevent long
       delays in bringing records and data into secure custody, minimize the risk of lost records and
       data, and greatly reducing the costs involved in maintaining digital records in government agen-
       cies and in supporting extraction. The result will be that higher quality records and data are
       available earlier for research and that they survive through time. The eArkive also will support
       enhanced interoperability and the ability to share information between public aencies. The fact
       that Noark is a mandatory standard across state public administration agencies will mean that
       changes can be effected much more quickly than would be possibile in an unstandardized envi-
       ronment. The eArchive, based on Noark requirements, also could remove regulatory obstacles
       to the use of the cloud, since digital information could potentially be held in a public sector
       cloud secured on Norwegian soil under government control.
           Significantly, in terms of openness, the eArchive will make it possible to greatly enhance
       the OEP. Difi has received funding for a pilot project to evaluate a new OEP solution, and the
       National Archives and the OEP team have been exploring collaboration. The eArchive architec-
       ture could be planned to intersect with a new OEP solution, based on an upgraded Noark core,
       to support much enhanced access to records, and hence enhanced transparency and account-
       ability. The Archives is beginning to explore ways of structuring its repositories in line with OEP
       architecture, with a view to making documents, as opposed to simply metadata, available auto-
       matically. This could provide a model for making material in repositories easily accessible online.
       The benefits for the OEP would be lower costs of publishing the documents, a greatly enhanced
Norway: Information Integrity and Access to Information	                                               37




ability to support openness and management transparency, and the ability to protect and access
records and data through time.
    Municipal and county governments face similar but more challenging issues: there are few
resources for preserving digital records, with only a handful of technicians around the coun-
try with extraction competence, and few digital repository facilities. The backlog of unsecured
records is far greater than at the state level.15 Some bigger cities have or share repositories, but
mostly for paper records. A digital resource centre in Trondheim is intended to play a national
role, but has not yet implemented a digital repository system. Many municipalities want the
National Archives to take responsibility for their records, but the Archives does not have the
resources to do this, and in any case, innovative work is already underway in large municipalities,
including Oslo, Bergen, and Trondheim as well as in the smaller municipality of Kongsberg,
including work on making metadata and entire documents available on public websites. There
would be real value in collaboration between the state and municipal levels in developing the
eArchive.
    Sweden is developing a similar solution, which is to be introduced in several major govern-
ment agencies in 2016, with the aim of achieving cost savings, more efficient public manage-
ment, and better protection of digital information that has legal, administrative, and historical
significance. Although the two systems are different, experiences from Sweden will be valu-
able in developing the Norwegian solution. The National Archives of Norway is in close contact
with Swedish authorities and follows the Swedish eARDproject (e-Archive and e-Diarium) with
interest.


Conclusion
Norway’s approach to open government information is achieved through a well-defined and
well-integrated framework of controls that are among the most advanced in the world. Its long
term commitment to building a framework of laws, functional requirements, and technical sys-
tems for making reliable government information available to everyone, has enabled a remark-
able degree of openness that directly benefits citizens by ay enabling them to know what their
government is doing and spending. The consistent application of well-defined Noark require-
ments has generated a common set of metadata that makes it possible to trace, relate, and
compare policies, decisions, actions, and expenditure accurately over long periods of time as a
basis for an informed and socially just society.
    In the future, the availability of metadata and linked records will be an enormous advantage
to the public and the private sector, so long as trustworthy information can be extracted auto-
matically and made available through a platform such as the OEP, a digital repository or an open
data or open government platform. Norway is in the process of finding a new balance between
carefully defined requirements for managing information and the need to use technology to
streamline information management functions.
    While specific to Norway, the essence of the systems that have been developed and are
being developed could be examined and modified for use internationally and scaled to existing
resources, for example to meet lower resource country requirements and financial constraints,
especially as Norway’s systems are all open source. In this way, Norway’s potential contribution
to the open government process is enormous.
38 	                       anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                          M
                          Lessons from Nordic Countries




       Notes
       1. http://www.constitution.org/cons/norway/dok-bn.html.
       2. Case documents of an administrative agency are those that have been received by or submitted to the
       agency or which the agency itself has drawn up in relation to that agency’s area of responsibility or activities.
       3. The Directorate later evolved into the Agency for Public Management and eGovernment (Difi).
       4. The National Archives of Norway developed ADDML in collaboration with the National Archives of
       Sweden in 1998.
       5. http://public.ccsds.org/publications/archive/650x0m2.pdf.
       6. http://www.iso16363.org/standards/iso-16363/.
       7. https://www.oep.no/?lang=en.
       8. Case handling is the work process involved in handling a request, an enquiry, or an application in order to
       make a decision or give an answer.
       9. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=HCh3UnDqa3k.
       10. http://presse.no/offentlighet/.
       11. http://www.opengovguide.com/country-examples/norway-has-developed-an-electronic-public-records-
       tool-which-is-used-by-central-government-agencies-to-publicise-their-public-records-online-and-which-is-
       open-for-everyone-to-use/.
       12. SAMDOK: Digital Created Material in the Municipal Sector (1985 to 2010), 2015.
       13. SAMDOK Report and N4OK: Kvalitetsvurdering av Avletvert Materiale (in English), http://www.kdrs.no/
       sites/default/files/filer/Tor%20Eivind%20Johansen/n4ok_rapport.pdf, 2014
       14. eArchive in Public Administration: Establishing a Data-Driven Infrastructure for Ongoing Transfer of
       Electronic Records to eArchive and Digital Repository, an Economic Analysis, Commissioned by the National
       Archives, 2015.
       15. The SAMDOK report quoted a 2014 survey of digitally created content in the 428 municipalities and
       19 counties. Of the records created in the period 1985 and 2010 in 12,000 case-filing systems and business
       systems, records from only 1000 systems were secured in custody.
                   List of Relevant
                   International Standards

Records Management/Information
Governance and Risk Related Standards
Generally Accepted Record-Keeping Principles

The Principles provide a high level overview of the principles of information governance.
Developed by ARMA International to foster awareness of information governance standards
and principles and to assist organizations in developing information management systems with
which records and information assets are expected to comply. The Principles set forth the char-
acteristics of an effective information governance program but allow flexibility based upon the
unique circumstances of an organization’s size, sophistication, legal environment, and resources.

Principle of Accountability

A senior executive (or a person of comparable authority) shall oversee the information gover-
nance program and delegate responsibility for records and information management to appro-
priate individuals. The organization adopts policies and procedures to guide personnel and
ensure that the program can be audited.

Principle of Integrity

An information governance program shall be constructed so the information generated by
or managed for the organization has a reasonable and suitable guarantee of authenticity and
reliability.




                                                                                                    39
40 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



       Principle of Protection

       An information governance program shall be constructed to ensure a reasonable level of pro-
       tection for records and information that are private, confidential, privileged, secret, classified, or
       essential to business continuity or that otherwise require protection.

       Principle of Compliance

       An information governance program should be constructed to comply with applicable laws and
       other binding authorities, as well as with the organization’s policies.

       Principle of Availability

       An organization shall maintain records and information in a manner that ensures timely, efficient,
       and accurate retrieval of needed information.

       Principle of Retention

       An organization shall maintain its records and information for an appropriate time, taking into
       account its legal, regulatory, fiscal, operational, and historical requirements.

       Principle of Disposition

       An organization shall provide secure and appropriate disposition for records and information
       that are no longer required to be maintained by applicable laws and the organization’s policies.

       Principle of Transparency

       An organization’s business processes and activities, including its information governance pro-
       gram, shall be documented in an open and verifiable manner, and that documentation shall be
       available to all personnel and appropriate interested parties.

       NOARK 4
       Norwegian Recordkeeping System—Version 4

       Noark-4 is a specification of functional requirements for electronic recordkeeping systems used
       in public administration in Norway. The specification lists requirements with regard to infor-
       mation content (what kind of information it should be possible to register and retrieve), data
       structure (design of each data element and the relationship between these elements), and func-
       tionality (the functions which the systems are to maintain). In some cases there are requirements
       with regard to the user interface (how the systems communicate with the users), but this is mainly
       left to the individual system developers or vendors to decide. The specification does not contain
       requirements with regard to the how the data structure is to be implemented, or with regard to
       system design. This is left to the system developers.
List of Relevant International Standards	                                                            41




NOARK 5
Standard for Records Management

Noark 5 sets out requirements concerning record structure, metadata and functionality, but does
not contain any requirements concerning how these requirements should actually be met in sys-
tem development. Noark 5 therefore does not define a system, but facilitates different solutions.
The requirements are stricter for depositing, transfer and migration. Obligatory metadata must
be included in the export, and the export must have a defined structure. The standard does
not contain a description of procedures or the way in which different requirements can be met.

ISO 14721
Space data and Information Transfer Systems—Open archival
information system (OAIS)—Reference Model

The standard establishes a common framework of terms and concepts that make up an Open
Archival Information System (OAIS). It allows existing and future archives to meaningfully com-
pared and contrasted. It provides a basis for further standardization within an archival context
and it should promote greater vendor awareness of, and support of, archival requirements. An
OAIS is an archive that has accepted the responsibility to preserve information and make it
available for a designated community. The information being maintained has been deemed to
need long-term preservation, even if the OAIS itself is not permanent. Long term is long enough
to be concerned with the impacts of changing technologies, including support for new media
and data formats, or with a changing user community. Long Term may extend indefinitely. In
this reference model there is a particular focus on digital information, both as the primary forms
of information held and as supporting information for both digitally and physically archived
materials.

ISO 15489:2001
Records Management

ISO 15489 is the foundation standard which codifies best practice for records management
operations.
    ISO 15489 Part 1: General gives a high level framework for record-keeping and explains the
benefits of good records management, the legal considerations and the importance of making
someone responsible for recordkeeping. This part also looks at what’s needed for good records
management, designing recordkeeping systems, records management processes, auditing and
training.
    ISO 15489 Part 2: Guidelines is a guide to putting the advice given in Part 1 into practice.
It provides specific detail on developing records management policy and responsibility state-
ments and suggests a process for developing recordkeeping systems. It also provides advice
about developing records processes and controls. It also gives specific advice about setting up
monitoring, auditing, and training programmes.
42 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



       ISO 16175-1:2010
       Information and documentation—Principles and Functional
       Requirements for Records in Electronic Office Environments—
       Part 1: Overview and statement of principles

       ISO 16175-1 establishes fundamental principles and functional requirements for software used
       to create and manage digital records in office environments. It is intended to be used in con-
       junction with ISO 16175-2 and ISO 16175-3. ISO 16175-1 establishes the principles of good
       practice, guiding principles, implementation guidelines, and it lists risks and mitigations for
       the purposes including: enabling better management of records in organisations, supporting
       the business needs of an organisation by enabling greater effectiveness and efficiency of the
       operations; providing enhanced abilities to support auditing activities; improving capabilities to
       comply with statutory mandates specified in various information-related legislation (for exam-
       ple, data protection and privacy); supporting good governance (for example, accountability,
       transparency and enhanced service delivery) through good management of records; and maxi-
       mizing cross-jurisdictional consistency regarding the articulation of functional requirements for
       managing records.

       ISO 16175-2:2011
       Information and documentation—Principles and Functional
       Requirements for Records in Electronic Office Environments—
       Part 2: Guidelines and Functional Requirements for Digital
       Records Management Systems

       ISO 16175-2:2011 articulates a set of functional requirements for digital records management
       systems. These requirements apply to records irrespective of the media in which they were cre-
       ated and/or stored. It is applicable to products that are often termed ‘electronic records man-
       agement systems’ or ‘enterprise content management systems’. ISO 16175-2:2011 uses the term
       digital records management systems for those software applications whose primary function is
       records management. It does not seek to set requirements for records still in use and held within
       business systems. Digital objects created by email, word processing, spreadsheet and imaging
       applications (such as text documents, and still or moving images), where they are identified to
       be of business value, are managed within digital records management systems which meet the
       functional requirements established in ISO 16175-2:2011.
           Records managed by a digital records management system can be stored on a variety of
       different media formats, and can be managed in hybrid record aggregations that include both
       digital and non-digital elements. ISO 16175-2:2011 does not give specifications for the long-
       term preservation of digital records; this issue needs to be addressed separately within a dedi-
       cated framework for digital preservation or ‘digital archiving’ at the strategic level. These digital
       preservation considerations transcend the life of systems and are system independent; they
       need to be assessed in a specific migration and conversion plan at the tactical level. However,
       recognition of the need to maintain records for as long as they are required is addressed in ISO
       16175-2:2011, and potential format obsolescence issues need to be considered when applying
       the functional requirements.
List of Relevant International Standards	                                                                 43




ISO 16175-3:2010
Information and Documentation—Principles and Functional
Requirements for Records in Electronic Office Environments—
Part 3: Guidelines and Functional Requirements for Records in
Business Systems

ISO 16175-3:2010 specifies general requirements and guidelines for records management and
gives guidelines for the appropriate identification and management of evidence (records) of
business activities transacted through business systems. It provides guidelines to assist in: under-
standing processes and requirements for identifying and managing records in business systems;
develop requirements for functionality for records to be included in a design specification when
building, upgrading or purchasing business system software; evaluating the records manage-
ment capability of proposed customized or commercial off-the-shelf business system software;
and reviewing the functionality for records or assess compliance of existing business systems.
    ISO 16175-3:2010 specifies requirements for export supports preservation by allowing the
export of records to a system that is capable of long-term preservation activities, or for the
ongoing migration of records into new systems. It does not specify requirements for the long-
term preservation of digital records, and it is not applicable to records management in highly
integrated software environments based on service-oriented architectures.

ISO 16363:2012:
Space Data and Information Transfer Systems—Audit and
Certification of Trustworthy Digital Repositories

This standard is for use as the basis for providing audit and certification of the trustworthiness
of digital repositories. It provides a detailed specification of criteria by which digital repositories
shall be audited. This document is meant primarily for those responsible for auditing digital
repositories and also for those who work in or are responsible for digital repositories seeking
objective measurement of the trustworthiness of their repository. Some institutions may also
choose to use these metrics during a design or redesign process for their digital repository.

ISO 23081
Information and Documentation—Records Management
Processes—Metadata for Records

Part 1: Principles

ISO 23081 sets a framework for creating, managing and using records management metadata
and explains the principles that govern them. It is a guide to understanding, implementing, and
using metadata within the framework of ISO 15489. It addresses the relevance of records man-
agement metadata in business processes and the different roles and types of metadata that sup-
port business and records management processes. It also sets a framework for managing those
metadata. It assesses the main existing metadata sets in line with the requirements of ISO 15489.
44 	                     anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                        M
                        Lessons from Nordic Countries



       Part 2: Conceptual and implementation issues

       This part of ISO 23081 focuses on the framework for defining metadata elements for managing
       records and provides a generic statement of metadata elements, whether these are physical,
       analogue, or digital, consistent with the principles of ISO 23081-1.

       ISO 26122
       Information and Documentation—Work Process Analysis
       for Records

       This standard provides guidance on work process analysis from the perspective of the creation,
       capture and control of records. It identifies two types of analyses, namely functional analysis
       (decomposition of functions into processes), and sequential analysis (investigation of the flow of
       transactions). Each analysis entails a preliminary review of context (i.e., mandate and regulatory
       environment) appropriate for the analysis. The components of the analysis can be undertaken
       in various combinations and in a different order from that described here, depending on the
       nature of the task, the scale of the project, and the purpose of the analysis. Guidance provided
       in the form of lists of questions/matters to be considered under each element of the analysis is
       also included.
            The standard describes a practical application of the theory outlined in ISO 15489. As such, it
       is independent of technology (i.e., can be applied regardless of the technological environment),
       although it can be used to assess the adequacy of technical tools that support an organization’s
       work processes.

       ISO/IEC 27001:2013
       Information Technology—Security techniques—Information
       Security Management Systems—Requirements

       This standard specifies the requirements for establishing, implementing, maintaining, and
       continually improving an information security management system within the context of the
       organization. This standard also includes requirements for the assessment and treatment of
       information security risks tailored to the needs of the organization.
       The standard covers information security leadership and high-level support for policy, planning
       an information security management system; risk assessment; risk treatment, supporting an
       information security management system, making an information security management system
       operational, reviewing the system’s performance, and corrective action.
List of Relevant International Standards	                                                                  45




ISO 30300:2011
Information and Documentation—Management Systems for
Records—Fundamentals and Vocabulary

This standard defines terms and definitions applicable to the standards on management systems
for records (MSR) prepared by ISO/TC 46/SC 11. It also establishes the objectives for using a
MSR, provides principles for a MSR, describes a process approach and specifies roles for senior
management. It is applicable to any type of organization that wishes to establish, implement,
maintain and improve a MSR to support its business; assure itself of conformity with its stated
records policy; and demonstrate conformity with this standard by undertaking a self-assessment
and self-declaration. It also supports organizations seeking confirmation of its self-declaration
by a party external to the organization, or seeking certification of its MSR by an external party.

ISO 31000: 2012
Risk Management—Principles and Guidelines

The standard provides principles, a framework, and a process for managing risk. It can be used
by any organization regardless of its size, activity or sector. Using ISO 31000 can help organiza-
tions increase the likelihood of achieving objectives, improve the identification of opportunities
and threats and effectively allocate and use resources for risk treatment.  However, ISO 31000
cannot be used for certification purposes, but does provide guidance for internal or external
audit programmes. Organizations using it can compare their risk management practices with
an internationally recognised benchmark, providing sound principles for effective management
and corporate governance.


Data Management Standards
Data Quality Assessment Framework (DQAF)

The International Monetary DQAF1 provides a structure for assessing countries’ data quality
against a structure of internationally accepted practices and methodologies. It covers institu-
tional environments, statistical processes, and characteristics of the statistical products. It is orga-
nized around a set of prerequisites and five dimensions of data quality: integrity, methodological
soundness, accuracy and reliability, serviceability, and accessibility. It identifies quality-related
features of governance of statistical systems, statistical processes, and statistical products. It
is rooted in the UN Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics and incorporated good prac-
tices developed by the IMF’s initiatives on data dissemination: the Special Data Dissemination
Standard (SDDS) and the General Data Dissemination System (GDDS).
46 	                    anaging Records and Information in the Digital Environment:
                       M
                       Lessons from Nordic Countries



       Data Documentation Initiative (DDI)

       The DDI is a quality assessment framework developed as an international standard for describ-
       ing data from the social, behavioral, and economic sciences. It aims to address obstacles to
       creating good structured It provides a metadata specification expressed in XML. The DDI proj-
       ect, which started in 1995, has steadily gained momentum and evolved to meet the needs of
       the social science research community including universities, data archives, research centers
       and institutes, and data services. The metadata specification now supports the documentation
       and integration of entire research data lifecycle. DDI metadata accompanies and enables data
       conceptualization, collection, processing, distribution, discovery, analysis, repurposing, and
       archiving in relation to the organizational needs of the creators and the data being described.


       Note
       http://dsbb.imf.org/Pages/DQRS/DQAF.aspx.
