                                                                                                      98808




     Alternative Social Safety Nets in South Sudan: Costing and
                   Impact on Welfare Indicators
                                              Poverty Note


                                     Utz Pape and Nicola Pontara1
                                              June 2015




1
 The authors would like to thank Samathida Kem, Nadia Selim, Maya Sherpa and Harsh Vijay for their research
assistance.
                                                       1
                                                                 Table of Content


I.         Background and Objectives .................................................................................................................. 7
II.        The Adverse Impact of Recent Shocks on Poverty and Food Security ................................................ 8
III.          Social Protection in South Sudan: A Snapshot ............................................................................... 10
IV.           Alternative Social Safety Nets in South Sudan: Cost and Impact................................................... 12
      A.      Why Social Safety Nets? Opportunities and Challenges ................................................................ 12
      B.      Types of Safety Nets: Targeted Population and Transfer Amounts................................................ 13
V.         Impact on Poverty ............................................................................................................................... 15
      A.      Poverty Overview ........................................................................................................................... 15
      B.      Universal targeting vs. perfect targeting of the poor....................................................................... 16
      C.      Geographic Targeting ..................................................................................................................... 20
      D.      Proxy Means Targeting (PMT) ....................................................................................................... 21
VI.           Conclusions ..................................................................................................................................... 24
References ................................................................................................................................................... 26
Appendix 1: The Social Protection Framework in South Sudan ................................................................ 27
Appendix 2: A Dual-track Strategy on Social Protection in South Sudan .................................................. 28
Appendix 3: Proxy Means Test Model Specification ................................................................................ 29
Appendix 4: Proxy Means Test Simulation Results (10 SSP per month transfer) ...................................... 31
Appendix 5: Proxy Means Test Simulation Results (20 SSP per month transfer) ...................................... 32
Appendix 6: Geographic Targeting Simulation Results (10 SSP per individual transfer).......................... 33
Appendix 7: Geographic Targeting Simulation Results (20 SSP per individual transfer).......................... 35




                                                                                 2
                                                       Figures and Tables


Figure 1: Estimates on Rural and Urban Poverty – 2009 to 2015 ................................................................. 9
Figure 2: South Sudan Food Security Index ................................................................................................ 10
Figure 3: Spending on Social Safety Nets in South Sudan.............................. Error! Bookmark not defined.
Figure 4: Population shares in South Sudan by Urban/rural and Major Towns ......................................... 12
Figure 5: Internally Displaced Population and Refugees – Dec 2013-Feb 2015 ......................................... 13
Figure 6: Poverty headcount, depth and severity before and after the conflict, by urban and rural ........ 15
Figure 7: Poverty Rate by Counties – 2008 & 2015 (simulated) ................................................................. 16
Figure 8: Measures of Poverty for National Population: Perfect vs. Universal Targeting .......................... 17
Figure 9: Cost Comparison as percent of GDP for perfect and universal targeting.................................... 18
Figure 10: Coverage and leakage for perfect and universal targeting........................................................ 18
Figure 11: Measures of poverty (urban) for perfect and universal targeting............................................. 18
Figure 12: Cost comparison as percent of GDP (urban) perfect and universal targeting. .......................... 19
Figure 13: Coverage and leakage (urban) for perfect and universal targeting. .......................................... 19
Figure 14: Measures of poverty (rural) for perfect and universal targeting............................................... 19
Figure 15: Cost comparison (rural) for perfect and universal targeting. .................................................... 20
Figure 16: Coverage and leakage (rural) for perfect and universal targeting............................................. 20
Figure 17: Impact on Poverty – Geographic targeting, 10 SSP per person. ................................................ 20
Figure 18: Impact on Poverty – Geographic targeting, 20 SSP per person. ................................................ 20
Figure 19: Cost as percentage of GDP for geographic targeting. ............................................................... 21
Figure 20: Coverage and leakage for geographic targeting. ....................................................................... 21
Figure 21: Measures of poverty using PMT targeting with a transfer of 10 SSP per individual. ................ 22
Figure 22: Measures of poverty using PMT targeting with a transfer of 20 SSP per individual. ................ 22
Figure 23: Cost as percentage of GDP for PMT targeting. .......................................................................... 22
Figure 24: Coverage and leakage for PMT targeting. ................................................................................. 22




                                                                     3
       Executive Summary

  i.     The genesis of this note originates in the realization that part of the huge volume of
         humanitarian aid which is channeled into South Sudan every year could be channeled to the
         population via a safety net to increase resilience. This can be done now in the states of South
         Sudan that are less affected by conflict; while efforts can be scaled up to the remaining states
         once the current conflict is resolved. At the same time, a peaceful South Sudan that is able to
         extract oil at full capacity could receive – depending on oil price assumptions – annual net
         revenues in the region of US$ 0.5 to 1.5 billion making it capable of funding well targeted
         social safety net programs without recurring to external financial assistance.

ii.      The second motivating factor relates to the fatigues of years of weak governance and ongoing
         efforts to find more direct, transparent ways to enable citizens to reap the benefits of
         independence and peace – once it materializes – including through (cash) transfer. Initial
         dialogue with representative of Government and civil society has provided a demand for
         producing broad orders of magnitude on the provision of alternative social safety nets (SSNs).

iii.     This poverty note responds to this demand by discussing the cost of implementing a SSN
         program using different targeting schemes and assess the impact on poverty indices. The note
         purports that gradually switching expenditures to the provision of well targeted SSNs can
         reduce the chronic dependency on humanitarian (mainly food) aid, which pours into South
         Sudan at regular intervals. At the same time, it could help to alleviate reliance on patronage
         networks and switch a portion of the public spending from unproductive uses (e.g., military
         expenditure) toward strengthening the resilience and supporting the livelihoods of South
         Sudanese.

iv.      South Sudan is characterized by ongoing conflict, worsening welfare indicators and
         historically low capacity. The country has been affected by repeated shocks since
         independence in June 2011 – first the voluntary oil shutdown in 2012, then the onset of the
         civil war in 2013 and, more recently, the exogenous shock of oil price decline. The compound
         effects of these shocks have been devastating for the population of South Sudan. Spending on
         SSN programs in South Sudan has traditionally been financed by donors in a fragmented way,
         while the government institutional, human, and financial capacity to deliver services to its
         population remain limited.

 v.      Moving toward well-targeted SSN programs requires choosing the appropriate targeted
         population and the type and amount of the transfer. Considering a monetary transfer, four
         types of targeting schemes are assessed in this note: a) perfect targeting; b) universal transfer;
         c) geographic targeting; and d) proxy means targeting (PMT). The cost of the selected SSN
         instrument, based often on budgetary considerations, will determine its feasibility and
         effectiveness. One impact of the SSN instrument can be measured by the reduction in poverty,

                                                       4
       as assessed in terms of poverty incidence, depth, and severity. The performance and cost-
       efficiency of the SSN instrument are captured in its coverage and leakage.

vi.    The results of the simulations can be summarized as follows:

       •   Perfect and universal targeting. Unsurprisingly, the largest poverty reduction of the SSN
           examined is achieved by perfect targeting, which is a theoretical benchmark. Perfect
           targeting reduces the poverty headcount from 57 to 46 percent. It does so at the lowest
           cost, corresponding to 4.57 percent of GDP. Universal targeting achieves the same poverty
           reduction of perfect targeting but comes at a larger cost, 7.97 percent of GDP. Perfect
           targeting is not practical due to the problem of identifying the poor on the basis of income
           – which tends to be under-reported – in context with large informal sectors, as is the case
           in South Sudan. Universal targeting is a feasible but expensive approach.

       •   Geographic targeting. This method can reduce poverty by 7 percentage points,
           corresponding to an eligibility poverty rate of 52 percent, at a cost of 4.57 percent of GDP.
           It would cover 57 percent of the population and 72 percent of the poor, with a leakage of
           31 percent. Geographic targeting can be more vulnerable to elite and political capture and
           may be also perceived as ‘ethnic’ targeting, making it unfit for South Sudan. In addition,
           areas with large poverty levels before the latest shocks are not well correlated with very
           poor areas after the shocks. Thus, an SSN based on geographic targeting would not be
           able to protect the livelihoods and increase resilience of individuals in areas with moderate
           poverty but – retrospectively – largely at risk and vulnerable to shocks.

       •   Proxy means tests. This more sophisticated approach can reduce poverty to 51 percent at
           a cost of 4.57 percent of GDP. The PMT approach covers 57 percent of the population and
           77 percent of the poor resulting in a leakage of 31 percent. In addition, PMT avoids the
           problem of discrimination while at the same time it introduces a perception of fairness
           since eligible individuals are identified as poor based on proxy indicators. It also mitigates
           the problem of excluding households that are vulnerable but only almost poor by defining
           eligible households based on household characteristics. Such household characteristics
           can reflect vulnerability more accurately than constraining eligibility on poverty
           headcount. On the basis of the analysis PMT is suited to the context of South Sudan and
           should be carefully considered.

vii.   Formal targeting methods can be complemented by self-targeting to reduce leakages. Self-
       targeting mechanisms can be incorporated into the selected program by increasing barriers
       for those applying. As time is often a constraint for non-poor households, time-consuming
       application procedure can reduce leakage by reducing the incentives for non-poor individuals
       to apply. However, self-selecting mechanisms can quickly become a deterrent even for poor
       individuals as experimental evidence suggests. For example, distant cash distribution center

                                                     5
        located far from population centers can exclude the extremely poor without means for
        transportation. Similarly, requirement of manual labor eliminates those physically
        handicapped from participating.

viii.   The cost of reducing rural vs. urban poverty is much higher. Reduction of poverty in urban
        areas is inexpensive given the small proportion of urban households. Urban poverty can
        theoretically be eradicated by perfect targeting for a cost of below 2 percent of GDP. But
        poverty reduction in rural areas is expensive. Even a theoretical perfect targeting with a
        transfer of 20 SSP per individual can only reduce rural poverty from 61 percent to 48 percent
        at a cost of 4 percent of GDP. Given the breadth and depth of rural poverty, a large part of
        the population needs to be eligible for a transfer while the transfer must be substantial to lift
        the household/individual out of poverty. Policy makers need to be aware of the cost of reducing
        rural poverty in choosing selected programs.

 ix.    This note was developed to provide guidance to policy makers on what can be achieved by
        providing a transfer to the population and at what cost. It complements the analysis conducted
        by the Government that underpinned the National Social Protection Policy Framework, as
        well as a recent World Bank Policy Note on Social Protection. In addition, it underpins the
        effort to create – in the long run – a solid social protection system, which are supported by the
        World Bank through its Safety Nets and Skills Development Program, as well as other
        development partners. Further analytical work will be conducted by the World Bank Social
        Protection Team to build on this analysis and expand the range of options.




                                                     6
I. Background and Objectives

1.      South Sudan is characterized by ongoing conflict, worsening welfare indicators and
low capacity. Even before the current conflict, over half the population (50.6 percent) lived below
the national poverty line in 20082, while food insecurity routinely affected nearly 2 million people
(World Bank 2015). The country displays some of the lowest human development indicators in
the world, and infrastructure remains grossly underdeveloped.3 Formal institutions are being built
from a very low base and the capacity of the Government to formulate policy and implement
programs is limited, but growing, albeit at quite a slow pace (Larson, Ajak, & Pritchett, 2013).

2.     The displacement, destruction and loss of assets have deepened economic and social
vulnerabilities. The conflict, which erupted in late 2013, has cost the country 15 percent of GDP
and severely impacted welfare indicators. The incidence of poverty increased by seven percentage
point nationwide – an additional one million people have been pushed below the poverty line –
and the depth of poverty worsened, creating a new class of ultra-poor. Nearly 2.5 million people
are predicted to remain in ‘emergency’ or ‘crisis’ level of food insecurity in the first quarter of
2015, with an additional 3.5 million in ‘stress’ status (World Food Programme, 2015).

3.     Given the repeated shocks that affect South Sudan and the chronic vulnerability of
the population, safety nets programs can play a key role in improving resilience. Non-
contributory social safety nets (SSNs) provide a bridge between short-term humanitarian activities
and more sustainable, longer-term development efforts. SSNs can provide short-term alternative
employment to frustrated, unemployed youth and help to smooth their consumption gaps. Such
programs can also target historically marginalized segments of the population, and create
productive infrastructures that can contribute to other sectors of development.

4.      The purpose of this note is to provide the monetary cost of various social safety net
targeting schemes that can be deployed to reduce vulnerability and increase resilience. It is
believed that gradually switching to the provision of social safety nets can reduce the chronic
dependency on humanitarian (mainly food) aid. At the same time, it could help to alleviate reliance
on patronage networks and switch a portion of the public spending from unproductive uses (e.g.,
military expenditure) toward strengthening the resilience and supporting the livelihoods of South
Sudanese. In addition, a social safety net would address the fatigues of years of weak governance
and ongoing efforts to find more direct, transparent ways to enable citizens to reap the benefits of
independence and – once it materializes – peace. Initial dialogue with representative of


2
  The poverty line used to calculate the poverty rate is 72.9 SSP per person per month, which is approximately
equivalent to US$ 32 per person per month, or just over US$ 1 per person daily (World Bank, 2013).
3
  Only 27 percent of the population is literate and the net primary enrollment ratio is 41 percent, with less than one
tenth of the entering students completing eighth grade. Less than 1 percent of the population has post-secondary
education. Infant mortality is 105 per 1000 births, while the maternal mortality rate is 2,054 per 100,000 births, the
highest in the world. Only 44 percent of households live within a 5km radius of a health care facility (World Bank,
2013). Despite being the size of France, South Sudan has less than 200 km of paved roads (World Bank, 2014).
                                                          7
Government and civil society has provided a demand for producing broad orders of magnitude on
the provision of alternative social safety nets.

5.      Introduction of social safety net in South Sudan can be phased. A safety net could first
be introduced in the states of South Sudan that are less affected by conflict. Once the current
conflict is resolved, efforts can be scaled up to the remaining states. At the same time, a peaceful
South Sudan that is able to extract oil at full capacity could receive – depending on oil price
assumptions – annual net revenues in the region of US$ 0.5 to 1.5 billion making it capable of
funding well targeted social safety net programs without recurring to external financial assistance.

6.      The analysis focuses on the impact of a SSN on poverty via a monetary transfer. The
focus on a monetary transfer is owed to the ease of presentation. An in-kind transfer can be more
appropriate in some contexts like rural areas without a market infrastructure. Conceptually, such
transfers are covered by the monetary transfer in terms of the impact on poverty since they equally
relax the budget constraint. The impact of the SSN is analyzed on poverty only. While SSNs often
aim to reduce poverty, other outcomes like resilience, education, health or employment should
also be considered. Poverty is used as outcome measures since it can be easily aggregated and
quantified while it correlates well with most other outcome measures.

7.      The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a snapshot on the
impact of conflict on poverty and food security. Section III summarizes the state of play of social
protection in South Sudan, including the recent policy options that have been put forward by the
World Bank. Section IV and V present the results of simulations on the cost and impact on welfare
indicators of alternative SSNs in South Sudan, which crucially complements the existing analytical
work on poverty and social protection. Section VI concludes by highlighting some implications of
the analysis and the suggested next steps.

II. The Adverse Impact of Recent Shocks on Poverty and Food Security

8.      As a result of the conflict, the incidence of poverty in South Sudan has increased and
deepened, creating a new class of ultra-poor. Estimates show that the conflict has added an
additional 1 million people to the poverty pool. The increase in poverty has been most pronounced
in the three states — Upper Nile, Jonglei and Unity, which continue to experience the bulk of the
fighting — due to considerable increases in food prices and loss of harvest, as well as displacement.
The depth of poverty has also sharply increased in both urban and rural areas, creating a new class
of ultra-poor (World Bank, 2014).




                                                 8
                  Figure 1: Estimates on Rural and Urban Poverty – 2009 to 2015




                                      Source: World Bank 2014


9.     Food insecurity has increased more significantly than poverty, and has sharply
deteriorated since December 2013. Most agricultural markets in the conflict-affected zones and
in neighboring states have been severely disrupted. In some instances, even basic staples are not
available. Violence and displacement have been one of the main causes of the recent spike in food
insecurity. Consequently, the conflict has affected the livelihoods of millions of people – crops
have not been planted, livestock are dislocated, and traders have fled – greatly affecting the
availability of commodities for local economies (World Bank, 2014).

10.     In addition, South Sudan is one of the countries hardest hit by the oil price decline.
Net oil revenue accruing to the government from each barrel of crude oil produced is estimated to
have declined from USD 44 in June 2014 to USD 17 in January 2015. A fiscal deficit of about
USD 1.5 billion is projected in FY 14/15, while the balance of payment position is expected to
deteriorate from a surplus to a deficit of over USD 1 billion. More than 40 percent of the population
(poor and non-poor) is estimated to be negatively affected by a decline in oil price (World Bank,
2015). The country is now on the brink of economic collapse.




                                                 9
                                   Figure 2: South Sudan Food Security Index




III.     Social Protection in South Sudan: A Snapshot

11.     Given the repeated shocks that affect South Sudan and the chronic vulnerability of
the population, social protection programs4 can play a key role in improving resilience. In
this paper, we focus especially on social safety nets (SSNs), which are non-contributory transfer
programs targeted to the poor. These programs usually include school feeding, cash transfers
(conditional and unconditional), social pensions, public works, in-kind transfers (e.g., food stamps)
and other social assistance programs (e.g., housing allowances, scholarships, fees waivers, etc.)
(World Bank, 2012).

12.      Spending on SSNs in South Sudan has been largely financed by donors, with heavy
focus on food distribution.5 There are currently no state-sponsored SSN programs. In 2012, food
transfer programs accounted for approximately 98 percent of total SSNs expenditures and covered
70 percent of SSN beneficiaries, a proportion that has likely increased since the recent outbreak of
hostilities. School feeding represented an additional 14 percent of beneficiaries (Figure 3). Cash
for work and food for work interventions provided assistance to 15 percent of beneficiaries, and
unconditional cash transfers addressed a 0.3 percent of total beneficiaries (World Bank, 2015).




4
  Social protection interventions include: (a) social safety nets (cash or in-kind transfers to alleviate poverty); (b) social
insurance programs (contributory programs like pensions, unemployment benefits, and health insurance); and (c) labor
regulations and active labor market programs (education and training, credit, and employment services).
5
  Spending on SSN in 2012 was estimated at US$345 million, or 5.6 percent of the country’s 2011 GDP. WFP food
transfers, including emergency distribution, school feeding, and food-for-work programs, covered nearly 2.5 million
individual beneficiaries at a cost of US$342 million, thus providing for nearly all the spending.
                                                             10
                        Figure 3: Spending on Social Safety Nets in South Sudan




13.     The Government’s vision on social protection is outlined in the South Sudan
Development Plan (see Appendix 1) and the National Social Protection Policy Framework.
But the Government capacity to deliver on social protection objectives remains limited. This
includes a lack of infrastructure and inadequate administrative capacity at the central and local
levels. Programs are fragmented and do not exist at a significant scale or as longer-term
interventions. There is no viable strategic planning in place, no robust mechanisms ensuring
adequacy of benefits, and no clear budgeting procedures. No attempt has been made to date to cost
alternative SSNs.

14.     The recent World Bank Social Protection Policy Note discusses a strategic approach
to social protection through a dual track strategy. The strategy seeks to strike a balance between
humanitarian and development interventions, and the realities of different states (conflict vs.
relative peace). The dual track strategy encompasses both short- and medium-term efforts, which
can co-exist based on the Government and development partners’ comparative advantage. In the
longer run, the objective is to create an integrated social protection system with a well-defined and
agreed timeframe, and based on significant capacity building efforts (see Appendix 2).

15.     The policy note also stresses the needs for stronger analytical underpinnings and
technical know-how. The Social Protection Policy Framework needs to be underpinned by a
stronger analytical base. A more thorough analysis of vulnerabilities and coping strategies,
available social protection instruments, and identification and quantification of target groups is
required to support a more in-depth understanding of the costs and benefits of different approaches
(for a rare exception see Bruni and Eddy 2012). Following up on this recommendation, the
remainder of this paper focuses on the costing of alternative SSNs and their impact on poverty.




                                                  11
IV.     Alternative Social Safety Nets in South Sudan: Cost and Impact

A.      Why Social Safety Nets? Opportunities and Challenges

14.      South Sudan can implement well-targeted SSNs to reduce its chronic dependence on
humanitarian aid and alleviate reliance on patronage networks. The country is heavily
dependent on humanitarian aid, which is crucial to save lives.6 However, many young adults who
were born into war have become dependent on such aid, opting to rely heavily on patronage
networks (and extended families) while waiting for unrealistic high paying ‘government jobs’
(World Bank, 2014).7 Given this context, different modalities of SSNs could contribute to alter
this status quo and allow South Sudanese to escape the low-level equilibrium trap.

15.     Moving to productive safety nets in rural areas can reduce humanitarian aid
dependency and boost productivity. In South Sudan, the majority of the population lives in rural
areas (Figure 4). Evidence from the Productive Safety Nets Program in Ethiopia shows it is
possible to achieve the twin objectives of food security and increased farm productivity with well-
designed programs. Transfers can be used to increase land productivity arising from investments
in land, as well as improve local ecology from investments in common resources, and improve
access to markets from investments in local roads (Hill, Olinto, Pape, Sherpa, & Sohnesen, 2015).

                Figure 4: Population shares in South Sudan by Urban/rural and Major Towns




                                       Source: World Bank’s calculation.

16.     Similarly, programs can be put in place aiming at creating and upgrading skills in
urban areas. This can be achieved through cash transfers combined with vocational and life and
business skills training. Only about 17 percent of urban adults in the age bracket 25-44 have
benefited from vocational training, despite the fact that access to these programs more than doubles

6
  For 2015, a little over USD 1.8 billion is required, of which a bit more than USD 527 million has been received so
far. See OCHA South Sudan, http://www.unocha.org/south-sudan.
7
  In rural areas, farmers are unlikely to invest in (surplus) production given the risk of looting by armed forces,
malfunctioning (or missing) markets, and insecurity and crime affecting the main routes. Rather, they continue to
depend on food aid to make ends meet.
                                                        12
participation in the labor force (World Bank, 2014). Given that the educational background of the
young urban male population is better than the average, innovative solutions to upgrade skills can
be very useful, particularly as a bridge between basic education and marketable skills.

17.    The debate is shifting towards provision of SSNs to deliver the long-awaited peace
dividends to the population. Yet, there are significant challenges: the war has displaced nearly 2
million people (Figure 5), making the identification of beneficiary difficult. Most SSN programs
continue to be fragmented, lacking coherence and without the benefit of rigorous impact
evaluations. But some stakeholders are beginning to realize that SSNs could be a way to deliver to
the population the peace dividends that never materialized since independence. The debate is
consequently shifting towards ‘costing’, targeting and the impact of SSNs on poverty.8


                 Figure 5: Internally Displaced Population and Refugees – Dec 2013-Feb 2015




                                        Source: World Bank’s calculations.

B.       Types of Safety Nets: Targeted Population and Transfer Amounts

18.     Moving towards setting up well-targeted SSN programs requires choosing the
appropriate targeted population and the type and amount of the transfer. The overarching
objective of SSNs, as intended in this paper, is mainly to reduce poverty. Hence, appropriate
instruments will have to be chosen to properly target the vulnerable and the poor. To that end, four
types of SSNs are examined: a) perfect targeting; b) universal targeting; c) geographic targeting;
and d) targeting the poor through a proxy means test. These transfers are described as follows:


8
 The National Social Protection Policy Framework, recently passed by the Council of Ministers, mandate one percent
of the national budget to be allocated towards social protection programs. As such, rigorous and evidence based
analysis of the cost of different social protection approaches is critical in order to ensure the most efficient use of
scarce Government financing.
                                                          13
    a. Perfect targeting. While perfect targeting of the poor can be evaluated theoretically, its
       implementation is not practical due to the constraints in identifying individuals as poor
       solely on the basis of income. Individuals have incentives to understate their welfare in
       order to qualify for the program’s benefits (Gosh & Baker, 1995). Moreover, in a country
       with large informal sector employment such as South Sudan, income of individuals can be
       difficult to ascertain, which results in higher leakages and program costs.
    b. Universal transfer. This is the most straightforward targeting scheme. This scenario does
       not distinguish between welfare levels of recipients, e.g., disability status, gender, age,
       employment status, etc. A universal transfer may save on administrative expenses and is
       easier to implement than alternatives options. However, this cash transfer alone is usually
       more expensive than other targeting mechanisms due to the larger number of beneficiaries
       that need to be reached.
    c. Geographic Targeting. Individuals can also be targeted depending on the poverty
       prevalence in the village, county or district where they reside. Geographic targeting works
       well if poverty levels are homogeneous in the areas where the programs are expected to be
       implemented. For the purpose of the analysis in this note, South Sudan counties were used
       as geographic areas representing the largest geographic disaggregation of available poverty
       estimates.

    d. Targeting by Proxy Means Test. In the absence of reliable records for verification of
       individual welfare, certain easily identifiable household characteristics can be considered
       as proxies for welfare. The difficulty is to determine which characteristics are flexible
       proxies for welfare. While perfect targeting might help to overcome the potential pitfalls
       from noise in income data, relying on easily identifiable household characteristics is an
       approximation that results in both inclusion and exclusion errors.9
19.     The cost of the selected SSN instrument, based often on budgetary considerations,
will determine its feasibility and effectiveness. Usually, comparisons between countries are
made by indicating spending on SSNs as a proportion of GDP or in per capita terms. In this note,
the simulations of the cost and impact of different targeting schemes are developed using transfers
of 10 South Sudanese Pounds (SSP) and 20 SSP per month for each individual. In addition, the
overall transfer amount is fixed such that the cost of the SSN corresponds to 2 percent of GDP,
which corresponds to the average spending in low-income countries.

20.     The impact of the SSN instrument can be measured by the reduction in poverty, as
assessed in terms of poverty incidence, depth, and severity. The poverty headcount index (P0)
is simply the proportion of the population living below the poverty line (SSP 72.9 per month). The
poverty gap (P1) measures the distance between individuals and the poverty line, calculated as the
difference between the poverty line and the consumption of poor households. It can be used to

9
  For the purpose of this analysis, welfare of households was predicted using Ordinary Least Squares (OLS) regression,
with the covariates being easily identifiable household characteristics.
                                                         14
determine the minimum cost of bringing all households out of poverty. The severity of poverty
(P3) assigns higher weight to those further below the poverty line by squaring the poverty gap.

21.     The performance and cost-efficiency of an SSN instrument are captured in its
coverage and leakage. Coverage is the proportion of eligible recipients chosen through the
targeting mechanism. This paper defines the coverage relative to the total population as well as
relative to the poor population. Leakage is the ratio of the total number of non-poor who may be
erroneously targeted compared to the total number of people targeted by the SSN program. An
effective targeting program should have a low leakage ratio. Carefully designed self-targeting
mechanisms can reduce inclusion errors.10


V. Impact on Poverty

     A. Poverty Overview

22.     Poverty in South Sudan increased considerably due to recent shocks. Before the
conflict, 50 percent of South Sudan’s population was below the poverty line, with a poverty depth
of about 23 percent. Both the eruption of the conflict in late 2013 and the significant oil price
decline of 2014-15 widened the poverty gap by 8 percentage points and deepened it to 34 percent
(Figure 6).11 An additional 1 million people were added to the poverty pool in little more than 15
months, mainly due to loss of harvest and displacement in rural areas resulting from the conflict,
raising market prices in the urban areas due to a rapidly depreciating SSP and inflation spikes.

      Figure 6: Poverty headcount, depth and severity before and after the conflict, by urban and rural




                               Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.

10
   For example, a lengthy registration process involving a long wait in a queue can dissuade people with larger
opportunity costs – usually less poor individuals – to register for the program.
11
   Poverty indicators are estimated based on the National Budget Household Survey from 2008 based on real private
consumption growth and specific shocks (World Bank, 2014; World Bank, 2015).
                                                       15
23.    The change in poverty since the onset of the conflict affected counties independent of
their poverty rate in 2008. The recent shocks of the oil shutdown in 2012, civil conflict of 2013,
and the oil price decline did not affect poorer counties more than better-off counties (Figure 7).
Rather, the conflict affected mostly the north-east quadrant of the country, while the oil price
decline increased poverty in counties with larger urban populations. Still, some counties have
become considerably better off in 2015 than in 2008. While this is partly due to economic growth
during 2008-12, counties with larger agricultural production gained from (food) price increases.

                     Figure 7: Poverty Rate by Counties – 2008 & 2015 (simulated)




                           Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.

24.     Large and unpredictable changes in poverty indicate that universal targeting would
be appropriate. Perfect targeting of the poorest could have mitigated the impact of the recent
shocks. However, the additional poor created by the combination of these shocks, some of which
are outside the control of the Government, illustrate that a SSN targeted only at the poorest would
not have helped to reduce poverty, as those remaining outside of the SSN programs would have
been still impacted negatively, with significant increases in poverty. This argues for a universal
targeting scheme, given the high proportion of households at high risk to slide into poverty.

   B. Universal targeting vs. perfect targeting of the poor

25.     Simulations shows that universal targeting and perfect targeting of the poor in South
Sudan have the same impact on poverty, for a fixed transfer amount. Given the breadth and
depth of poverty in the country today, both targeting schemes invariably end up including all poor
individuals, and hence, have the same impact on poverty reduction for a fixed transfer amount
(Figure 8). A fixed amount of 10 SSP per individual reduces poverty by about 6 percentage points.
Doubling the transfer amount to 20 SSP also doubles poverty reduction to around 12 percentage
points.

                                                  16
26.     However, for a fixed total cost of the SSN program at 2 percent of GDP, perfect
targeting of the poor is theoretically the best possible way of achieving poverty reduction.12
Such a targeting scheme maximizes the transfer amount, entails a transfer of slightly less than 10
SSP, and reaches a reduction in the incidence of poverty equivalent to 5 percentage points (Figure
8). In contrast, universal targeting distributes the total transfer amount to a larger number of
individuals, resulting in lower transfer amounts per individual, and only achieves a reduction in
the incidence of poverty equivalent to 3 percentage points.

              Figure 8: Measures of Poverty for National Population: Perfect vs. Universal Targeting




                                  Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.

27.     If the transfer amount instead of program costs are fixed, a universal targeting
scheme is more expensive than perfect targeting because it entails a higher leakage ratio.
Since about half of the population is poor in South Sudan, meaning the other half is non-poor,
universal targeting almost doubles the cost for the same transfer amount, i.e. almost 4 percent of
GDP (Figure 9). While both targeting mechanisms cover all the poor by design, universal targeting
also includes non-poor recipients of the transfer. This results in a substantial leakage of 42.75
percent compared to a leakage of less than 10 percent if perfect targeting is implemented (Figure
10).




12
     We assume that all eligible individuals receive the same transfer amount.
                                                           17
 Figure 9: Cost Comparison as percent of GDP for      Figure 10: Coverage and leakage for perfect and
 perfect and universal targeting.                     universal targeting.




 Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.    Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.

28.     In urban areas, where 15 percent of the population resides, a perfectly targeted urban
SSN program can eradicate poverty at a cost of 2 percent of GDP. At 2008 GDP levels, 2
percent of GDP (or 680 million SSP) translates into a transfer of 80 SSP per individual per month
for a perfectly targeted SSN. With the national poverty line of 72.9 SSP per month, urban poverty
can – theoretically – be eradicated (Figure 11). In contrast, a universal targeting scheme at 2
percent of GDP has large leakage to non-poor individuals and, hence, lowers the transfer amount
(Figure 12 and Figure 13). Thus, the incidence of poverty declines only from 40 to 26 percent.

                Figure 11: Measures of poverty (urban) for perfect and universal targeting.




                             Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.




                                                     18
 Figure 12: Cost comparison as percent of GDP         Figure 13: Coverage and leakage (urban) for perfect
 (urban) perfect and universal targeting.             and universal targeting.




Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.
                                                      Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.

29.     The largest cost for poverty reduction is in rural areas, which contains 85 percent of
the population and 61 percent of the poor. Some 6.2 million rural people live below the poverty
line. Not even a perfectly targeted rural SSN can reduce rural poverty by more than 6 percentage
points at a cost of 2 percent of GDP (Figure 14). In addition, program delivery in rural areas has
significantly higher implementation and overhead cost. However, given the large number of poor
people in rural areas, the difference between a perfectly and universally targeted program is smaller
and the latter displays a relatively low leakage (Figure 15 and Figure 16).

                Figure 14: Measures of poverty (rural) for perfect and universal targeting.




                            Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.




                                                    19
 Figure 15: Cost comparison (rural) for perfect         Figure 16: Coverage and leakage (rural) for perfect and
 and universal targeting.                               universal targeting.




Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.
                                                          Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.

    C. Geographic Targeting

30.     Geographic targeting combines ease of implementation with low leakage ratios.13 In
counties with a poverty rate above 25 percent geographic targeting contributes considerably to
poverty reduction. Eligibility based on a county poverty rate of 15 percent represents the case of
universal transfer, as all counties are eligible for the SSN program (Figure 17 and Figure 18). A
gradual increase of the eligibility poverty rate per county progressively removes the countries with
lowest poverty from the target group. With a very high eligibility rate, poverty reduction is limited
as only very few counties – although the ones with highest poverty – are targeted.

 Figure 17: Impact on Poverty – Geographic targeting, 10          Figure 18: Impact on Poverty – Geographic targeting,
 SSP per person.                                                  20 SSP per person.




 Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.                Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.

31.     A transfer of 20 SSP per individual geographically targeted is more effective in
reducing poverty. Similar to other targeting schemes, a transfer of only 10 SSP per individual is
not effective in lifting households out of poverty (Figure 17). In contrast, a transfer of 20 SSP per

13
   Geographic targeting defines eligible individuals by their household location. Given a pre-defined threshold, all
households in a given administrative area with a poverty rate greater than the threshold are eligible. In the following
analysis, counties are selected as administrative areas (see appendix for poverty rates by county).
                                                          20
individual can reduce poverty by 5 percentage points, even if only counties with a majority of poor
households are targeted (Figure 18).

32.      The cost of geographic targeting depends on the eligibility threshold and the transfer
amount. The cost for geographic targeting is bound by the cost of a universal transfer. An increase
in the eligibility threshold lowers the costs while ensuring that counties with highest poverty are
still targeted. A transfer of 20 SSP per individual to counties with a majority of poor households
would cost about 5 percent of GDP (Figure 19). This would target about 55 percent of the
population and 3 out of 4 poor individuals resulting in a leakage of less than one third (Figure 20).

Figure 19: Cost as percentage of GDP for geographic       Figure 20: Coverage and leakage for geographic
targeting.                                                targeting.




 Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.        Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.


33.     Geographic targeting can pose political problems, however. While it has low
administrative costs, the selection of beneficiaries based on location can turn into a very sensitive
exercise. It runs the risk of political capture of programs, as elites will strive to relax targeting
conditions so that their own constituents benefit the most regardless of where the greatest need is.
Moreover, geographic targeting could potentially correlate considerably with ethnic
concentrations, especially given the displacement patterns caused by the conflict. As such, if
utilized, geographic targeting would require careful selections of locations, as well as mechanisms
to protect against elite and political capture.

   D. Proxy Means Targeting (PMT)

34.     Proxy Means Targeting (PMT) selects eligible individuals by observable household
characteristics. PMT uses household characteristics that cannot easily be concealed to create a
proxy for the household’s welfare. These include indicators such as geographic location, type and
size of household, household inventory including durable goods, sources of livelihood, and
sanitation facilities – all good predictors of household welfare. Other characteristics, more
prevalent in poor households, include lack of access to clean drinking water, female household
head, house construction material, and overcrowded household. Both sets of characteristics are
used on the model to predict households’ welfare / poverty (see Appendix for details).

                                                     21
35.     In order to determine the eligibility of a household, SSN schemes must consider the
likelihood of a household to be poor. The simulation based on the identified model suggests a
threshold for the likelihood of a household to be poor to be around 40 percent (Figure 21 and
Figure 22). Such choice minimizes leakage while still achieves reasonable coverage of poor
households and reducing poverty to 52 percent with a 10 SSP transfer and 46 percent with a 20
SSP transfer.

 Figure 21: Measures of poverty using PMT targeting        Figure 22: Measures of poverty using PMT targeting
 with a transfer of 10 SSP per individual.                 with a transfer of 20 SSP per individual.




 Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.
                                                           Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.

36.      In South Sudan, proxy means targeting can achieve a reduction of poverty of 46
percent at a cost of 7 percent of GDP. A universal transfer of 20 SSP per individual reduced
poverty to 46 percent at a cost of 8 percent of GDP (Figure 23 and Figure 24). The same reduction
of poverty can be achieved with a realistic PMT SSN while saving 1 percentage point of GDP.
While PMT incurs additional administering costs compared to a universal transfer, it might overall
still be less expensive. It also adds an important element of perceived fairness to the program as
an effective proxy is used to disqualify non-poor people.

 Figure 23: Cost as percentage of GDP for PMT targeting.    Figure 24: Coverage and leakage for PMT targeting.




 Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.          Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2008.




                                                     22
Table 1: Summary of the impact on poverty by targeting approach for a transfer of 20 SSP per individual per
 month. Thresholds for geographic and PMT targeting are set by defining the cost equal to perfect targeting.

                                   Poverty Measures                           Coverage
                                                               Cost as
                                                              percent
                Threshold          P0         P1         P2    of GDP     of total   of poor Leakage
 Perfect                        45.62      19.66      11.15       4.57      57.24        100       0
  Urban                         30.91      15.69       9.95        0.5        39.5       100       0
  Rural                          48.4      20.41      11.37       4.06      60.61        100       0
 Universal                      45.62      19.66      11.15       7.97         100       100   42.75
  Urban                         30.91      15.69       9.95       1.27         100       100    60.5
  Rural                          48.4      20.41      11.37       6.71         100       100   39.39
 Geographic            52          50         22         14       4.57          30        60      30
 PMT                  52.5      50.57      22.76      13.19       4.57      57.24      77.26    31.1


                             Source: Authors’ calculations based on NBHS 2009.




                                                    23
VI.    Conclusions

37.     Universal targeting is subject to substantial leakage of transfers to non-poor
increasing costs or lowering effectivity of a SSN. Unsurprisingly, the largest poverty reduction
of the SSN examined is achieved by perfect targeting, which is a theoretical benchmark. Perfect
targeting reduces the poverty headcount from 57 to 46 percent. It does so at lowest cost,
corresponding to 4.57 percent of GDP. Universal targeting achieves the same poverty reduction of
perfect targeting but comes at a larger cost, 7.97 of GDP. As discussed above, perfect targeting is
not practical due to the problem to identifying the poor on the basis of income – which tends to be
unreported – and in context with large informal sectors, like South Sudan. Universal targeting
could be feasible, but is more expensive than the other targeting programs examined in this paper.

38.     Geographic targeting is more cost-efficient than universal targeting but can be
perceived as ethnic discrimination. This method can reduce poverty by 7 percentage points at
cost of 4.57 percent of GDP (corresponding to an eligibility poverty rate of 52 percent). It would
cover 57 percent of the population and 72 percent of the poor, with a leakage of 31 percent.
Geographic targeting is more vulnerable to elite and political capture and may be also perceived
as ‘ethnic’ targeting, making it unfit for South Sudan. In addition, areas with large poverty levels
before the latest shocks are not well correlated with very poor areas after the shocks. Thus, an SSN
based on geographic targeting would not be able to protect the livelihoods and increase resilience
of individuals in areas with moderate poverty but – retrospectively – largely at risk and vulnerable
to shocks.

39.      The more sophisticated PMT approach can reduce poverty to 51 percent at a cost of
4.57 percent of GDP. PMT approach covers 57 percent of the population and 77 percent of the
poor resulting in a leakage of 31 percent (Error! Reference source not found.). In addition, PMT
avoids the problem of discrimination while at the same time it introduces a perception of fairness
since only poor individuals are targeted. It also mitigates the problem of excluding vulnerable but
only almost poor households by defining eligible households based on household characteristics.
Such household characteristics can reflect more accurately vulnerability than constraining
eligibility on poverty headcount. On the basis of the analysis PMT is suited to the context of South
Sudan and should carefully considered.

40.     The cost of reducing rural vs. urban poverty is much higher. Reduction of poverty in
urban areas is inexpensive given the small proportion of urban households. Urban poverty can
theoretically be eradicated by perfect targeting for a cost below 2 percent of GDP. But poverty
reduction in rural areas is expensive. Even a theoretical perfect targeting with a transfer of 20 SSP
per individual can only reduce rural poverty from 61 percent to 48 percent and is expensive at 4
percent of GDP. Given the breadth and depth of rural poverty, a large part of the population needs
to be eligible for a transfer while the transfer must be substantial to lift the household/individual

                                                 24
out of poverty. Policy makers need to be aware of the cost of reducing rural poverty in choosing
selected programs.

41.     Formal targeting methods can be complemented by self-targeting to reduce leakages.
Self-targeting mechanisms can be incorporated into the selected program by increasing barriers
for those applying. As time is often a constraint for non-poor households, time-consuming
application procedure can reduce leakage by reducing the incentives for non-poor individuals to
apply. However, self-selecting mechanisms can quickly become a deterrent even for poor
individuals as experimental evidence suggests (Alatas, et al., 2013). For example, distant cash
distribution center can be located far from population centers excluding extremely poor without
means for transportation. Similarly, requirement of manual labor eliminates those physically
handicapped from participating.




                                              25
References
Alatas, V., Banerjee, A., Hanna, R., Olken, B. A., Purnamasari, R., & Wai-Poi, M. (2013). Ordeal
         Mechanisms in Targeting: Theory and Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia. NBER
         Working Paper.

Bruni, L., & Eddy, M. (2012). The Role of a Local Public Goods Transfer in Promoting Stability and
         Alleviating Poverty in South Sudan. Boston: Harvard University.

Gosh, M. E., & Baker, J. L. (1995). Proxy Means Tests for Targeting Social Programs.

Hill, R., Olinto, P., Pape, U. J., Sherpa, M., & Sohnesen, T. (2015). Designing an Urban Safety Net in
          Ethiopia. Washington: World Bank.

Larson, G., Ajak, P., & Pritchett, L. (2013). South Sudan's Capability Trap: Building a State with Disruptive
        Innovation. Boston: Harvard Kennedy School.

World Bank. (2012). Social Protection Strategy for Africa. Washington: World Bank.

World Bank. (2013). World Bank Iterim Strategy Note (ISN) for 2013 - 2014. Washington: World Bank.

World Bank. (2014). South Sudan Jobs and Livelihoods. Washington: World Bank.

World Bank. (2014). South Sudan: Impact of a Continued Internal Conflict on Food Security and Poverty.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank. (2015). South Sudan: Social Protection Policy Note. Washington: World Bank.

World Bank. (2015). The Fiscal Impact of Declining Oil Prices on South Sudan. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.

World Food Programme. (2015). Situation Report #76. Juba: World Food Programme.




                                                     26
Appendix 1: The Social Protection Framework in South Sudan

The Government’s vision on social protection is outlined in the South Sudan Development
Plan (SSDP) 2011-2013. The Plan’s stated objective is to ‘work progressively to reduce risk,
vulnerability, poverty, and economic and social exclusion throughout South Sudan’ (GoSS 2011).
The Government established a Social Protection Core Team led by the Ministry of Gender, Child,
Social Welfare, Humanitarian, and Disaster Management, with membership of several government
institutions14 and development partners, including the World Bank, World Food Programme
(WFP), United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), United Nations Development Programme
(UNDP), Save the Children, and the Department for International Development (DfID).

The Ministry of Gender, Child, Social Welfare, Humanitarian, and Disaster Management
has produced a draft National Social Protection Policy Framework. The overall goal of the
Framework is to ‘respond to and address the multiple vulnerabilities faced by South Sudanese
citizens, with a particular focus on the poorest and most excluded sectors’ (GoSS 2014). The
framework identifies the following six objectives: (i) inclusive social protection: ensuring access
to basic social services for all; (ii) protective environments for children; (iii) strengthened linkages
among social protection, economic development and sustainable livelihoods; (iv) improved
livelihoods for women; (v) a systems approach to social protection; and (vi) progressive realization
of coverage.

To translate its objectives into interventions, the Framework has identified the following
three clusters:
 a) Social assistance to poor and vulnerable persons, which includes Child Support Grant,
     School Feeding Program, War Veterans Grant, Foster Family Grant, and Girls’ Scholarship
     Program;
 b) Promoting the participation of poor and vulnerable persons in national economic growth,
     which includes the provision of temporary jobs and support for income-generating
     opportunities; and
 c) Legal reforms to equitably realize constitutional and human rights for all, which include
     legislative reforms to protect the right of vulnerable groups, including women and children
     (GoSS 2014).
The Framework discusses a financing strategy for social protection interventions but stops
short of costing alternative options. Social protection interventions are to be jointly funded by
the GoSS and international donors in the short-term, with the GoSS gradually funding all
interventions in the medium-term.




14
   General Directors from the Ministries of Agriculture, Defense and Veteran Affairs, Education, Finance, Health,
Local Government, and the Commission of War Widows & Veterans, and a member of Parliament.
                                                       27
Appendix 2: A Dual-track Strategy on Social Protection in South Sudan

Short term Priorities and Actions
   • Recommendation 1: Foster greater coordination of humanitarian assistance, under the
       Oslo Mechanisms umbrella and establish and maintain open safe corridors for
       humanitarian actors and food traders to alleviate the emergency.
   • Recommendation 2: Explore the feasibility of implementing alternative social safety
       programs (e.g. public works, food vouchers, cash transfers), including for IDPs, where
       markets have not been wholly disrupted and in peaceful areas (scale up SNSDP).
   • Recommendation 3: Open borders with Sudan to spur trade and relax food prices so that
       households that rely on food markets can afford a larger food intake. This would also entail
       a careful monitoring of open borders.

Medium term Policy Options
  • Recommendation 1: Implement more predictable and more flexible alternatives to
     humanitarian food aid (e.g., public works, productive SSN, cash transfers), based on an
     analysis of the functioning of local markets.
  • Recommendation 2: Conduct a detailed analysis of specific vulnerable groups – including
     a distinction between temporary and chronically vulnerable to underpin a better targeted
     and sustainable SSN system.
  • Recommendation 3: Mitigate the high dependency on food aid by implementing a host of
     longer-term structural measures encompassing better rural infrastructure (including roads),
     increases in agricultural productivity, and a competitive exchange rate.

Toward a more Robust Social Protection Policy Framework
  • Recommendation 1: Move towards a more coherent and robust Social Protection System
     by achieving better coordination of existing SSN activities and strengthening the analytical
     base (e.g., costing of alternative SSN, impact evaluation, etc.).
  • Recommendation 2: GoSS to take greater ownership of the draft Policy Framework and
     commit more resources to funding SSN, as a means to reduce the importance of patronage
     networks and increase the proportion of productive spending.
  • Recommendation 3: Design of SSN interventions with community participation given
     low government capacity at local levels, through a participatory process that would soak
     in local level knowledge for better inclusion and equity.

Analytical Work
  • Recommendation 1: Strengthen the evidence base with respect to costing and impact
      evaluation of various SSN interventions currently underway, as a critical input for
      developing a robust and integrated Social Protection Framework.




                                                28
Appendix 3: Proxy Means Test Model Specification


                                        PMT Model Selection Coefficients
                                                                                                 p-
                                                              Coefficients    Standard Errors    Values
Pit latrine (private or shared)                               0.263***        0.034              <0.001
Flush (private or shared)                                     0.547***        0.130              <0.001
Air Conditioner Ownership                                     0.234           0.144              0.105
Urban                                                         -0.118**        0.037              0.001
Age of Household Head                                         -0.003**        0.001              0.001
Water access through Deep Boreholes / wells                   -0.190***       0.031              <0.001
Water Access through Dams / Wells                             -0.249***       0.040              <0.001
Household size                                                -0.077***       0.005              <0.001
Primary Schooling of Household Head                           -0.120*         0.050              0.016
Access to Private / Public Electricity (Y = 1, N = 0)         0.214**         0.070              0.002
Radio Ownership                                               0.159***        0.033              <0.001
No Schooling of Household Head (Y = 1, N = 0)                 -0.168***       0.047              <0.001
Use of Charcoal for Cooking                                   0.151***        0.046              0.001
Use of Paraffin for Cooking                                   0.560           0.590              0.343
Computer Ownership                                            0.301*          0.122              0.014
Overcrowding (#members / #rooms)                              -0.044***       0.007              <0.001
Bicycle Ownership                                             0.102***        0.030              0.001
Use of Mud for Household Construction                         -0.174***       0.053              0.001
Use of Wood for Household Construction                        -0.296***       0.080              <0.001
Phone Ownership                                               0.088*          0.041              0.030
Sex of Household Head                                         -0.091**        0.029              0.002
Constant                                                      5.631***        0.105              <0.001
r2              0.236
N                4197
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
                                      PMT Model Selection Coefficients
                                                                                                 p-
                                                               Coefficients    Standard Errors   Values
 Pit latrine (private or shared)                               0.263***        0.034             <0.001
 Flush (private or shared)                                     0.547***        0.130             <0.001
 Air Conditioner Ownership                                     0.234           0.144             0.105
 Urban                                                         -0.118**        0.037             0.001
 Age of Household Head                                         -0.003**        0.001             0.001
 Water access through Deep Boreholes / wells                   -0.190***       0.031             <0.001
 Water Access through Dams / Wells                             -0.249***       0.040             <0.001
 Household size                                                -0.077***       0.005             <0.001
 Primary Schooling of Household Head                           -0.120*         0.050             0.016
 Access to Private / Public Electricity (Y = 1, N = 0)         0.214**         0.070             0.002

                                                         29
Radio Ownership                                      0.159***    0.033   <0.001
No Schooling of Household Head (Y = 1, N = 0)        -0.168***   0.047   <0.001
Use of Charcoal for Cooking                          0.151***    0.046   0.001
Use of Paraffin for Cooking                          0.560       0.590   0.343
Computer Ownership                                   0.301*      0.122   0.014
Overcrowding (#members / #rooms)                     -0.044***   0.007   <0.001
Bicycle Ownership                                    0.102***    0.030   0.001
Use of Mud for Household Construction                -0.174***   0.053   0.001
Use of Wood for Household Construction               -0.296***   0.080   <0.001
Phone Ownership                                      0.088*      0.041   0.030
Sex of Household Head                                -0.091**    0.029   0.002
Constant                                             5.631***    0.105   <0.001
r2              0.236
N                4197
* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001




                                                30
Appendix 4: Proxy Means Test Simulation Results (10 SSP per month transfer)

                                                                                    Cost (Million   Cost (as percent of
  Probability*        Coverage Poor       Coverage Total      Leakage                                                     P0      P1      P2
                                                                                    SSP)            GDP)
  0.00                 100                100                 46.72                 1,355.5         3.99                  51.88   26.33   17.43
  0.05                 100                99.77               46.59                 1,352.4         3.98                  51.88   26.33   17.43
  0.10                 99.96              99.15               46.28                 1,344.0         3.95                  51.89   26.34   17.43
  0.15                 99.75              97.53               45.51                 1,322.1         3.89                  51.97   26.36   17.45
  0.20                 99.56              95.49               44.45                 1,294.5         3.81                  52.02   26.38   17.46
  0.25                 98.57              92.71               43.35                 1,256.7         3.70                  52.11   26.46   17.50
  0.30                 97.32              89.02               41.75                 1,206.8         3.55                  52.25   26.57   17.57
  0.35                 95.95              85.46               40.18                 1,158.5         3.41                  52.35   26.67   17.65
  0.40                 93.23              80.22               38.08                 1,087.5         3.20                  52.63   26.87   17.77
  0.45                 87.79              72.85               35.79                 987.6           2.90                  53.18   27.27   18.08
  0.50                 80.42              63.54               32.56                 861.3           2.53                  53.91   27.82   18.48
  0.55                 71.92              53.65               28.57                 727.2           2.14                  54.51   28.45   18.98
  0.60                 59.60              42.84               25.88                 580.8           1.71                  55.41   29.35   19.78
  0.65                 50.45              34.12               21.21                 462.5           1.36                  56.10   30.04   20.39
  0.70                 41.17              26.41               16.95                 358.1           1.05                  56.31   30.73   21.05
  0.75                 34.73              21.16               12.56                 286.9           0.84                  56.72   31.22   21.49
  0.80                 30.12              17.70               9.35                  240.0           0.71                  56.79   31.57   21.84
  0.85                 27.64              15.77               6.61                  213.7           0.63                  56.85   31.75   22.04
  0.90                 26.19              14.50               3.75                  196.5           0.58                  57.12   31.85   22.14
  0.95                 25.45              13.94               2.74                  189.0           0.56                  57.18   31.92   22.19
  1.00                 25.08              13.53               1.27                  183.4           0.54                  57.21   31.94   22.22
*Probability of being poor for a household, as predicted by the proxy means test.




                                                                                            31
Appendix 5: Proxy Means Test Simulation Results (20 SSP per month transfer)

                                                                                                         Cost (as percent of
  Probability*        Coverage Poor       Coverage Total      Leakage               Cost (Million SSP)                         P0      P1      P2
                                                                                                         GDP)
  0.00                 100.00             100.00              46.72                 2,711.1              7.97                  45.62   19.66   11.15
  0.05                 100.00             99.77               46.59                 2,704.8              7.96                  45.62   19.66   11.15
  0.10                 99.96              99.15               46.28                 2,688.1              7.91                  45.64   19.66   11.15
  0.15                 99.75              97.53               45.51                 2,644.2              7.78                  45.74   19.70   11.17
  0.20                 99.56              95.49               44.45                 2,588.9              7.61                  45.85   19.74   11.19
  0.25                 98.57              92.71               43.35                 2,513.5              7.39                  46.18   19.87   11.25
  0.30                 97.32              89.02               41.75                 2,413.5              7.10                  46.58   20.06   11.37
  0.35                 95.95              85.46               40.18                 2,316.9              6.81                  46.88   20.25   11.49
  0.40                 93.23              80.22               38.08                 2,174.9              6.40                  47.55   20.60   11.70
  0.45                 87.79              72.85               35.79                 1,975.1              5.81                  48.64   21.32   12.21
  0.50                 80.42              63.54               32.56                 1,722.6              5.07                  50.13   22.32   12.88
  0.55                 71.92              53.65               28.57                 1,454.4              4.28                  51.33   23.49   13.72
  0.60                 59.60              42.84               25.88                 1,161.5              3.42                  53.09   25.17   15.09
  0.65                 50.45              34.12               21.21                 924.9                2.72                  54.40   26.47   16.14
  0.70                 41.17              26.41               16.95                 716.1                2.11                  55.17   27.80   17.26
  0.75                 34.73              21.16               12.56                 573.8                1.69                  56.20   28.73   18.03
  0.80                 30.12              17.70               9.35                  480.0                1.41                  56.51   29.39   18.63
  0.85                 27.64              15.77               6.61                  427.5                1.26                  56.70   29.74   18.98
  0.90                 26.19              14.50               3.75                  393.0                1.16                  56.97   29.93   19.15
  0.95                 25.45              13.94               2.74                  378.0                1.11                  57.15   30.05   19.24
  1.00                 25.08              13.53               1.27                  366.9                1.08                  57.18   30.09   19.28
*Probability of being poor for a household, as predicted by the proxy means test.




                                                                                              32
Appendix 6: Geographic Targeting Simulation Results (10 SSP per individual transfer)
  Poverty Rate    Coverage              Coverage                 Cost (Million   Cost (as %
                             Coverb40              Leakage                                    P0      P1      P2
 (County Level)     Poor                 Total                       SSP)         of GDP)
       15            100        100        100      46.72           1,355.5         3.99      51.88   26.33   17.43
       16           99.75      99.86      99.02     46.33           1,342.3         3.95      51.92   26.35   17.45
       20           99.56      99.86      98.36     46.03           1,333.3         3.92      51.92   26.36   17.46
       20           99.12      99.80      97.10     45.47           1,316.3         3.87      51.98   26.39   17.47
       21           99.12      99.80      97.10     45.47           1,316.3         3.87      51.98   26.39   17.47
       23           98.59      99.17      95.74     44.91           1,297.8         3.82      52.00   26.43   17.52
       25           97.49      98.71      93.27     44.11           1,264.3         3.72      52.02   26.52   17.58
       27           97.49      98.71      93.27     44.11           1,264.3         3.72      52.02   26.52   17.58
       27           95.48      97.47      88.97     42.26           1,206.1         3.55      52.40   26.64   17.70
       28           94.71      97.00      87.40     41.73           1,184.7         3.48      52.45   26.70   17.74
       28           94.71      97.00      87.40     41.73           1,184.7         3.48      52.45   26.70   17.74
       30           94.04      96.77      86.12     41.38           1,167.4         3.43      52.53   26.75   17.77
       32           93.40      95.91      84.94     40.94           1,151.5         3.39      52.53   26.80   17.82
       32           93.40      95.91      84.94     40.94           1,151.5         3.39      52.53   26.80   17.82
       32           93.08      95.85      84.37     40.78           1,143.7         3.36      52.57   26.82   17.83
       33           92.00      95.31      82.42     40.17           1,117.3         3.29      52.70   26.90   17.88
       39           91.11      94.93      80.89     39.55           1,096.5         3.22      52.82   26.96   17.91
       40           90.48      94.30      79.96     39.44           1,083.9         3.19      52.85   27.01   17.95
       40           90.18      94.08      79.53     39.27           1,078.1         3.17      52.86   27.03   17.97
       42           89.59      93.77      78.70     39.05           1,066.8         3.14      52.98   27.07   18.00
       42           89.12      93.55      78.05     38.81           1,058.0         3.11      53.08   27.09   18.02
       43           85.89      90.38      73.67     36.97            998.7          2.94      53.30   27.33   18.31
       44           84.67      89.33      72.06     36.40            976.8          2.87      53.43   27.42   18.39
       44           84.12      88.88      71.33     36.08            966.9          2.84      53.47   27.45   18.42
       44           82.04      87.42      68.64     35.01            930.4          2.74      53.61   27.61   18.55
       44           82.04      87.42      68.64     35.01            930.4          2.74      53.61   27.61   18.55
       45           81.10      86.66      67.43     34.61            914.0          2.69      53.71   27.68   18.61
       47           79.69      84.70      65.65     34.00            890.0          2.62      53.73   27.79   18.80
       48           77.73      83.22      63.24     33.37            857.3          2.52      53.90   27.93   18.91
       50           76.66      82.14      61.96     32.95            839.9          2.47      53.98   28.01   18.99
       51           74.96      80.86      60.03     32.27            813.8          2.39      54.12   28.13   19.08
       51           74.29      80.25      59.28     32.04            803.5          2.36      54.16   28.18   19.13
       51           71.85      77.66      56.55     31.29            766.6          2.25      54.32   28.36   19.35
       53           71.85      77.66      56.55     31.29            766.6          2.25      54.32   28.36   19.35
       54           71.69      77.54      56.38     31.21            764.2          2.25      54.33   28.38   19.36
       54           70.50      76.66      55.11     30.85            747.0          2.20      54.42   28.46   19.43
       55           69.78      75.67      54.34     30.57            736.6          2.17      54.46   28.52   19.53
       55           68.45      74.82      52.95     30.38            717.8          2.11      54.57   28.61   19.60
       56           66.74      73.22      51.18     29.61            693.7          2.04      54.65   28.74   19.71
       57           65.34      72.04      49.74     29.14            674.2          1.98      54.68   28.85   19.80
       58           63.81      70.80      48.20     28.62            653.4          1.92      54.80   28.96   19.91

                                                            33
 Poverty Rate    Coverage              Coverage                 Cost (Million   Cost (as %
                            Coverb40              Leakage                                    P0      P1      P2
(County Level)     Poor                 Total                       SSP)         of GDP)
     60            61.94      69.29      46.34     27.74            628.2          1.85      54.90   29.10   20.04
     60            61.52      68.82      45.95     27.58            622.9          1.83      54.93   29.13   20.08
     61            60.60      67.82      45.08     27.30            611.1          1.80      54.97   29.20   20.17
     62            59.85      67.35      44.38     26.91            601.6          1.77      55.06   29.24   20.21
     62            57.74      65.23      42.43     26.12            575.2          1.69      55.12   29.41   20.37
     63            57.74      65.23      42.43     26.12            575.2          1.69      55.12   29.41   20.37
     63            57.02      65.00      41.77     26.05            566.3          1.67      55.21   29.46   20.40
     64            52.83      61.15      37.97     24.48            514.7          1.51      55.47   29.77   20.70
     64            48.86      57.30      34.42     22.64            466.6          1.37      55.67   30.07   20.98
     64            47.65      56.37      33.35     22.13            452.1          1.33      55.71   30.16   21.05
     67            44.00      52.35      30.10     20.48            408.1          1.20      55.91   30.43   21.39
     67            42.91      51.13      29.17     19.83            395.4          1.16      56.00   30.51   21.48
     71            40.64      48.82      27.24     18.64            369.3          1.09      56.19   30.68   21.64
     75            39.27      47.36      26.14     17.56            354.4          1.04      56.28   30.78   21.76
     76            38.41      46.11      25.49     17.38            345.5          1.02      56.28   30.85   21.88
     76            35.82      44.29      23.52     15.59            318.8          0.94      56.49   31.04   22.01
     77            31.81      39.97      20.52     13.06            278.1          0.82      56.79   31.33   22.40
     77            30.37      37.81      19.45     12.49            263.6          0.78      56.79   31.44   22.60
     79            28.38      35.68      17.98     11.47            243.7          0.72      56.84   31.59   22.74
     82            28.30      35.63      17.92     11.39            242.9          0.71      56.84   31.60   22.75
     82            27.79      35.04      17.56     11.25            238.1          0.70      56.84   31.64   22.80
     84            26.07      32.98      16.35     10.66            221.7          0.65      56.87   31.77   22.99
     85            24.96      31.94      15.60     10.20            211.4          0.62      56.93   31.86   23.06
     85            21.93      28.37      13.55      9.20            183.7          0.54      57.00   32.09   23.30
     86            21.73      28.13      13.42      9.15            181.9          0.53      57.00   32.10   23.32
     89            14.97      20.68       8.90      4.81            120.6          0.35      57.11   32.63   23.84
     90            13.78      19.81       8.13      3.15            110.2          0.32      57.19   32.71   23.91
     90            11.51      16.74       6.69      1.93             90.7          0.27      57.20   32.89   24.16
     94            10.91      15.87       6.31      1.20             85.5          0.25      57.20   32.94   24.24
     100            9.06      13.16       5.19      0.00             70.3          0.21      57.20   33.08   24.50




                                                           34
Appendix 7: Geographic Targeting Simulation Results (20 SSP per individual transfer)
    Poverty Rate
                    Coverage Poor   Coverage Total   Leakage   Cost (Million SSP)   Cost (as % of GDP)    P0      P1      P2
   (County Level)
        15             100.00          100.00         46.72         2,711.1                7.97          45.62   19.66   11.15
        16             99.75           99.02          46.33         2,684.5                7.90          45.66   19.69   11.18
        20             99.56           98.36          46.03         2,666.5                7.84          45.66   19.72   11.19
        20             99.12           97.10          45.47         2,632.6                7.74          45.88   19.76   11.21
        21             99.12           97.10          45.47         2,632.6                7.74          45.88   19.76   11.21
        23             98.59           95.74          44.91         2,595.5                7.63          45.93   19.84   11.31
        25             97.49           93.27          44.11         2,528.5                7.44          46.21   19.99   11.39
        27             97.49           93.27          44.11         2,528.5                7.44          46.21   19.99   11.39
        27             95.48           88.97          42.26         2,412.1                7.09          46.77   20.21   11.61
        28             94.71           87.40          41.73         2,369.4                6.97          46.90   20.31   11.68
        28             94.71           87.40          41.73         2,369.4                6.97          46.90   20.31   11.68
        30             94.04           86.12          41.38         2,334.8                6.87          47.04   20.39   11.72
        32             93.40           84.94          40.94         2,302.9                6.77          47.04   20.50   11.81
        32             93.40           84.94          40.94         2,302.9                6.77          47.04   20.50   11.81
        32             93.08           84.37          40.78         2,287.3                6.73          47.16   20.53   11.83
        33             92.00           82.42          40.17         2,234.6                6.57          47.46   20.66   11.90
        39             91.11           80.89          39.55         2,193.0                6.45          47.67   20.77   11.95
        40             90.48           79.96          39.44         2,167.8                6.38          47.77   20.85   12.02
        40             90.18           79.53          39.27         2,156.3                6.34          47.84   20.89   12.06
        42             89.59           78.70          39.05         2,133.7                6.28          48.00   20.96   12.10
        42             89.12           78.05          38.81         2,116.1                6.22          48.19   21.00   12.14
        43             85.89           73.67          36.97         1,997.3                5.87          48.64   21.45   12.65
        44             84.67           72.06          36.40         1,953.5                5.75          48.83   21.61   12.79
        44             84.12           71.33          36.08         1,933.9                5.69          48.92   21.68   12.85
        44             82.04           68.64          35.01         1,860.8                5.47          49.33   21.96   13.08
        44             82.04           68.64          35.01         1,860.8                5.47          49.33   21.96   13.08
        45             81.10           67.43          34.61         1,828.0                5.38          49.47   22.08   13.17
        47             79.69           65.65          34.00         1,779.9                5.24          49.51   22.30   13.52
        48             77.73           63.24          33.37         1,714.5                5.04          49.89   22.55   13.71
        50             76.66           61.96          32.95         1,679.8                4.94          50.00   22.71   13.84
        51             74.96           60.03          32.27         1,627.5                4.79          50.31   22.93   14.00
        51             74.29           59.28          32.04         1,607.1                4.73          50.41   23.03   14.07
        51             71.85           56.55          31.29         1,533.2                4.51          50.61   23.38   14.48
        53             71.85           56.55          31.29         1,533.2                4.51          50.61   23.38   14.48
        54             71.69           56.38          31.21         1,528.4                4.50          50.62   23.40   14.49
        54             70.50           55.11          30.85         1,494.0                4.39          50.87   23.56   14.62
        55             69.78           54.34          30.57         1,473.2                4.33          50.90   23.66   14.80
        55             68.45           52.95          30.38         1,435.5                4.22          51.23   23.84   14.91
        56             66.74           51.18          29.61         1,387.5                4.08          51.48   24.08   15.10
    Poverty Rate
                    Coverage Poor   Coverage Total   Leakage   Cost (Million SSP)   Cost (as % of GDP)    P0      P1      P2
   (County Level)
        57              65.34           49.74         29.14         1,348.4                3.97          51.67   24.28   15.25
        58              63.81           48.20         28.62         1,306.8                3.84          51.88   24.49   15.44
        60              61.94           46.34         27.74         1,256.4                3.70          52.16   24.74   15.67
        60              61.52           45.95         27.58         1,245.7                3.66          52.22   24.80   15.74
        61              60.60           45.08         27.30         1,222.1                3.59          52.28   24.93   15.90
        62              59.85           44.38         26.91         1,203.1                3.54          52.43   25.03   15.97
        62              57.74           42.43         26.12         1,150.4                3.38          52.51   25.34   16.25
        63              57.74           42.43         26.12         1,150.4                3.38          52.51   25.34   16.25
                                                                              35
63    57.02   41.77   26.05   1,132.6        3.33   52.66   25.44   16.30
64    52.83   37.97   24.48   1,029.4        3.03   53.24   26.03   16.80
64    48.86   34.42   22.64    933.2         2.74   53.72   26.59   17.29
64    47.65   33.35   22.13    904.2         2.66   53.86   26.76   17.41
67    44.00   30.10   20.48    816.2         2.40   54.22   27.28   18.01
67    42.91   29.17   19.83    790.9         2.33   54.32   27.43   18.18
71    40.64   27.24   18.64    738.6         2.17   54.62   27.75   18.46
75    39.27   26.14   17.56    708.8         2.08   54.78   27.94   18.68
76    38.41   25.49   17.38    690.9         2.03   54.78   28.08   18.88
76    35.82   23.52   15.59    637.6         1.88   55.22   28.41   19.10
77    31.81   20.52   13.06    556.2         1.64   55.73   28.96   19.80
77    30.37   19.45   12.49    527.2         1.55   55.73   29.19   20.17
79    28.38   17.98   11.47    487.4         1.43   56.00   29.47   20.42
82    28.30   17.92   11.39    485.8         1.43   56.01   29.49   20.43
82    27.79   17.56   11.25    476.1         1.40   56.05   29.56   20.52
84    26.07   16.35   10.66    443.4         1.30   56.08   29.83   20.87
85    24.96   15.60   10.20    422.9         1.24   56.21   29.99   20.99
85    21.93   13.55    9.20    367.3         1.08   56.41   30.44   21.41
86    21.73   13.42    9.15    363.7         1.07   56.42   30.47   21.45
89    14.97    8.90    4.81    241.2         0.71   56.86   31.49   22.34
90    13.78    8.13    3.15    220.4         0.65   57.06   31.65   22.45
90    11.51    6.69    1.93    181.4         0.53   57.10   32.00   22.91
94    10.91    6.31    1.20    171.0         0.50   57.10   32.10   23.06
100    9.06    5.19    0.00    140.6         0.41   57.11   32.38   23.53




                                        36
