                                                            98899

   Rethinking Youth, Livelihoods, and
Fragility in West Africa: One Size Doesn’t
                   Fit All




      Francis Fortune, Olawale Ismail, and Monica Stephen



             Fragility, Conflict, and Violence Group
                          World Bank
                                1
                                                                    2015

Table of Contents
Abbreviations ........................................................................................................................ 3
1. Introduction: Why youth, employment, and fragility in West Africa? .................................. 4
2. Revisiting core assumptions ............................................................................................... 6
   Who are West Africa’s “youth?? .....................................................................................................6
   What is the nature of “youth unemployment? in West Africa? ........................................................9
   What are the links between youth bulges, employment, and fragility? .......................................... 13
3. Five livelihoods activities ................................................................................................. 15
   Artisanal small-scale mining ......................................................................................................... 16
   Motorcycle Taxis .......................................................................................................................... 20
   Street Trading .............................................................................................................................. 24
   Hairdressing and barbering ........................................................................................................... 26
   Drug trafficking ............................................................................................................................ 28
Conclusions and Recommendations ..................................................................................... 30
References .......................................................................................................................... 36




                                                                        2
Abbreviations

AfDB      African Development Bank

ASM       artisanal small-scale mining

DFID      Department for International Development

ECOWAS    Economic Community of West African States

IEMS      Informal Economy Monitoring Study

ILO       International Labour Organization

NGO       nongovernmental organization

UN        United Nations

UNDPKO    United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations

UNECA     United Nations Economic Commission for Africa

UNODC     United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime




                                              3
1. Introduction: Why youth, employment, and fragility in West Africa?
Africa’s population is young and growing at twice the pace of other continents (McArthur, 2014). Half the
current population of sub-Saharan Africa is under 25 years of age, and each year between 2015 and
2035, there will be half a million more 15 year olds than the year before (Filmer and Fox, 2014). West
Africa’s demographics reflect this continental trend.1 Between 1950 and 2007, the population increased
from approximately 70 to 315 million (more than quadrupling) (de Verdière et al., 2009), with about
one-third aged 15–24 years and 60 percent of the population under 25 years of age (de Verdière et al.,
2009; Hervish and Clifton, 2012). The youth bulge in West Africa is expected to grow through 2035 and
plateau around 2050 (UNECA, 2011) by which time the West Africa’s population will have doubled to
about 700 million people.

Figure 1. The structure of sub-Saharan Africa’s population is different than that in other
regions




Source: Filmer and Fox, 2014.

A youth bulge presents a series of development policy opportunities and challenges. For example, a
youth bulge could result in a demographic dividend of improved productivity and economic growth2
made possible by a large, young, and healthy workforce and a relatively small dependent population,
assuming the costs of increased demand for basic public services (health, education, and so on) can be
met. Despite the opportunities they represent and the fact that they constitute the bulk of the voting
population, the needs and aspirations of West Africa’s young people have little informed development
agendas (Van Gyampo and Obeng-Odoom, 2013; Gyimah-Brempong and Kimenyi, 2013; Sumberg et al.,
2014; Olaiya, 2014). On the whole, attention to youth issues reflects “more alarm than constructive
engagement? (Sommers, 2007, p. 6). The alarmist response to the youth bulge in West Africa is triggered

1
  For the purposes of this study, the term West Africa refers to the fifteen ECOWAS member states unless otherwise
specified.
2
  The potential of Africa’s large working age population for global development is discussed in World Bank (2014).
                                                        4
by a series of poorly understood, complex, and interrelated societal dynamics.

Three significant societal dynamics have emerged and merged over recent years to complicate
understandings of and policy responses to the youth bulge in resource-rich West Africa. First, high levels
of economic growth have not been accompanied by job creation. The formal sector’s limited capacity to
absorb the growing youth population (Filmer and Fox, 2014) is linked to increasing inequalities and a
growing and highly visible gap between the haves and the have-nots. Second, modernity and
globalization have helped to transform the character of youth aspirations, increasing the gap between
young peoples’ hopes and realities and further entrenching intergenerational differences in all areas of
life. Finally, the decade of conflict in the Manu River Basin and recent conflicts in the Sahel have
weakened state institutions that are still just fifty years from independence. These institutions struggle
to negotiate the complex and volatile dynamics of globalization, corruption, rapid urbanization, cross-
border migration, drugs and weapons trafficking, natural resource management, climate change, and
marginalization in global governance and the global economy. These dynamics and others pose specific
threats to the peacebuilding, state-building, and development efforts of West-African states (Page,
2012; Heinrigs and Trémolières, 2012).3 Past and current threats weaken state institutions, in turn
creating the space for further threats to evolve and bolster a cyclical process of institutional weakening
and increasing fragility (World Bank, 2011).

In this context, simplistic linkages between the youth bulge, high unemployment, and fragility have
gained traction and given rise to a youth policy agenda that targets urban male youth as the problem
and emphasizes formal sector development as the solution (Van der Geest, 2010). However, a growing
body of research highlights how this agenda and its associated programs have largely failed to deliver
(Langevang and Gough, 2012; Olaiya, 2014; Van Gyampo and Obeng-Odoom, 2013; Gyimah-Brempong
and Kimenyi, 2013; Kakwagh and Ikwuba, 2010; Ismail et al., 2009; Batmanglich and Enria, 2014). In
some cases initiatives have exacerbated problems for young people, for example, by contributing to
rather than alleviating youth unemployment (Sommers, 2007). The literature indicates some of the
reasons why these interventions have failed. First, they are divorced from a nuanced and evidence-based
understanding of young West Africans’ diverse realities and aspirations, largely because of a paucity of
data on the specific circumstances of different young people in the region. Second, they are driven by an
urgency of action that has been sparked by the simplistic linkages drawn between the youth bulge,
unemployment, and insecurity. Finally, they often frame young people in an instrumentalist fashion as
the problem to be managed and/or solved without paying sufficient attention to how social, economic,
and security dynamics at the country, regional, and global levels interact with and impact upon young
people’s lives in different ways. Despite thirty years of research on the nexus of youth, economic, and
security issues, policy makers, civil society, and international development experts are still grappling with
youth marginalization across the African continent (Olaiya, 2014). Specifically, they are grappling with
how to understand the complexity of these dynamic, interrelated, and multidimensional issues in order

3
 According to Reitano and Shaw (2014), the decline of human security and statehood in West Africa is driven by
the assembly of five societal dynamics: political instability, humanitarian crisis, conflict, organized crime, and
terrorism.
                                                          5
to advance the social cohesion necessary to end extreme poverty and promote shared prosperity in
fragile and conflict-affected situations.4

This paper questions some of the core assumptions that underpin mainstream perceptions of the
linkages between youth, employment, and fragility in West Africa, and proposes an alternative analysis.
The study will use the language of livelihoods to reflect on youth employment experiences, as
livelihoods take into account “the capabilities, assets (including both material and social resources) and
activities required for a means of living? (Krantz, 2001, p. 7) beyond traditional ideas of employment,
and thus enable a deeper, more sophisticated understanding of the realities of many young West
Africans. The paper argues that a nuanced understanding of specific groups of young people and their
livelihood activities in their specific social, cultural, political, and economic context is necessary to
understand how young peoples’ lives intersect with fragility dynamics. In doing so the paper aims to
highlight that the relationship between youth, unemployment, underemployment, livelihoods, and
fragility is far more complex than is often recognized and should not be exaggerated or taken out of
context. Policy and programming strategies that seek to improve young peoples’ situation and improve
state resilience need to be highly tailored to precise groups of young people and the identified risks that
their livelihood activities pose in the specific context.

The first part of the paper revisits and challenges dominant assumptions about youth, employment, and
fragility in West Africa and proposes an alternative way to frame young people, their employment
situation, and the risks these pose for security and fragility. The second part examines five prominent
livelihood activities relied upon by young people in West Africa and examines how these can either
support or undermine peace, state-building and inclusive development. These activities are
motorcycle/Okada taxi riding, artisanal/small-scale mining, street trading, hairdressing/barbering, and
drug trafficking. In each section, regional dynamics are examined alongside specific examples drawn
where data is available from Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali, and Nigeria.5 Insights from other countries in
West Africa are also included where relevant. Finally, the paper draws some broad conclusions and
proposes a series of recommendations with a view toward supporting policy makers and programmers
to better understand and catalyze the diverse and transformative potential of young people in West
Africa.

2. Revisiting core assumptions
Who are West Africa’s “youth??

The first issue to clarify is to whom we are referring when we use the term “youth.? Youth is a socially
constructed category and as such neither refers to a fixed age group or a homogeneous social group. As
a label it is therefore limited in its utility for tailored and responsive policy making. Table 1 summarizes a

4
  Recent studies by several international organizations and governments address some of these issues: Filmer and
Fox, 2014; ILO, 2013; UNECA (2011); Hervish and Clifton, 2012; Gyimah-Brempong and Kimenyi , 2013; USAID,
2013; and Commonwealth, 2013a.
5
  Countries selected balance anglo and francophone experiences, and diverse conflict and fragility dynamics.
                                                        6
series of age-based definitions of youth used in policy making and programming across West Africa—the
summary highlights how agreement is consistent neither within nor across institutions.

Table 1. Age definitions in Africa

Organization       Definition    References
                   (age range in
                   years)

United Nations     15–24             General’s Report to the General Assembly, A/36/215, 1981

                                     General Assembly Resolutions, A/RES/62/126, 2008

                                     Commission for Social Development Resolutions, E/2007/26 &
                                     E/CN.5/2007/, 2007

UN Economic        15–39             African Youth Report, 2011
Commission for
Africa

Commonwealth       15–29             Commonwealth, 2013b
Secretariat

African Union      15–35             African Youth Charter, adopted by the Seventh Ordinary Session
                                     of the Assembly, African Union, Banjul, Gambia, July 2, 2006



ECOWAS             15–35             ECOWAS Youth Forum, 2003

Nigeria            18–36             Second National Youth Policy Document of the Federal Republic
                                     of Nigeria, 2009

                                     National Youth Policy and Strategic Plan of Action, Abuja, Nigeria,
                   18–35             2001

Ghana              15–35             National Youth Policy of Ghana, August 2010

Mali               15–40             Ministry of Youth and Sports

Côte d’Ivoire      15–35             Ministry of Youth, Sport and Leisure


The differences between definitions of youth by age are rooted in different ideas or markers of when
children become youth, youth become adults, and adults become elders. These life-course-based

                                                    7
definitions assume that people evolve and develop in the same way through a linear series of
experiences. In West Africa age-based definitions of youth include young people aged 15 to 40 years, a
much wider group than the UN global definition (15–24 years). The wide age range in West Africa
indicates that young people are suspended in a “space where they are neither dependent children nor
autonomous adults? and may never become “social adults,? meaning they may never attain the social
goods and status associated with adulthood such as a secure income (stable job), valuable skills, and
secure shelter (Jeffrey, 2010; Honwana, 2012, p. 23).

In reality, young peoples’ transitions to adulthood are not unidirectional or linear. Rather they can be
chaotic and distorted; subject to fragmentation, interruptions, and reversals; and are vulnerable to
shocks and disasters. “Youth? can also take on different meanings depending on gender, urban/rural
setting, or socioeconomic status; a rural girl of 13 may be considered an adult, while an urban,
unemployed man of 35 a youth. The wide age bracket used to define “youth? in West Africa indicates
significant social, political, and economic upheavals that disrupt and constrain young people’s
trajectories towards adult status.

In a study of seven West African countries, a series of obstacles confronting the progress of young West
Africans towards adulthood were identified by Ismail et al. (2009):6

       Difficulty accessing quality education and lack of formal and vocational education

       Unemployment, underemployment, and inappropriate training for the opportunities of the job
        market

       Involvement in violent conflicts, as some countries are plagued with political unrest

       Drugs and substance abuse

       Poverty

       Inadequate opportunities to participate in political and socioeconomic decision making

       Lack of technological advancement

       High vulnerability to sexually transmitted infections such as HIV/AIDS and waterborne diseases
        such as typhoid fever

It is clear that youthhood is diverse, and transitions to adulthood are neither homogeneous nor linear.
Rather, transitions to adulthood are mediated by the interaction between young peoples’ identities (age,
class, gender, sexuality, religion, ethnicity, family position, education level, urban/rural location, and
other differences) and the wider context of formal and informal social, economic, and political
institutions (including the strength and breadth of their social networks) of the environment in which
they live and seek their advancement. Furthermore, the agency and decision-making power of young
6
    Studies by Olaiya (2014), Honwana (2012), de Verdière et al. (2009), and Ashford (2007) reinforce these findings.
                                                            8
people as they encounter and navigate the choices and events that shape their life trajectories and
impact their life outcomes introduce a further complication to analyzing youth and transitions to
adulthood.

This nuanced understanding of young people and their transitions to adulthood highlights the need for
policy and programming concerning “youth? to be highly tailored to specific groups of young people in
specific environments and targeted to the specific outcomes sought by policy makers and programmers.
For example, in rural Mali, an intervention designed to promote migration among young people as a
strategy for improving employment prospects and transitions to adulthood produces different results for
men and women, as the intervention interacts with individuals, local cultural values, and institutions. In
Mali, the migration of young men is seen as part of a family livelihood strategy; it strengthens family
status and is socially recognized as part of the traditional rites of passage to adulthood for men, whereas
female migration is stigmatized and understood as part of a personal project (Hertrich and Lesclingand,
2013),7 Thus, in the context of rural Mali, any intervention designed to promote migration as a strategy
for both men and women’s transitions to adulthood needs to address local attitudes toward female
migration.

What is the nature of “youth unemployment? in West Africa?

In West Africa, most young people and wider society only recognize a job as a skilled position that offers
an individual and family status and a sustained and sufficient source of income (Van Gyampo and Obeng-
Odoom, 2013; Kakwagh and Ikwuba, 2010). The idea of a job, often referred to as a “serious job? (Esson,
2013), is characterized by a contract, a regular salary, social security and income tax, perhaps some
benefits, and providing a level of security that more informal income-generating activities do not
provide. It is estimated that only 16 percent of young people across sub-Saharan Africa as a whole are
employed in waged jobs in the formal sector with the associated benefits (Filmer and Fox, 2014). In Côte
d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali, and Nigeria, between 31 and 33 percent of 15–24 year olds participate in the
formal labor force (Hervish and Clifton, 2012).

These statistics suggest very high levels of unemployment, but in reality many young people are
employed. Few young people in sub-Saharan Africa have the luxury of idleness and the vast majority
work to feed, shelter, and clothe themselves, often simultaneously contributing to family welfare. The
“unemployed? majority are either employed on small-scale family farms (62 percent) or in household
enterprises (meaning work in the informal economy) (22 percent) (Filmer and Fox, 2014). Young people
from both urban and rural areas work in the informal sector, which is expanding across the continent—
informal enterprise accounts for 40–75 percent of GDP and employs anywhere from 50–80 percent of
the available workforce in different countries (Jütting et al., 2009). The informal sector is thought to
account for around 60 percent of all urban “jobs? and to have provided 90 percent of all new “jobs?
created during the 1990s (Brown and Lyons, 2010; Charmes, 2012). In rural areas, the agricultural sector

7
  It is also worth noting that in many contexts, socioeconomically marginalized men are stigmatized as dangerous,
lazy, and stupid. Challenging the stigma attached to different groups of young people is an important component of
interventions that aim to target their situation.
                                                        9
absorbs many young people as informal farm laborers, and statistics for rural youth indicate that non-
farm informal activities are on the rise (Van der Geest, 2010).8

Young people who work in the informal economy often describe themselves as unemployed. This is
despite the fact that they may work 80 hours a week and earn a wage, and despite the fact that the
informal economy is recognized to play an important role in development and progress. It is “the main
driving force behind the construction and organisation of towns. It builds houses, makes furniture,
produces and processes foodstuffs, repairs cars, runs markets organises savings, provides culture and
entertainment (restaurants, bars, theatre and music groups) and even healthcare? (de Verdière et al.,
2009, p. 70).

The sense of failed professional advancement experienced by young people who work in informal
activities is rooted in the mismatch between employment aspirations and reality. Data from Ghana
illustrate some of the challenges encountered by young “unemployed? and “underemployed? Ghanaians
as they seek to achieve their aspirations. A survey found that a lack of relevant work experience and
means to get relevant work experience is highlighted by young men, and that young women more often
sought to set up their own enterprise but lacked capital, space, and were concerned about competition
from cheap imports.

Table 2. Aspirations of unemployed youth in Ghana, 2001

Options                                                                         Male        Female       Total
                                                                                (%)         (%)          (%)

Proportion of unemployed youth who want to work but are unable                  41.7        22.5         33.7
to because they lack the right work experience, yet they also lack
opportunities to improve their chances of gainful employment

Proportion of unemployed youth who want to set up their own                     30.5        50.3         38.5
enterprises but are unable to do so because they lack capital, space,
and face competition from imports vis-à-vis indigenous value-added
products

Proportion of unemployed youth who want to better their grades to               9.9         6.2          8.3
continue their education and seek for formal sector jobs

Proportion of unemployed youth who want skills training and                     16.3        19.1         17.4
retraining apprenticeship, or job attachment programs to enhance



8
 Rapid urbanization and concerns about security have focused research and policy agendas on urban young
people. In Africa, however, the number of young people living in rural areas is more than half of the total youth
population, and in absolute numbers is increasing even as the proportion of young people in rural areas is
decreasing (Sumberg et al., 2014).
                                                         10
their chance of getting paid or being self-employed

Proportion of unemployed youth who want to travel overseas to           0.7        0.4        0.7
seek employment

Proportion of unemployed youth who want to reintegrate into             0.4        1.2        0.9
family or married life to get settled

Proportion of unemployed youth with other hopes and aspirations         0.5        0.3        0.4

Total                                                                   100        100        100

Sample Size                                                             524,028    378,830    903,437

Source: Amankrah and Nsowah-Nuamah, 2003.

The employment policy challenges indicated by these findings are less about job creation per se and
more about ensuring the right training (academic and professional) for the demands of the labor market,
and ensuring the availability of the right support for young people to pursue entrepreneurial activities.
However, with insufficient action on these issues, young people in West Africa are frustrated.

While West African governments have adopted a discourse of youth empowerment and employment,
youth perception surveys indicate government actions in these areas do not inspire young peoples’
confidence. Afrobarometer surveys (Afrobarometer, 2012) show that well over two-thirds of young
people aged 15–29 in Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali, and Nigeria felt their governments were not doing well
and had little confidence in their ability to effect job creation. Nigeria fared the worst, with the least
confidence in government’s ability to create jobs, while Ghana did the best. Rural youth in Côte d’Ivoire
and Mali were particularly disappointed with their governments’ performance on job creation,
suggesting an urban bias in employment-related initiatives (see Figure 2).

The sense of broad-based disillusionment with government among many young people in West Africa is
reinforced further when we look at government performance in particular policy areas relating to job
creation. Much emphasis has been placed on reinvigorating agriculture as a livelihood strategy among
young people, reversing the trend of young people withdrawing from agriculture, yet without really
understanding their aspirations and what might attract them to the sector (Leavy and Hossain, 2014).
Similarly, investment in the education sector has not been matched to the demands of the economy and
labor markets.

Strategic investment in education across Africa has shaped expectations that an education leads to
greater economic opportunities (UNECA, 2011; Hervish and Clifton, 2012; Esson, 2013). In Ghana for
example, education is thought to be the dominant channel through which a “better world? or “good life?
can be attained (Esson, 2013; Langvang, 2008). For many young and old, education leads to the formal
sector “serious job,? however this trajectory is increasingly falling short on delivering across Africa.
Successful completion of tertiary education no longer provides a failsafe entry into formal sector
                                                   11
employment—in Zambia for example, higher education is associated with lower employment rates
(Locke and Lintelo, 2012).

Figure 2. Assessment of government’s ability to create jobs

                                                                   Assessment of government’s ability to create jobs
                      Assessment of government's                       (disaggregated by rural and urban youth
                     ability to create jobs (overview)                              perspectives)
                90
                80                                                 Country      Very badly and Very well and
                70                                                              fairly badly (%) fairly well (%)
                60
   Percentage




                50                                                               Urban       Rural     Urban       Rural
                40                              Very badly and
                30                              fairly badly
                                                                   Côte            68         75         30         21
                20                              Very well and      d’Ivoire
                10                              fairly well
                 0
                                                                   Ghana           66         65         32         35

                                                                   Mali            60         76         38         21

                                                                   Nigeria         86         80         14         20
Source: Afrobarometer, 2012.

In Nigeria, there is an oversupply of graduates. All university graduates are required to do national
service for one year and when it ends, they are often left with high expectations and limited prospects.
Two anecdotes articulate the frustrations and experiences of young Nigerian graduates:

“With over eighty universities in Nigeria today and      “Kunle, a masters student at the University of Lagos
an average of one hundred and sixty thousand             finds himself operating the popular Okada
graduates each year, the country is now bedeviled        [motorbike taxi] in Lagos. He said: ‘I am a graduate
with severe graduate unemployment, since there           of Geography, from Bayero University, Kano, and
seems to be a mismatch between graduate training         after my Youth service, I couldn’t get any job, I tried
and the world of work. Thousands of graduates that       to help myself by taking up a teaching job in one of
are turned out every year end up roaming the             the private schools, but the salary was meagre, the
streets for years without any hope of securing paid      payment was irregular. I found out that operating
employment even after sacrificing one year to serve      Okada as business is a lot better. Seven months
their fatherland through the National Youth Service      after starting the Okada, I was able to enroll for my
Corps (NYSC) Scheme. The resultant effect is the         Masters degree at UNILAG’? (AllAfrica.com, 2012).
fear of a revolution which may consume all if care is
not taken as these jobless graduates have become
very desperate and willing to do anything including
armed robbery in order to survive? (Kayode Ajayi et
al., 2008, p. 77).


                                                         12
In Ghana, the Afrobarometer Survey (Afrobarometer, 2012) found that young Ghanaians felt that the
top three most pressing problems for government to address (and the top three greatest needs of
Ghanaians) were employment, education, and health.9 At the same time, some young Ghanaians based
in rural areas are leaving school (if they are enrolled) and moving to urban centers where they perceive
there to be more opportunities to realize their aspirations (Esson, 2013). In this case, education is not
seen as a valuable prerequisite for a successful life, highlighting a mismatch between aspirations and
realities. While there is potential for frustration and anger expressed in these examples from Nigeria and
Ghana, they also reveal a powerful transformative capacity among young people who are adapting and
adjusting to their circumstances in new and hybrid ways, and in doing so produce new expressions of
culture and identity (Philips, 2013; Ferguson, 1999).

In Mali, some rural-to-urban migration is enabling the achievement of aspirations and producing a new
“youth culture? constructed around the idea of the “urban adventure.? Upon returning home, young
men enjoy a stronger position in the family based on their experiences, and the acquisition of skills and
material means which lend them status and recognition as an adult. The main outcomes found for
young women include the acquisition of knowledge and skills, which include learning the national
language, interpersonal skills, and domestic skills. The effect of these experiences is that the decision by
subsequent generations of rural young people to migrate to urban areas is increasingly informed by this
“youth culture? (Hertrich and Lesclingand, 2013).

These examples from Nigeria, Ghana, and Mali10 demonstrate how frustrations can produce creativity as
well as anger and disillusionment. While not explicitly analyzed in the above examples, social networks
are alluded to as important factors in many of the creative strategies young people have developed in
difficult circumstances. Research by Philipps (2013), Hoffman (2011), and Vigh (2006) has identified how
some young men in urban areas have been able to draw on “old/rural/tribal? networks and use these
strategically, redefining and renegotiating them in the urban sphere to their advantage when needs
arise. Other young people who migrate to urban centers can find they have to create social networks,
which can be challenging and lead to marginalization, frustration, anger, disillusionment, and exposure
to risks (Ferguson, 1999).

What are the links between youth bulges, employment, and fragility?

In West Africa, the tendency to frame “youth? as a threat stems in part from the role young people
played in the decade of brutal violence in Liberia and Sierra Leone. Characterized by some as a “crisis of
youth,? the media portrayals of rebel militias and the existence of child soldiers, combined with
deteriorating socioeconomic conditions, led a link to be drawn between contemporary youth agency
and disorder (Olaiya, 2014). The concept of youth is often interpreted as “angry young men?, and
continuing this association, “youth agency? is more often associated with anti-social or politically

9
  Fieldwork for Round 5 was conducted in Ghana in May and June 2012. The survey interviewed 2,400 adult
Ghanaians, and a sample of this size yields results with a margin of error of +/ -2% at a 95% confidence level. See
Afrobarometer, n.d.
10
   See the livelihoods section on barbering and hair dressing for a similar example from Côte d’Ivoire.
                                                         13
disruptive behavior than the creative and productive contribution youth make to progress and positive
change (Sumberg et al., 2014; Philipps, 2013; Hoffman, 2011; Vigh, 2006).11 In the West African context,
the prospect of a youth bulge and the combination of economic growth with high levels of
unemployment (exclusive growth) combine to produce a “panic? narrative in which a mass of
unemployed, dissatisfied/angry youth pose a collective threat to peace and security. The perception of
threat escalates where conflict dynamics and weak institutions already produce insecurity and fragility.
By treating youth as a homogeneous mass, the panic narrative ignores the different needs and interests
of different groups of youth and their individual agency. It assumes youth act en masse in the same
ways. Furthermore, the panic narrative assumes youth are unemployed and idle, and that their
dissatisfaction will drive them to violence. As such, the narrative ignores the important role of wider
socioeconomic and political actors in youth violence. The narrative places the blame for violence on
youth rather than acknowledging the wider needs and interests served by their mobilization. Evidence
of this simplistic panic narrative can be found in the publications, strategies, and plans of a range of
peace and development actors (for examples, see UNDPKO, 2010 or AfDB, 2014) and contributes to the
failure of programming responses that focus on youth alone as the problem without acknowledging the
instrumentalization of youth by other groups in society. The repetition of the panic narrative gives it
undue credibility and legitimacy. It also creates a rift of misunderstanding, tension, and distrust between
decision makers and youth. Where leaders and decision makers are much older than the youth for
whom they make decisions, the misunderstanding, tension, and distrust take on the character of
intergenerational conflict. In this way, the panic narrative itself contributes to conflict and fragility.

Theories for understanding young peoples’ involvement in West Africa’s decade of violence have
evolved with the growing but still limited body of research on the subject. Peters (2011) and Richards
(1996, 2005, 2006; Richards et al., 2004) highlight how young people involved in conflict in Sierra Leone
and Liberia agree that the lack of education and jobs, and the failure or unwillingness of the ruling elite
to help and include rather than exploit and exclude, were part of what caused them to join the war as
fighters. Failed expectations plus the instrumentalization of youth by political actors combined for their
mobilization. Building further on this, David Keen’s studies of the violence in Sierra Leone highlight the
diverse dynamics that encouraged young people to perpetrate brutal violence. In addition to economic
exclusion and grievances related to limited access to education and jobs, Keen identifies
intergenerational tensions that drove a search for “respect through the barrel of a gun? (Keen 2002, p.
5; Keen, 2005). He argues that the need for status and visibility were important factors in young peoples’
involvement in violence, thereby linking the drivers of violence to wider societal dynamics and the
institutions (formal and informal) that mediate youth transitions to adulthood. What becomes clear
from these studies is that a simplistic analysis of the connections between youth, unemployment, and
violence obscure “the specific transmission mechanisms from economic marginality to violent
behaviour? (Batmanglich and Enria, 2014, p. 11). Furthermore, in a careful and systematic study of the

11
   The focus on youth as “angry young men? has meant that research on women’s roles and motivations for
participating in violence are lacking. In turn, research and policy that looks more widely at different groups of youth
(violent women and nonviolent young men and women) to understand their diverse needs and aspirations is also
lacking.
                                                          14
evidence used to support a direct causal link between youth unemployment and violence, Cramer
(2010) concluded that the evidence is lacking. He argues that data about youth and youth issues is
meager; what data is available points to a complex and diverse web of factors that lead young people to
engage in violence.

A more nuanced and sophisticated understanding of the connections between youth,
unemployment/underemployment, and violence becomes possible when understandings of risk and
fragility are unpacked. Risk analyses that assess the likelihood that different groups of young people will
engage in violence not only analyze incentives and grievances, but also what is known about local young
peoples’ own strategies for managing grievances. The Youth Vulnerability and Exclusion (YOVEX) study
shows that young people’s problem solving in West Africa, whether violent or not, tends to be mediated
locally within their community, family, and close interests groups rather than having any connection to
national levels (Ismail et al., 2009).12 As mobile phone penetration and social media use rapidly increase
across West African countries and increase young people’s connectivity and means to share problems,
frustrations, and seek support, the potential for an increase in group action (as observed among
motorcycle taxi riders in Sierra Leone, for example) merits further exploration as a potential risk. For
example, West Africa demonstrates high levels of social media use compared to the rest of Africa
(Portland Communications, n.d.). In parallel, a deeper understanding of fragility would look beyond the
role of youth in violence and the likelihood of their mobilization, to also address how different youth
employment activities can either reinforce or undermine the rule of law and state institutions. Such an
understanding of fragility highlights the need to examine the range of different youth livelihood activities
and their interactions with fragility dynamics. The next section of this paper focuses on this interaction.

Clearly panic narratives are counterproductive to understanding and responding effectively to the
diverse, real, and complex challenges presented by a growing youth demographic, limited quality
employment opportunities, rapid social change, and the dynamics of state fragility that characterize the
development context of West Africa.

3. Five livelihoods activities
In West Africa, as previously discussed, the majority of young people are employed in the informal
sector. Given the ambiguity of employment status in the informal economy, debates on youth
employment activities in the informal economy increasingly deploy the concept of livelihoods (Skinner,
2008). With a genealogy in the rural sector and links to agricultural activities, the term “livelihoods?
suggests diverse activities combined to mitigate household or family risk (Bryceson, 2002); these are
sometimes referred to as “multiplex? livelihood strategies. Typically precarious and low-productivity
activities, young people engage in multiple activities at any one time to secure their livelihood.




12
  Note it is not clear from the study how different groups of young people (age, gender, class, and location) might
negotiate grievances differently.
                                                         15
This section examines five livelihood activities popular with young people.13 The activities selected are
often the core livelihood activity within a wider group of activities that form the multiplex livelihood
strategy of young people in urban and/or rural areas of Côte d’Ivoire, Ghana, Mali, and Nigeria. Artisanal
and small-scale mining takes place mainly in rural areas. It is gaining new momentum and evolving as an
industry as increasing numbers of young people engage in it. Motorcycle taxis provide a valuable public
service transporting passengers and goods between rural and urban areas and through congested
streets, at the same time employing many young men. Street trading is the lifeblood of African cities and
towns. Considered to be a survivalist entrepreneurial activity, a wide range of products are distributed
and the activity is continuously expanding. Hairdressing and barbering are prominent industries that
present young West African men and women with a means to succeed, and for young men especially,
barbering has been shown to be a space in which to reframe traditional ideas about masculinity and
success. Lastly, drug trafficking is enabling some young people to become rich and achieve social status
quickly, but the activity drives a whole range of negative societal dynamics from drug abuse to forced
marriages to the sustained erosion of state institutions.

The Institute for Development Studies defines sustainable livelihoods as follows: “A livelihood comprises
the capabilities, assets (including both material and social resources) and activities required for a means
of living. A livelihood is sustainable when it can cope with and recover from stresses and shocks,
maintain or enhance its capabilities and assets, while not undermining the natural resource base?
(Krantz 2001, p. 7).

In fragile and conflict-affected countries and situations, the definition of sustainable livelihoods should
be extended to include “not undermining the institutions of state.? While many youth livelihood
activities exist in the grey area between formal and informal, often contributing simultaneously to
systems of taxation through the payment of licences and registrations, and to systemic corruption and
other illegal activities, basic steps can be taken to reduce the way in which they contribute to state
fragility. The following five sections, one on each livelihood activity, will explore the specific
circumstances and processes that young people use to construct and make sense of their lives. Each of
the five sections will explore pathways into and out of livelihood activities looking at the interaction of
different groups of young people with the opportunities and constraints they experience. By
understanding how young people construct their lives and identifying some of the vulnerabilities with
which they live, governments and wider society can better support them, minimizing their potential
contributions to fragility and maximizing their possibility to realize their potential and make unique
contributions to development progress in West Africa.

Artisanal small-scale mining

What is it? A common definition for artisanal small-scale mining (ASM) is yet to be achieved. In some
West African countries (such as Mali, Niger, and Burkino Faso) small-scale mining is differentiated from


13
  Agricultural activities play a central role in many young peoples’ livelihood strategies in West Africa and are
pertinent to discussions about fragility, especially in relation to land rights, but were not selected for this study.
                                                           16
artisanal mining by the presence of permanent installations (Hentschel et al., 2002). Essentially it
involves low-tech and labor-intensive natural resource extraction and processing. Two categories of
ASM exist—one for minerals such as gold and diamonds, and the other for stone and construction
materials such as sand. In recent years there has been a “meteoric rise? in the importance of ASM as the
nature of activities and those engaged in it have changed (Hilson et al., 2013). Originally a component of
family livelihood strategies, more recently there is evidence of greater commercialization in ASM
operations—there are differences between countries and even between mining sectors within a
country, as demonstrated in Sierra Leone between gold and diamond mining (Pijpers, 2011).

Common characteristics of ASM include (see Hentschel et al., 2002; Hinton et al., 2003):

     minimal machinery or technology; ASM mining relies instead on simple techniques and a great
      amount of physical labor;

     lack of occupational safety measures, health care, or environmental protections;

     the ability to operate without legal mining titles (concession, claim) or a valid contract with the
      title holder;

     low productivity, since ASM often takes place in very small or marginal plots, is often limited to
      surface or alluvial mining, and uses inefficient techniques (however, total recovery is improved by
      repetitive scavenging and reprocessing);

     may be practised seasonally (such as to supplement farm incomes) or temporarily in response to
      high commodity prices;

     economic insecurity, lacks social security; and

     is highly gendered, possibly also ethnicized by politics of access.

Geographic coverage. ASM takes place in many different locales across West Africa. Most ASM
communities are located in sparsely populated, rural, remote regions (with some exceptions, such as the
Ashanti district in Ghana) (Hinton et al., 2003). Ten percent of Mali’s population depends on gold mining
(Hinton et al., 2003).

How do young people get involved? The International Labour Organization (ILO, 1999) estimates that
ASM provides direct employment for over 3 million people in sub-Saharan Africa. It is mainly undertaken
in small groups who are self-employed, and requires low capitalization. Financial capital requirements
for starting the work in the simplest cases are for tools only. Social capital is also required to get
involved.

ASM has been a part of family livelihood strategies as an off-farm activity across all four countries since
before independence. As a family livelihood, young family members usually engage in this activity during
the dry season when agriculture activities are at a low point. Young men dig the earth to find the
mineral bearing gravel and then pan or sift the dirt to find minerals. They work in a gang with specific
                                                   17
tasks for the day. Mostly this would be unlicensed and informal agreements with landowners are
negotiated through kinship networks. The winnings are given to the family head to share and use for the
family interests. For young people, being able to contribute to family income is an important status
symbol.

More recently, ASM has seen a shift to more commercial operations. It is still labor intensive but
organized on a different scale. Individuals called “supporters? may purchase licenses to mine and
engage a group of young men to do the labor. The supporters will provide food, shelter, and other basic
necessities until the minerals are recovered and converted to cash. At this time, some portion is given
over to the laborers while the supporter keeps the lion’s share. Different arrangements are negotiated
by each group and depend on the minerals’ market value. There is the likelihood of a cash windfall after
much hard labor, which is an incentive for young people to do this kind of work.

Mining construction material is normally part of a family livelihood strategy and undertaken in the dry
season. Where large rocks are available, a family will work together (including children) using hammers
to break them down to gravel size. This is collected into piles for sale at a fixed price. Sand mining has
also become increasingly lucrative and the banks of rivers and streams are being exploited usually by
groups of young people. In larger rivers, a gang of young people will use a wooden canoe to dig sand out
of the river bed, transporting it to shore and heaping it onto piles for sale.

In Ghana, young operators (under 25) reported spending 0.1–6 years on the same site and 2–7 years in
ASM. Their main reason for being involved was needing money, but in contrast to older operators, they
also referred to dropping out of school and lack of family support as motives for engagement (Tschakert,
2009). Women are active in ASM across West Africa—89,500 women in Ghana; 100,000 women in Mali
(Hentschel et al., 2002). Women’s activities on ASM sites differ according to the legality of the
operation, the presence of a cooperative, and societal attitudes toward rural poor women’s work. For
example, at the Akoon mining cooperative, women don’t engage in underground mining due to the risks
involved (Hinton et al., 2003). Women in Mali are actively involved in mineral processing—their
participation in this activity specifically is thought to be linked to strong traditional associations with
gold mining among certain cultural groups, and droughts are also believed to have driven those not
typically engaged in mining into ASM (Hinton et al., 2003). With increasing migration to urban areas or
large mining districts by men, many of the poorest rural households—the dominant group who engage
in ASM—are de facto headed by women, thus partly explaining their considerable involvement in ASM
(Hentschel et al., 2002).

How does it contribute to young peoples’ livelihoods? Young people engage in ASM for several reasons:
because it provides cash income; supplements the declining viability of small holder plots and their
seasonality; has low start-up costs; can absorb a lot of labor; and because there are limited viable
alternative livelihood options available (Mark, 2014). In Ghana, ASM has replaced small holder farming
as a primary income-generating activity (Hilson and Garforth, 2012). Earnings depend on the mineral
being mined. For example, Pijpers (2011) finds that in Sierra Leone, gold is more reliable than diamond
mining on average, although one lucky diamond dig could significantly outweigh extensive gold mining
                                                    18
efforts. In contrast with Ghana, in Sierra Leone a drop in the profitability of diamond mining has meant
that some miners are switching to farming (Pijpers, 2011).

What risks and challenges does ASM pose to young people and society? Approximately 80 percent of
ASM is illegal (ILO, 1999). As a result ASM is plagued by social and environmental problems related to
health, safety, struggles over land, fights between mining gangs, cheating by buyers, bribery of soldiers,
association with other criminal activities (especially during the marketing of mining products), and links
to violent conflict (Tschakert, 2009; Hilson and Potter, 2003). Obara and Jenkins (2006) highlight how
the arrival of multinational mining companies in Ghana gives rise to issues concerning displacement,
land registration, and lack of alternative livelihoods—thus their arrival drives potential for conflict. More
recently, ASM has been identified in supporting terrorist activities (Maconachie and Hilson, 2011).
Despite the risks and threats, young operators express interest in staying in the sector (Tschakert, 2009).
It is difficult to imagine alternative, accessible, and lucrative livelihood activities arising to replace ASM.
As one multinational representative pointed out, “How do you convince a person who takes or gets a
million [Ghanaian Cedis] in a week into a livelihood like cocoa or oil palm that will take him 3 years
before he gets a penny?? (quoted in Obara and Jenkins, 2006).

How is it organized/regulated? The regulatory framework for mining, particularly for valuable minerals,
is complicated. While sand and gravel mining would require paying local councils to use the natural
resources, regulative administrative requirements for more valuable resources typically include a mining
title, environmental compliance, an environmental operations license, a registered company, paying
taxes, and enrolling staff in social security benefits. As all of this is typically undertaken in the city away
from mining sites, ASM thus lends itself to informality. For example, in Ghana, where ASM was legalized
in 1989, ASM miners continue to operate illegally (Hilson and Potter, 2003).

What are the policy options? Despite its significance in some of the world’s poorest regions, ASM is
under-recognised in poverty alleviation and livelihood strategies (Hilson et al., 2013). The Ghanaian
government established a special program called Youth in Mines when other livelihood programs (such
as silk farming) failed to attract miners’ interests. Their program focused on the rehabilitation of the
environment after mining operations. Formalizing ASM activities that traditionally occur in an
unregulated and rural setting does not automatically improve the livelihood situation in ASM mining
communities (Owusu and Dwomoh, 2012). On the contrary, policy efforts have often attempted to
eliminate ASM to create space for business, enterprise, and foreign direct investment (Lawal, 2002).
Often little or no consultation occurs in these processes, and formalization has been more concerned
with legislative frameworks than the impact on miners and their livelihoods. Often, formalization does
not address ASM, and formal sector mining develops alongside informal sector mining. In response, ASM
activities move to more marginal areas, creating more environmental and health issues. Without specific
attention to ASM and the needs of these miners in policy formulation, ASM will remain “a rational
response to poorly formulated legislation? (Maconachie and Hilson, 2011).




                                                      19
Motorcycle Taxis

What is it? Poor infrastructure and transport systems plus the availability of cheap imported
motorcycles have led to the growth of a vibrant, largely unregulated (in the formal sense, although
informal internal regulation of the sector is strong), informal motorcycle taxi “industry? in West Africa.
The development of the Okada14 industry was enabled by the influx of inexpensive Chinese
manufactured motorcycles in the mid-1990s, transforming what was initially a marginal activity of short-
distance commercial transport into a widespread means of transport across cities, towns, and villages in
West Africa. Transport was traditionally provided by vehicle taxis and buses, which ply set routes with
and between towns and cities. Motorcycles are usually used to provide commercial taxi services over
short distances or in congested traffic. They are a faster and more flexible means of transportation than
taxis (Olubomehin, 2012).

Okada riding has had a significant impact on economies. It has created employment, generated
revenues for government via licensing, supported industry-associated businesses, for example, by
providing spare parts and necessitating repairs, and facilitated the marketing of rural produce and trade,
especially where other transport links are weak. “[Okada] have highly enhanced the mobility of people
who can afford to hire a bike; almost all narrow tracks and bush paths—and therefore most remote
areas—are traversable on them. By speeding up a great portion of economic activities, transporting
people and goods, and increasing the number of consumers, bike riders contribute to the economy and
society at large, and therefore they indirectly benefit people who do not ride bikes themselves? (Bürge,
2011).

Geographic coverage. Prior to independence in Nigeria, cities relied on private monopoly suppliers of
public transport; after independence, governments took over provision but eventually subsidies could
not be maintained and public transport deteriorated giving rise to informal transport. In Lagos,
commercial motorbikes started in 1980 in Agege’s local government area, and they were initially used to
supplement other forms of income. They spread in the 1990s with the decline in public transport and
declining formal sector opportunities for a growing youth population. By 2007 there were almost
200,000 bikes on the road (Kumar, 2011). In Ghana, rapid urbanization and decentralization (rapid
growth in suburban areas and “edge cities?) combined with poor transport systems and a growing youth
population to give rise to commercial motorbike riding (Oteng-Ababio and Agyemang, 2012). This trend
has been observed across the region.

How do young people get involved? There are few practical barriers to this livelihood for men—one can
learn to ride a bike from a friend in a short time. Driving licenses are usually bought and easy to access.
Some borrow a friend’s bike in the evening to run some business and gather the capital required to
purchase a bike. Alternatively, motorcycles can be bought through a friend’s reference and paid for in
installments. In Ghana, the cost of a new motorbike and accessories (helmet, repair kit, tools) is

14
   Okada is the popular term for motorcycles that are used for public transportation in the anglophone countries in
West Africa; it originated in Nigeria. The term comes from the now-defunct airline established in Okada, Edo state;
its use is a reference to speed (Beekers, 2008; Kumar, 2011).
                                                        20
between 700 and 1,500 Ghanaian Cedis, while used motorbikes are between 200 and 400 Ghanaian
Cedis (Oteng-Ababio and Agyemang, 2012). Riders look out for brands of motorcycles that are durable
and have low fuel consumption (Olubomehin, 2012). They seek bikes capable of plying rough roads and
that can conveniently carry two passengers simultaneously, producing more profit.

Okada riding has negative social perceptions. It is perceived as a job only suitable for earning “quick
money for the day, to eat, drink, possibly smoke jamba (marijuana), visit a prostitute, and gamble a
little, but unfit to feed a family and sustain an orderly and responsible lifestyle? (Menzel, 2011, p. 98). In
reality however, Okada-riding fathers sustain many families. Young men from rural areas with
appropriate social networks migrating to cities find this work easy to obtain. Urban young men engage
in Okada riding until they find full-time employment that is more in line with their educational status
and aspirations, while others use it as a livelihood to facilitate their longer term plans (Menzel, 2011).
Most people engage in this work for a defined period of time with the perception on entry that they will
make money, save capital, and progress to other types of business, but in reality this is not always the
case.

How does it contribute to young peoples’ livelihoods? In Lagos, Nigeria, there are 200,000 commercial
motorcycles and 100,000 minibuses that provide direct employment to over 500,000 people—if an
average household size is 5 people, more than 2,000,000 people benefit from the business (Kumar,
2011; Olubomehin, 2012). In a survey of 125 Okada riders in 4 “parks? Freetown, Sierra Leone (Fortune,
2010), half the respondents had worked for two years or less as bike riders and most had worked for 1–
4 years. Only 11 percent of the sample had worked for five years or more. Forty one percent of the
respondents said it was their own idea to get into the business and 47 percent said they intended to be
Okada riders for two years or less. Only 9 percent said five years or more. Okada riding in this part of
Freetown is thus seen as a relatively short-term livelihood project from which gains are made to help
the individual move on. The daily income, expenses, and profits of Okada riders in Freetown are set out
in the table below.

Table 3. Daily earnings of Okada riders in Freetown, Sierra Leone, 2010

No.   Item                  Description                              Income (SL           Expenses (SL
                                                                       Leones)              Leones)

1     Income                Working 10 hours per day                   100,000

2     Fuel                  One gallon                                                        16,500

3     Bike Riders’          Daily membership rate                                             1,000
      Association dues

4     Bribes                Daily to duty bearers (police,                                    25,000
                            road transport authorities)


                                                     21
5      Master money        For rental of the motorcycle for                               30,000
                           the day

6      Drivers license                                                                      278

7      Health care         Daily costs of pain medication                                  2,000



Subtotals                                                           100,000               74,778

Profits (daily)                                                      25,222


Given that 39 percent of these Okada riders owned their own motorcycle, daily profits were
substantially higher. Among those that did not own their own bikes (61 percent), monthly profits could
rise to SL Leones 1,000,000 per month. In Accra, Ghana (in 2012), Okada operators can earn between 40
and 50 Ghanaian Cedis a day, compared to the national minimum wage of 6 Ghanaian Cedis. Hire
purchase usually costs around 20 Ghanaian Cedis a day, which still puts earnings above the minimum
wage (Oteng-Ababio and Agyemang, 2012). In Ibadan, Nigeria, start-up costs are low (the most used
Jincheng Suzuki motorbikes cost about 55,000 Nigerian Naira) and riders make about 700–800 Nigerian
Naira on average per day (much more than other informal occupations like street hawking) (Beekers,
2008). The Okada business is considered relatively lucrative, in the scheme of options available. Of those
interviewed in Freetown, Sierra Leone, 85 percent had savings from their earnings and 48 percent had
opened bank accounts for their savings (Fortune, 2010). Some commentators observe that artisanal
trades are suffering as young people are less inclined to learn trades when the Okada business is more
accessible, profitable, and exciting (fast, social) (Olubomehin, 2012). Okada riders develop wide social
networks through their customers and through well-established and powerful unions and welfare
associations.

What risks and challenges does it pose to young people and society? Traffic congestion in urban West
Africa situates Okada riders in a struggle with traffic police and other duty bearers and road users.
Operating mainly in the informal sector and having bought their licences, some Okada riders have no
idea about the laws or rules of the road. Conflict with police is daily and often associated with violated
traffic laws, overloaded vehicles (enabling riders to earn more from each ride, fast money), and
inadequate documentation (licenses or insurance). A further reason for adversarial relations between
riders and law enforcement/duty bearers is Okada riders’ revenue streams. With a relatively high
income to hand in cash (because each passenger pays for each short trip), Okada riders can be targeted
for bribes from those who want a share of their relative wealth. Perceived and real injustices by law
enforcement have led to mob action. Okada riders use their mobile phone network to quickly mobilize
protection. These incidents exacerbate tensions and produce a threatening dynamic around road
accidents involving Okada riders (Fortune, 2010). Increased competition between Okadas, buses, and
taxis for livelihood revenues also contributes to tensions and threats on the road.

                                                   22
There are also serious health risks involved in Okada riding, which is likely why riders limit their
engagement in this work to a few years. Riding for 10 to 12 hours a day through all kinds of weather,
traffic, and landscapes is physically taxing and results in poor health and injuries from accidents and
exposure to the elements. Riding is considered a young man’s work and rarely will one find anyone over
40 years actively engaged (Fortune, 2010).

How is it organized/regulated? Okada riding fits into a legal and regulatory framework related to
licensing (of bike and driver), insurance coverage, taxation on imported goods (the motorcycles), as well
as safety provisions for riders and passengers (helmets). In Fortune’s 2010 survey of Okada riders in
Freetown, 97 percent of riders said their motorcycle was licensed (at a cost of approximately Le
270,000), 93 percent said their motorcycle was insured (at a cost of approximately Le 50,000) yet only
72 percent said they were licensed to drive (the cost of a driver’s license is Le 100,000). In Ghana, the
Motor Traffic Act does not recognize commercial motorbikes, and in 2012 LI 2180 Regulation 128
introduced the “prohibition of use of motorcycle or tricycle for commercial purposes? (cited in Bentil,
2013). However, Okadas continue to ply the roads of Accra in defiance of regulation (Oteng-Ababio and
Agyemang, 2012). In Lagos, the state government banned circulation between 7 P.M. and 6 A.M. with a
fine of up to 50,000 Nigerian Naira (Kumar, 2011), and in 2010, Governor Fashola banned Okadas from
the main roads and bridges (Economist, 2010). Similarly, motorcycle taxi riders in the Liberian capital
Monrovia also face legal restrictions around their access to the city center.

Okada riders are organized through fairly ad hoc, small-scale self-help welfare and solidarity associations
and through highly organized (often officially recognized) transport unions that can also have some
political traction, although it is often unclear to what extent this translates into defending the rights of
the riders themselves. In Lagos, the Nigerian Auto Bike Commercial Owners and Workers Association
(NACOWA) is the dominant union with 57 branches (Kumar, 2011). Congregating in certain sections of
the city, the bike riders take over a space where they park and await passengers and socialize with each
other. These “parks? are usually organized with an elected head and perhaps two or three associates to
support the head. In Ganta, Liberia, a very well developed welfare model of support has been developed
by leaders to encourage young riders. Membership fees are paid on a daily basis, and in return the
leadership supports negotiations with the police and other duty bearers; assists during times of injury or
ill health; and provides representation in civil society. Welfare, including justice issues, is at the core of
the Okada associational life; riders mobilize to support each other in the face of hostile duty bearers,
including police and licensing authorities. They also mobilize to squeeze out competition from
nonmembers. Beekers’ research (2008) in Nigeria links associational life, mutual support, and solidarity
groups among Okada riders to the Yoruba practice of oredegbe (friends become a club). Some
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) also work with youth riders and association leaders to provide
training in road rules and leadership skills.

What are the policy options? Policy makers and the plethora of duty bearers working on roadway issues
have been slow to capitalize on the innovation and entrepreneurial character of the Okada business in
West Africa. They have focused on getting their share of the business through harassment, bribes, and
controlling roads using outdated laws. Legal restrictions concerning motorcycle taxi access to cities and
                                                    23
urban areas are closely associated with a widespread generalized perception of Okada riders as
facilitators of criminal activity—supporting robberies, for example. However, in Ghana at least, there is
little empirical evidence for the connection between Okada riding and crime (Oteng-Ababio and
Agyemang, 2012). Similarly, research in Nigeria regarding the perception that Okada riders are potential
“rented crowds? for politicians has found empirical data inconclusive (Beekers, 2008). The merits of
imposing legal restrictions vis-à-vis the Rwandan strategy of formally regulating motorcycle taxis in Kigali
have yet to be studied.

Street Trading
What is it? Informal commerce has become the lifeblood           Informal sector work is often segmented into
of African cities. Street trading is a common way to sell two parts, the lower and upper tier. The
both goods and services or both, and accounts for 12–24 upper tier is often referred to as top
                                                                 performers, and they are considered growth-
percent of total urban informal employment in many sub-
                                                                 oriented entrepreneurs. The lower tier is
Saharan African cities (IEMS, 2012).15 Street trading refers     often labelled as entrepreneurial survivalists.
specifically to trade that is characterized as outside of the    Recent research has revealed a third group
regulatory environment and does not participate in called constrained gazelles, who, while in the
                                                                 lower tier, show a number of characteristics
business regulation, planning codes, or other legal
                                                                 like the top performers. In a less dynamic
requirements. However on closer examination, street              economy they are a significant group,
trading (like many informal sector livelihood activities) is     between 20–35 percent of the total (Grimm
deeply intertwined with formal sector activity. In a 2012 et al., 2012), and this has implications for
IEMS study of street trade in sub-Saharan African cities, it policy.
was found that over 50 percent of traders source their
goods from formal sector suppliers; nearly two-thirds of traders make payments to the city government
for a licence; and a quarter of traders have either paid or unpaid helpers who learn skills from them. Far
from being located outside the formal economy, street traders play a part in the rise of African cities as
nonindustrial “trading cities? that serve as major economic nodes connecting national and international
trade in complex and increasingly global networks of trade (Skinner, 2008). Trade liberalization has
facilitated street trading dramatically, increasing the importation of cheap goods. Items manufactured in
China can be seen proffered for sale by young men and women at intersections and stoplights in cities
across West Africa (Langevang, 2008).

Street trading can be done part time, full time, all day, or all night, and can be tailored to the vendor’s
needs in terms of time commitment. Some street vendors are fixed in one place—in a kiosk or around a
major road junction, or in shopping malls—while others have no fixed location. Vending takes places
through different structures, including tables, racks, wheelbarrows, handcarts, mats, on the ground, or
simply displayed on the traders’ hands and heads (Mitullah, 2003).

How do young people get involved? West African countries, especially matrilineal societies, are
distinctive in their long tradition of informal markets controlled by women (Skinner, 2008). While still
15
  The ILO (2002) notes that street trading is especially difficult to measure because of the nature of the work—
numbers can fluctuate depending on season and even during the day, and locations continuously shift and change.
                                                       24
dominant, the largest group of street traders are older women (Charmes, 2012), the large numbers of
young people entering street trading as a livelihood strategy is shifting the character of this ubiquitous
activity. The proliferation of street vendors is increasingly fuelled by urbanization, migration, public
sector restructuring, conflict, drought/famine, and the impoverishment of people (Brown and Lyons,
2010; Skinner, 2008; Mitullah, 2003). Originally viewed as an economic activity for those with a low level
of education and for women with multiple responsibilities/extending the reproductive and domestic
roles traditionally assigned to them, more recently people from all backgrounds have entered street
trade as a livelihood strategy, especially after the structural adjustment-related retrenchment of the civil
service (Mitullah, 2003).

How does it contribute to young peoples’ livelihoods? Income distribution of street vendors is highly
skewed; a few make quite high incomes, comparable to those of successful storekeepers and career
professionals, while most making relatively low incomes, comparable to those of unskilled manual
laborers (Bromley, 2000). In Niamey, Niger, a vendor’s average earning is four times the minimum wage,
and often comparable to wages of skilled laborers in the formal sector—women therefore join the
urban street food trade because of the possibility to earn higher incomes (Otoo et al., 2011). Factors
determining productivity and income levels include location in the public space, the nature of the goods,
trader’s social relations and networks, access to finance, and access to basic infrastructure (Grimm et al.,
2012). Street vendors are twice as likely as market vendors to face insecurity of workplace, and one in
two vendors reported insecurity of their vending site as a significant problem for their trading (with
many unable to access a license or permit) (IEMS, 2012). Furthermore, two-thirds of street vendors
reported poor access to infrastructure (running water and waste management) impacting hygienic
conditions and the success of their trade (IEMS, 2012). Numerous factors influence how economically
productive street trading is; while it is widely considered a “lower tier? activity with traders often
referred to as survivalist entrepreneurs (Grimm et al., 2012), it plays an important role in economies and
has the potential to facilitate social mobility for traders in the right conditions.

Associational life has the potential to play an important role in increasing street traders’ livelihood
security and social status. However, strikes and demonstrations as mechanisms to voice vendor
concerns (regarding their regulation or the lack of services despite revenue collection) have not been
successful because traders cannot forego income to participate, and weak associations have no voice
(Mitullah, 2003). Associational life can be valuable for developing the social capital required for
accessing microcredit. Most microcredit is administered through peer groups that mirror traditional
cooperative savings systems. Street traders who are mobile find it particularly difficult to develop this
kind of social capital (Lyons and Snoxell, 2005).

What risks and challenges does it pose to young people and society? Street trading is sometimes
perceived as negatively impacting the formal economy, stimulating conflicts with urban authorities over
licensing, taxation, operation site, sanitation, and working conditions. State responses to street trading
have included large-scale, sustained evictions and event-driven evictions, all coexisting with lower level
ongoing harassment of traders (Skinner, 2008). Traders surveyed in sub-Saharan Africa cite abuse of
authority as a key risk/threat to their working conditions (police harassment, bribes, arbitrary
                                                     25
confiscation of merchandise, and physical abuse) (IEMS, 2012). They also suffer extortion by gangs or
informal “security? providers.

How is it organized/regulated? Millions of petty traders and urban poor are organized into associational
life in urban economies mainly around problem solving and conflict mitigation (Skinner, 2008). Street
trader and market associations fall into two groups—formal associations recognized by the authorities
and informal kinship, or social networks that derive their power outside the political economy of the
state. The level of organization amongst street traders is not well understood.

What are the policy options? Street vending as a livelihood activity can be combined with other types of
productive trading, and studies show that people who move between production sectors are more likely
to be upwardly mobile; women are particularly found to be more mobile than men (Lyons and Snoxell,
2005).

Hairdressing and barbering

What is it? Hairdressing and barbering encompass a whole range of hair care businesses—from informal
services delivered between friends through roadside temporary stands, to highly entrepreneurial small
shops and salons. Providing a highly personal service, hairdressing and barbering rely heavily on the
service providers’ social capital.

Hair care businesses increased in popularity and importance during the early 2000s as a result of
urbanization and the influence of hair relaxing techniques and new fashions (Oda, 2005). Hairdressing
particularly expanded as the result of vocational training programs for urban women that focused on
traditional female livelihood activities: hairdressing, tailoring, and catering. The proliferation of
hairdressing has meant that markets are becoming saturated, affecting the ability of businesses to
sustain themselves (Langevang and Gough, 2012). In a saturated market, women who have been trained
as hairdressers seek alternative livelihood activities to supplement or entirely replace their hairdressing
income (Oda, 2005). The overpopulated hairdressing sector has supressed the earning power of urban
young women (Korboe and Williams, 2012). In contrast, barbering has seen little in the way of large-
scale investment but has organically grown to meet demand, creating new spaces for young men to
assert new forms of masculinity.

How do young people get involved? Parallel businesses have evolved in the informal and formal sectors.
In the informal hairdressing sector, women learn the skills of the trade informally from family and
friends, and set up independently with little need for start-up capital beyond the cost of small plastic
combs and a few stools (Essah, 2008). Formal hairdresser training has been the focus of numerous skills
and vocational training programs for urban girls rolled out by governments, international organizations,
and civil society organizations in countries across West Africa. The modalities of apprenticeships vary
but usually involve low entry requirements; long hours (usually six days per week); some trainees pay for
their training or forgo their income; and sometimes they get board and lodging, but only in very few
situations do they get to keep the profits of what they produce (Donkor and Mallet, 2006). In Côte
d’Ivoire, high unemployment levels in the hairdressing sector mean that trainees prefer to extend
                                                   26
apprenticeships to at least continue receiving in-kind support (food and so on), if not an income
(Grootaert, 1990). In Ghana, formal sector salons experience competition from hairdressers without
formal training who are able to set up small hair-braiding kiosks and offer competitive rates because
they rely on their clients to bring their own products. Despite their relatively good income, the kiosk
hairdressers are often cast as lower class (Essah, 2008).

Barbering has not benefited/suffered from the consequences of extensive vocational training. It is
normally learned from older brothers or friends and deployed as an asset among networks of family and
friends (Langevang, 2008). From here it can morph into a central part of young men’s livelihood
strategy. If people like the quality of the work, a client base and business is developed.

How does it contribute to young peoples’ livelihoods? Hairdressing is an attractive occupation for young
West African women negotiating the balance between domestic and child bearing/rearing
responsibilities, and earning an income (Langevang and Gough, 2012). The hours are flexible, locations
can be close to home or even in the home, and unlike many other informal sector activities, hairdressing
is regarded as a respectable occupation. In Ghana, hairdressers also benefit from active hairdressing
associations that have sought to increase their dues-paying membership, negotiate rates and tariffs with
government, and worked to standardize training methodologies. Furthermore, drawing on global trends
and new hair products that have created demand for hairdressing, trade associations have facilitated a
shift in the perception of the occupation as one for school dropouts to one that is modern, lucrative, and
enterprising (Langevang and Gough, 2012). Despite these attractions and benefits, many formally
trained hairdressers in Ghana have become street traders because they are unable to make a sufficient
income from hairdressing in a saturated market (Korboe and Williams, 2012).

In addition to providing an income, barbering has also provided young West African men a space to
mediate and reframe negative stereotypes attached to their identities. For example, Ivorian youth that
fled to Burkina Faso are renegotiating the negative image attached to refugees. They are reinterpreting
negative meanings attached to the term “diaspo? by branding their barbing shops with names such as
“Diaspo Coiffure? thereby creating a new urban cosmopolitan identity (Bjarnesen, 2012). Similarly,
barber shop images in Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire, create “localised narratives that celebrate an Abidjanais-
specific lifestyle and claim participation in the global political economy as black male actors? (Matlon,
2011, p. 381). By emphasizing their likeness to icons of the African diaspora, “these images represent
expressions of masculinity that embody the desires and disappointments of marginalized Abidjanais
men? and young “men’s insistence on global membership and adoption of global masculine forms that
compensate for their failures to assume the expected roles of men in their society? (Matlon, 2011, p.
381). These images and the narratives they represent are a direct response from young Ivorian men to
the marginalization and stereotyping they experience in society. As such, barber shops become much
more than the site of young men’s income generation, but also the hub of their social transformation on
their own terms.

What risks and challenges does it pose to young people and society? Apprenticeship models to
transition young people into independent hairdressing entrepreneurs have been widely criticized. A
                                                   27
number of young people drop out at each stage in the process of becoming an independent hairdresser
(access to apprenticeships, training, graduating, opening a shop, and so on) (Schraven, 2013). Woltjer
(2006) similarly identifies a series of weaknesses in the traditional Ghanaian apprenticeship system:
there is no formal curriculum, there are varied standards, and no government
support/control/supervision. In addition, Donkor and Mallet (2006) highlight the lack of formal
vocational and technical training provided to masters in the apprenticeship system. In effect, masters
lack knowledge of and access to technological information, knowledge of wider environmental issues,
and entrepreneurial skills to pass on. Aside from the issue of a saturated sector, the failings of
apprenticeship systems are associated with hairdressers experiencing health problems because they
deal with chemical hair relaxants unsafely, for example (Essah, 2008). The failure to effectively manage
young women’s vocational training and subsequent livelihood opportunities has undermined the sector
as a valuable means for young women to achieve advancement.

Most hairdressing and barbering opportunities for young people tend to exist in the informal economy
in the form of pop-up shops (Essah, 2008; Matlon, 2011). As such, they exist in the grey space of other
informal sector activities, supporting the formal economy yet negotiating the constraints of informality
and a lack of protections.

Drug trafficking

What is it? West Africa has been a transit and repackaging point for the cocaine trade between Latin
America and Europe for the last ten years (Ellis, 2006). The flow peaked at 47 tons in 2007 and declined
more recently to about 18 tons, the latter with a European street value in the region of US$1.25 billion
(UNODC, 2013). Reitano and Shaw (2014) suggest that the increasing complicity of West African political
and security actors in cocaine trafficking has encouraged a diversification of drug trafficking and
organized crime in the region: “Drugs ranging from hashish, methamphetamine and precursor chemicals
to cocaine and heroin have all been seized in recent years? (p. 2). For example, in Ghana, recent major
seizures include 675 kg of cocaine in 2004, and over 80 kg of heroin, over 220 kg of cocaine, and over
3,000 kg of cannabis in 2010 (Kavanagh, 2013). Furthermore, according to Pierre Lapaque, Regional
Representative for the UN Office on Drugs and Crime, recent discoveries of large-scale
methamphetamine labs in Nigeria, Guinea, and Liberia indicate that West Africa “is shifting from a
transit and consumer place to a producing place? (quoted in Skelton, 2013). A full picture of the history
and scale of drug trafficking in the region is impossible to achieve, as available figures are all based on
estimates derived from seizures. The effects of drug trafficking on the region are more visible; it is
facilitated by and encourages the further erosion of human security and statehood.

Geographic coverage. While not marked on the map in Figure 3, drug production has been identified in
Nigeria, Ghana, Liberia, and Guinea-Bissau. Access to European markets enabled by effective
transportation infrastructure and systems combine with the limited reach of the state and an unpoliced
Sahara to make these countries important transit countries for drug trafficking. 4x4 vehicles are used to
transport drugs from east to west across the dessert (Global Initiative against Transnational Organized
Crime, 2014).
                                                    28
Figure 3. Trafficking flows through West Africa and the Sahel




Source: Reitano and Shaw, 2014.

How do young people get involved? In Mali, for semi-nomadic communities that have long relied on
cross-border trade and migration strategies for livelihoods and survival during droughts and conflict,
trafficking commodities across the Sahel and Maghreb represents a way of life: “Arab youths begin
learning to drive at a very young age, and are known locally to have a particular talent for driving in the
dessert. They start as early as 10; are well practiced by 15, and by 18 are driving in the drug convoys for
long distances. After being paid for the first couple of runs, they purchase their own cars—normally
4x4s—and then their futures are made? (Reitano and Shaw, 2014, p. 6).

Less is known about the factors that influence the decisions of other young West Africans to engage in
drug trafficking. In countries with large numbers of young people engaged in livelihood activities and
jobs that offer limited opportunities for social mobility, the attraction of fast money and status offered
by drug trafficking is clear: “Even if a mule earns only a small portion of the final street value, trafficking
just a few grams of cocaine to Europe offers a payoff similar to the annual economic production of the
region’s average citizen? (Cockayne, 2011, p. 3). But how do young people themselves understand the
“opportunities? and risks involved in confronting the border regimes and laws of other countries? More
                                                      29
practically, how do they access the social networks that position them to engage in drug trafficking?
Reitano and Shaw (2014) suggest that “young men engaged in trafficking publicise their success by
buying valuable real estate, cars and other status symbols, which in turn become a tool for recruiting …
especially impressionable youths? (p. 6). In the case of drivers in Mali, recruitment was mediated by the
young men’s willingness to engage and the traffickers need for both driving skills and knowledge of
trafficking routes. Kinship and social networks also play a central role in recruitment. Fortune (2013)
highlights the strategic selectivity exercised by transnational organized crime groups at recruitment;
they reportedly “target government officials and politicians who are in positions to support their profit
making.?
How does it contribute to young peoples’ livelihoods? The financial benefits of drug trafficking are
clear. For example, 4x4 drivers in Mali are paid “at least US$6,000 for trafficking cigarettes … for hashish
or cocaine they are paid a minimum of US$14,000? (cited in Reitano and Shaw, 2014, p. 5). With higher
incomes, these young men gain social status at the community level, which shifts the balance of power
away from traditional authority figures (leaders of clans, imams, elders) (Reitano and Shaw, 2014) and
creates the opportunity for young people to shape their futures and that of those who surround them. If
drug trafficking goes wrong and young people get caught by law enforcement or engage in drug abuse,
their livelihood strategies can be severely and negatively disrupted by imprisonment and/or health
problems.

What risks and challenges does it pose to young people and society? In Mali, drug trafficking and the
rapid social mobility it enables disrupt traditional hierarchies and social structures. Traditional justice
and stabilization mechanisms have struggled to adjust and have become ineffective, which has led to
intracommunity tensions. Collusion by state officials and the army with drug traffickers and other
organized criminal gangs has eroded state capacity to protect citizens (Davis, 2014). Outbreaks of armed
violence in relation to the control of trafficking routes have further eroded security. In terms of wider
social cohesion, fears regarding young wealthy men’s potential appetites have also sparked tensions.
Forced or swiftly arranged marriages are on the rise, as elders seek to “placate the desires of young Kel
Tamasheq men who have access to large amounts of money?—that is, young men not involved in drug
trafficking become priced out of marriage as the costs of dowries increase and divorce rates have
increased, as young wives are rejected if they do not bear children quickly enough (Reitano and Shaw,
2014, p. 7).

Conclusions and Recommendations
It is challenging to make policies that improve opportunities for the growing population of young people
who are largely employed in precarious, underproductive, and unsustainable livelihood activities that
impact state-fragility in different ways across West Africa. Matching up diverse young people to the
shifting and evolving opportunities produced by national and global dynamics is complex, yet much
learning is already available to help avoid the repetition of past mistakes and missed opportunities.

Given the regional, high-level nature of this report, and patchy and limited availability of quality data
about young peoples’ experiences of the five livelihood activities studied in the four focus countries, this
                                                    30
paper does not attempt to make sector-specific or country-specific recommendations for stimulating the
advancement of young people in West Africa. To do so on the basis of limited knowledge and evidence
of different groups of young people in different social and geographic locations would be irresponsible,
given the limited resources available for investment; the specificity and complexity of the various
situations affecting different countries in West Africa; and the risks for progressing peace, security, and
development involved in pursuing ill-advised livelihood interventions. Rather, by bringing together
available information on young peoples’ livelihood activities in different contexts, this study highlights a
series of broad guidelines and recommendations for policy makers and programmers working in/on
West Africa:

    1) Develop targeted interventions. Where working with youth is intended to reduce fragility, first
       identify which youth are involved in activities that contribute to fragility, how they get
       involved, and why. For example, where fragility is related to the activities of radical groups such
       as Boko Haram in Nigeria, identify which youth are being recruited (gender, geographic location,
       socioeconomic background), how they are being recruited, and why recruitment is appealing to
       them. This is critical to effectively disrupting the recruitment process. From understanding the
       actions of specific groups of youth, it becomes possible to devise targeted strategies, policies,
       and interventions to minimize risks. For example, it may emerge that recruitment into radicalism
       is facilitated by the activities of wider groups in society (such as religious preachers) who could
       be better monitored and regulated, or that a credible nationwide anti-corruption campaign
       would help restore youths’ trust in government and the state, thus discouraging them from
       engaging with radical groups (Onuoha, 2014). Similarly, where some motorcycle taxi drivers are
       found to be associated with violence and other criminal activities that contribute to fragility,
       formalizing motorcycle taxi services could be a productive response. The alternative—restricting
       where and when motorcycle taxis operate—in effect compromises the livelihood of many law-
       abiding riders and their dependents, and reduces the economic benefits of a flexible and
       affordable means of transportation for the wider economy. Lessons could be drawn from
       Rwanda’s experience of formalizing motorcycle taxis, taking into account why formalization has
       worked there and why it might or might not work in other country contexts.

    2) Reframe debate, policy, and programming on the youth bulge to acknowledge that youth are
       a national and continental asset, and that the large majority of youth are nonviolent, working
       hard and struggling against a plethora of obstacles to make a life for themselves, their
       families, and their communities. Intergenerational tensions and hostility are aggravated when
       leaders and decision makers treat youth as one homogeneous category and focus their
       attention on the violent and criminal actions of a minority. Too much emphasis on the needs,
       interests, and incentives of the minority of youth who do engage in violence, without attention
       to the nonviolent majority who do not, can produce perverse incentives for the otherwise
       nonviolent to engage in violence. The circumstances, needs, interests, and incentives of the
       diverse, nonviolent majority of youth must be understood and managed to minimize


                                                    31
    intergenerational tensions and hostility, and to channel the full potential of youth towards
    creating shared prosperity.

3) Manage expectations and publicly acknowledge that creating enough good jobs to meet
   demand involves significant structural reforms; as such, it is a medium- to long-term goal.
   Governments need to act now for the future and lead the multistakeholder effort.
   Government leadership needs to bring together relevant government institutions (local and
   national, managing education, health, private sector development, natural resource
   management, and financial resources), the international community (including private sector
   actors), as well as traditional leaders, families, and diverse groups of youth themselves to
   respond to the job creation challenge. Each plays a role in building an enabling environment for
   young peoples’ advancement in society and society’s overall transformation. Where
   government capacity has been eroded by conflict and insecurity, government leadership of
   complex multistakeholder initiatives and significant structural reforms is an exceptionally tough
   challenge. The international community needs to support these governments particularly with
   specialized accompaniment and technical support as they rapidly put in place medium- to long-
   term plans that marshal stakeholders and resources. Urgent action is needed to put in place the
   right health, education, and training policies and programs to develop human resources with the
   right capacities and technical skills to benefit from future opportunities that arise from shifting
   global value chains and other labor market developments. Furthermore, education and training
   programs must produce workers with diverse and adaptable skills that match diverse and
   changeable labor market demands to avoid undermining the value of any particular skill set. For
   example, Ghana’s experience of training too many hairdressers—which resulted in a flooded
   labor market, the undervaluing of hairdressers skills, and underemployment—is informative.

4) Mobilize regional networks. Governments must make more use of the Economic Community
   of West African States (ECOWAS), working with and within it to negotiate regional and global
   support to manage the employment challenge and its links to fragility in West Africa.
   Globalization has meant that regional and international institutions play a central role in shaping
   the opportunities for job creation and managing cross-border fragility dynamics. For example,
   regulatory regimes shape opportunities for safe migration, market access for global trade, and
   the strength of illegal trafficking networks. ECOWAS can play an important role in securing an
   increase in the proportion of global value chains based in West Africa. Not least because West
   Africa benefits from substantial natural resources and a large young labor force (in the context
   of an aging labor force elsewhere in the world). Similarly, ECOWAS can play a role in pressing for
   the renegotiation of immigration policy to increase safe migration opportunities for young West
   Africans; or the terms of different regional trade rules that constrain market access available to
   West Africa producers. ECOWAS can also help to more strongly negotiate for international
   assistance to tackle cross-border drivers of fragility that impact prospects for peace,
   development, and investment in the region, for example drug trafficking.


                                               32
5) Pursue immediate reforms to improve the prospects associated with current youth livelihood
   activities:

           a. Recognize the contribution youth livelihoods activities already make to individual,
              household, and community well-being, including economic growth. Numerous
              youth livelihood activities are not recognized as jobs despite the fact that they make
              important social and economic contributions. Young people thus spend years
              technically unemployed, not achieving recognition or adult status despite
              contributing substantially to their families and communities. In the short term,
              building a wider understanding and appreciation of how youth livelihood activities
              contribute to society and the economy can help improve youths’ status and well-
              being, reducing youth marginalization and frustration. A sustained public
              information campaign can play a role in the recognition process—through radio
              interviews and stories, for example—alongside other targeted interventions.

           b. Put in place mechanisms to enable youth financial inclusion, despite informal
              sector employment. Access to credit and saving schemes are critical to reducing the
              economic vulnerability often associated with youth livelihood activities. Providing
              access to credit and facilitating savings through clubs and associations, the formal
              banking sector, or new technologies (such as mobile money) can also help catalyze
              youth livelihood activities toward increased productivity and further contributions
              to wider society and economic growth (Filmer and Fox, 2014).

           c. Work with the private sector and NGOs to stimulate youth entrepreneurialism and
              build associations around livelihood activities that provide sustainable support.
              Youth livelihood activities are shaped by market demands and opportunities, yet
              their potential for growth and expansion is constrained by limited education and
              little access to training and support. Young potential entrepreneurs need hands-on
              support to develop life, technical, and business skills that enable them to transform
              small-scale initiatives into small enterprises that can go on to employ others.
              Associations and clubs have been an important factor in determining the survival
              and success of youth livelihood activities. They provide support and development
              opportunities and represent the needs and interests of the group in local and
              national decision-making processes. Careful attention to facilitating the
              development of different groups and associations that can provide appropriate and
              sustained support to young entrepreneurs can further facilitate social integration
              and minimize the risk that livelihood activities contribute to fragility dynamics.
              Private-sector expertise combined with the trust and access enjoyed by NGOs make
              them both valuable partners in this endeavor.

6) Deepen understanding of youth aspirations and frustrations in parallel with short- and long-
   term employment focused interventions. Failed aspirations and frustration with authorities and
                                              33
    decision makers is often identified by youth who have engaged in violence as a significant factor,
    among others, in their mobilization. Decision makers rarely engage with different groups of
    youth directly. Engagement can be restricted to election time, when politicians want to mobilize
    votes. This relationship can be very narrow, short-term, and transactional in character, with
    limited benefit for the youth involved. Similarly, decision making concerning youth can treat
    them as technical “inputs? for economic progress, erased of agency and aspirations, and media
    and communications on new investments and economic growth that imply new opportunities
    are coming often raise expectations that rarely translate into changed daily realities for the
    majority of youth. These interactions often produce or even deepen the frustration and distrust
    that feed intergenerational, citizen-state tensions between youth and those who make decisions
    on their behalf. Political leaders and decision makers must better understand young peoples’
    diverse lives (their challenges and aspirations), including their interest in cultural phenomena
    such as hip-hop, new technologies, and social media. Rather than treating them as a resource to
    serve political or economic ends, working to understand youth and their diverse realities can
    help foster confidence and reduce frustration.

7) Manage expectations via tailored communications and honest and sustained dialogue
   mechanisms. Youth with limited education can struggle to understand the complex realities that
   shape decision making (weighing important yet competing priorities, sequencing policy and
   program efforts, negotiating local and global dynamics). Where there are high hopes for the
   future, yet only long, slow, and difficult paths to get there, it is critical that communications do
   not unduly raise expectations and then deliver disappointment and frustration. Where reports
   of corruption and high levels of inequality prevail, repeated failed expectations can aggravate
   intergenerational tensions and citizen-state relations. Dialogue that is sustained beyond
   elections and other politically expedient moments, and that honestly engages with the diverse
   realities that diverse groups of youth confront and the diverse challenges that decision makers
   confront, can help build understanding and trust. Such sustained and honest dialogue can also
   help transform national political dynamics from limited transactional relationships to more
   productive collaborative relationships. By working with formal and informal collectives,
   associations, and unions in which different groups of youth participate, decision makers can
   help build confidence and trust in their capabilities. Working toward a more collaborative
   political culture can transform youth into active stakeholders in their future and help prepare
   future generations of leaders to manage the local and global challenges that confront decision
   makers in a globalized world.

    8) Improve the transparency of youth employment-related interventions by making the
       evidence base for interventions publicly available in order to facilitate dialogue and
       improve citizen-state relations. Governments and their donor partners need to spend more
       money on research to build an evidence base for their decisions and to improve the
       targeting and effectiveness of policies and programs. As noted throughout this study, data
       on the diverse circumstances, needs, interests, and aspirations of different groups of young

                                                34
           people and their livelihood activities is limited. To mobilize the full potential of current
           youth livelihood activities in the short term and to pave the way for more and better
           livelihood opportunities in the future, much more context-specific research is needed to
           inform policy and programming interventions now. Participatory research and dissemination
           of the evidence base behind policy and programming interventions can also contribute to
           confidence-building and stronger intergenerational, citizen-state relations. For example,
           demand for evidence-based policy and programming builds demand for a local knowledge
           economy, which can in turn create employment opportunities for underemployed,
           educated, and talented youth.

A common feature of each of these guidelines and recommendations is that “one size does not fit all.?
On the contrary, attempts to fit generic policies and programs for youth employment into fragile
settings in West Africa have produced poor and sometimes undesirable results (Batmanglich and Enria,
2014).




                                                 35
References
AfDB (African Development Bank Group). 2014. “Addressing Fragility and Building Resilience in Africa:
       The African Development Bank Group Strategy.? Report, AfDB, Tunis-Belvedère, Tunisia.
       http://www.afdb.org/fileadmin/uploads/afdb/Documents/Policy-
       Documents/Addressing_Fragility_and_Building_Resilience_in_Africa-
       _The_AfDB_Group_Strategy_2014%E2%80%932019.pdf.

Afrobarometer. n.d. “What Are the Greatest Needs of Ghanaians?? Press release.
       http://www.afrobarometer.org/files/documents/press_release/gha_r5_pr1.pdf.

Afrobarometer. 2012. “Afrobarometer Data, Round 5.? http://www.afrobarometer.org.

AllAfrica.com. 2012. “Nigeria: Unemployment—Biggest Frustration Among Youths.?
         http://allafrica.com/stories/201211170589.html.

Amankrah, J. Y., and N. N. N. Nsowah-Nuamah. 2003. “Survey of Unemployed and Underemployed
      Persons in Ghana, 2001.? Report, Ghana Statistical Service, Accra.

Ashford, Lori S. 2007. “Africa’s Youthful Population: Risk or Opportunity?? Report, Population Reference
       Bureau, Washington, DC. http://www.prb.org/pdf07/africayouth.pdf.

Batmanglich, S., and L. Enria. 2014. Real Jobs in Fragile Contexts: Reframing Youth Employment
      Programming in Liberia and Sierra Leone. London: International Alert.

Beekers, D. 2008. Children of a Fallen House: Lives and Livelihoods of Youth in Nigeria. MPhil thesis,
       Oxford University.

Bentil, N. A. 2013. “Okadas Flourish Despite Ban.? Development Ghana Blog.
         http://bentil.blogspot.co.uk/2013/05/okada-blossoms-in-spite-of-ban.html.

Bjarnesen, J. 2012, March 29, 2012. “‘Diaspo’ Youth Culture and the Ivoirian Crisis." Fieldsights—Hot
       Spots, Cultural Anthropology Online. http://production.culanth.org/fieldsights/191-diaspo-
       youth-culture-and-the-ivoirian-crisis.

Bromley, Ray. 2000. “Street Vending and Public Policy: A Global Review.? International Journal of
       Sociology and Social Policy 20 (1/2): 1–28.

Brown, A., and M. Lyons. 2010. “Seen But Not Heard: Urban Voice and Citizenship for Street Traders.? In
       Africa’s Informal Workers: Collective Agency, Alliances and Transnational Organizing in Urban
       Africa, ed. I. Lindell, 33–45. London: Zed.

Bryceson, D. F. 2002. “Multiplex Livelihoods in Rural Africa: Recasting the Terms and Conditions of
       Gainful Employment.? Journal of Modern African Studies 40 (1): 1–28.

                                                    36
Bürge, Michael. 2011. “Riding the Narrow Tracks of Moral Life: Commercial Motorbike Riders in Makeni,
        Sierra Leone.? Africa Today 58 (2): 58–95.

Charmes, J. 2012. “The Informal Economy Worldwide: Trends and Characteristics.? Margin—The Journal
      of Applied Economic Research 6 (2): 103–22.

Cockayne, J. 2011. “Transnational Threats: The Criminalization of West Africa and the Sahel.? Policy
       Brief, Global Center on Cooperative Security, Washington, DC.

Commonwealth. 2013a. “Youth Development Index.? Results report, Commonwealth, London.
     http://www.youthdevelopmentindex.org/cms/cms-
     youth/_images/197918019952385f3219c75.pdf.

Commonwealth. 2013b. “Youth Forum Opening Ceremony Heralds Start of Commonwealth Gathering.?
     http://thecommonwealth.org/media/news/youth-forum-opening-ceremony-heralds-start-
     commonwealth-gathering.

Cramer, Chris. 2010. “Unemployment and Participation in Violence.? Background Paper, World
       Development Report 2011, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Davis, Laura. 2014. Supporting Peaceful Social, Political, Cultural and Economic Change in Mali. London:
        International Alert.

Donkor, F., and J. Mallet. 2006. “Enhancing Apprenticeship Training in Ghana Through Distance
       Learning.? Paper presented at the Fourth Pan-Commonwealth Forum on Open Learning, Ocho
       Rios, Jamaica, October 30–November 3.

Economist. 2010, September 11. “Tame Those Taxis: A Well-Intentioned Governor Is Annoying
      Frustrated Commuters.?

Ellis, S. 2006. The Mask of Anarchy: The Destruction of Liberia and the Religious Dimension of an African
           Civil War. New York: New York University Press.

Essah, D. S. 2008. Fashioning the Nation: Hairdressing, Professionalism and the Performance of Gender
        in Ghana, 1900–2006. Doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan.

Esson, J. 2013. “A Body and a Dream at a Vital Conjuncture: Ghanaian Youth, Uncertainty and the Allure
         of Football.? Geoforum 47: 84–92.

Ferguson, J. 1999. Expectations of Modernity—Myths and Meanings of Urban Life on the Zambian
       Copperbelt. Oakland: University of California Press.

Filmer, D., and L. Fox. 2014. “Overview: Youth Employment in Sub-Saharan Africa.? Report, World Bank,
        Washington, DC.



                                                   37
Fortune, F. 2010. Young Entrepreneurs: Bike Riders and Conflict Management in Sierra Leone. Master’s
       thesis, Royal Roads University.

Fortune, F. 2013. “Working at Cross Purposes: The Drugs Trade and MRU Peacebuilding; A Case Study.?
       Unpublished background research paper.

Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime. 2014. “Illicit Trafficking and Instability in Mali:
        Past, Present and Future.? Research paper, Global Initiative against Transnational Organized
        Crime, Geneva.

Grimm, M., P. Knorringa, and J. Lay. 2012. “Constrained Gazelles: High Potentials in West Africa’s
       Informal Economy.? World Development 40 (7): 1352–68.

Grootaert, C. 1990. “Returns to Formal and Informal Vocational Education in Côte d’Ivoire: The Role of
       the Structure of the Labor Market.? Economics of Education Review 9 (4): 309–19.

Gyimah-Brempong, K., and M. S. Kimenyi. 2013. “Youth Policy and the Future of African Development.?
      Working Paper No. 9, Africa Growth Initiative, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
      http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/research/files/reports/2013/04/youth%20policy%20african
      %20development%20kimenyi/04_youth_policy_african_development_kimenyi.pdf.

Heinrigs, P., and M. Trémolières, eds. 2012. “Global Security Risks and West Africa: Development
        Challenges.? OECD West African Studies Series, OECD and Sahel and West Africa Club
        Secretariat, Paris.

Hentschel, T., F. Hruschka, and M. Priester. 2002. “Global Report on Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining.?
       Mining, Minerals and Sustainable Development Report No. 70, International Institute for
       Environment and Development, London.

Hertrich, V., and M. Lesclingand. 2013. “Adolescent Migration in Rural Africa as a Challenge to Gender
        and Intergenerational Relationships: Evidence from Mali.? ANNALS of the American Academy of
        Political and Social Science 648 (1): 175–88. doi: 10.1177/0002716213485356.

Hervish, A., and D. Clifton. 2012. “Adolescence and Young People in Sub-Saharan Africa: Opportunities
        and Challenges.? Report, United Nations Population Fund and Population Reference Bureau,
        Johannesburg and Washington, DC.

Hilson, G., F. Amankwah, and R. Ofori-Sarpong. 2013. “Going for Gold: Transitional Livelihoods in
        Northern Ghana.? Journal of Modern African Studies 51 (1): 109–37.

Hilson, G., and C. Garforth. 2012. “’Agricultural Poverty’ and the Expansion of Artisanal Mining in Sub-
        Saharan Africa: Experiences from Southwest Mali and Southeast Ghana.? Population Research
        and Policy Review 31 (3): 435–64.



                                                      38
Hilson, G., and C. Potter. 2003. “Why Is Illegal Gold Mining Activity So Ubiquitous in Rural Ghana??
        African Development Review 15 (2–3): 237–70.

Hinton, J. J., M. M. Veiga, and C. Beinhoff. 2003. “Women and Artisanal Mining: Gender Roles and the
        Road Ahead.? In The Socio-economic Impacts of Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining in Developing
        Countries, ed. G. Hilson. Leiden, Netherlands: Swets.

Hoffman, D. 2011. The War Machines: Young Men and Violence in Sierra Leone and Liberia. Durham, NC:
      Duke University Press.

Honwana, Alcinda Manuel. 2012. The Time of Youth: Work, Social Change, and Politics in Africa. West
      Hartford, CT: Kumarian.

IEMS (Informal Economy Monitoring Study). 2012. “The Urban Informal Work Force: Street Vendors.?
        http://wiego.org/sites/wiego.org/files/publications/files/IEMS-street-vendor-report.pdf.

ILO (International Labour Organization). 1999. “Social and Labour Issues in Small-Scale Mines.? Report
         for discussion at the Tripartite Meeting on Social and Labour Issues in Small-Scale Mines,
         International Labour Organization, Sectoral Activities Programme, International Labour Office,
         Geneva, May 17–21.

ILO. 2002. “Women and Men in the Informal Economy: A Statistical Picture.? Report, ILO, Geneva.

ILO. 2013. “Global Employment Trends for Youth: A Generation at Risk.? Report, ILO, Geneva.

Ismail, Wale, ’Funmi Olonisakin, Bob Picciotto, and Dave Wybrow. 2009. “Youth Vulnerability and
        Exclusion (YOVEX) in West Africa: Synthesis Report.? CSDG Papers, Kings College, London.

Jeffrey, Craig. 2010. “Geographies of Children and Youth I: Eroding Maps of Life.? Progress in Human
         Geography 34 (4): 496–505.

Jütting, Johannes, and Juan R. de Laiglesia, eds. 2009. “Is Informal Normal? Towards More and Better
          Jobs in Developing Countries.? Report, Development Centre of the Organisation for Economic
          Co-operation and Development, Paris.

Kakwagh, V. V., and A. Ikwuba. 2010. “Youth Unemployment in Nigeria: Causes and Related Issues.?
      Canadian Social Science 6 (4): 231–37.

Kavanagh, C. 2013. “Getting Smart and Scaling Up: Responding to the Impact of Organized Crime on
       Governance in Developing Countries.? Report, New York University Center on International
       Cooperation, New York.

Kayode Ajayi, F., I. A. Adeniji, and E. O. Adu. 2008. “Graduate Unemployment in Nigeria: A Blind Spot in
       the Nation’s Educational System.? African Symposium 8 (2): 77.
       http://www.ncsu.edu/aern/TAS8.2/TAS8.2Ajayi.pdf.

                                                    39
Keen, David. 2002. “‘Since I Am a Dog, Beware My Fangs’: Beyond a ‘Rational Violence’ Framework in
       the Sierra Leonean War.? Crisis States Program Working Paper Series No. 14, Development
       Studies Institute, London School of Economics, London.

Keen, David. 2005. Conflict and Collusion in Sierra Leone. Oxford: Curry.

Korboe, D., and A. Williams. 2012. “Young Women: Life Choices and Livelihoods in Urban Areas in
       Ghana.? Report, Action Aid Ghana, Accra.

Krantz, Lasse. 2001. “The Sustainable Livelihood Approach to Poverty Reduction.? Division for Policy and
        Socio-Economic Analysis, Swedish International Development Cooperation Agency, Stockholm.
        http://www.forestry.umn.edu/prod/groups/cfans/@pub/@cfans/@forestry/documents/asset/c
        fans_asset_202603.pdf.

Kumar, A. 2011. “Understanding the Emerging Role of Motorcycles in African Cities: A Political Economy
       Perspective.? SSATP Discussion Paper 13, Urban Transport Series, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Langevang, Thilde. 2008. “‘We Are Managing!’ Uncertain Paths to Respectable Adulthoods in Accra,
       Ghana.? Geoforum 39 (6): 2039–47. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2008.09.003.

Langevang, Thilde, and Katherine V. Gough. 2012. “Diverging Pathways: Young Female Employment and
       Entrepreneurship in Sub-Saharan Africa.? Geographical Journal 178 (3): 242–52. doi:
       10.1111/j.1475-4959.2011.00457.x.

Lawal, M. 2002. “Constraints to Small-Scale Mining in Nigeria: Policies and Strategies for Development.?
        Centre for Energy, Petroleum and Mineral Law and Policy Annual Review, Dundee Yearbook of
        International Natural Resources and Energy Law and Policy, University of Dundee, Dundee.

Leavy, J., and N. Hossain. 2014. “Who Wants to Farm? Youth Aspirations, Opportunities and Rising Food
         Prices.? IDS Working Paper, vol. 2014, no 439, Brighton, UK.

Locke, Catherine, and Dolf J. H. Lintelo. 2012. “Young Zambians 'Waiting' for Opportunities and ‘Working
        Towards’ Living Well: Lifecourse and Aspirations in Youth Transitions.? Journal of International
        Development 24 (6): 777–94. doi: 10.1002/jid.2867.

Lyons, Michal, and Simon Snoxell. 2005. “Sustainable Urban Livelihoods and Marketplace Social Capital:
        Crisis and Strategy in Petty Trade.? Urban Studies 42 (8): 1301–20.

Maconachie, Roy, and Gavin Hilson. 2011. “Safeguarding Livelihoods or Exacerbating Poverty? Artisanal
      Mining and Formalization in West Africa,? Natural Resources Forum 35: 293–303. Wiley Online
      Library.

Mark, M. 2014, March 20. “Illegal Miners: Poisoning Is Better than Poverty.? Mail & Guardian.
       http://mg.co.za/article/2014-03-19-illegal-miners-poisoning-is-better-than-poverty.


                                                    40
Matlon, J. 2011. “Il est garçon: Marginal Abidjanais Masculinity and the Politics of Representation.?
       Poetics 39 (5): 380–406.

McArthur, J. W. 2014. “Pushing the Employment Frontiers for Africa’s Rural and Urban Youth.? Paper,
      Foresight Africa, Brookings Institution, Washington, DC.
      http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Research/Files/Reports/2014/foresight%20africa%202014/
      01%20foresight%20employment%20rural%20urban%20youth%20mcarthur.pdf.

Menzel, Anne. 2011. “Between Ex-combatization and Opportunities for Peace: The Double-Edged
       Qualities of Motorcycle-Taxi Driving in Urban Postwar Sierra Leone.? Africa Today 58 (2): 96–
       127.

Mitullah, W. 2003. “Street Vending in African Cities: A Synthesis of Empirical Findings from Kenya, Côte
        d’Ivoire, Ghana, Zimbabwe, Uganda and South Africa.? Background Paper, World Development
        Report 2005, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Obara, L., and H. Jenkins. 2006. “Land Use Disputes in Ghana’s Mining Communities: Developing
        Sustainable Strategies.? Working Paper No. 36, Centre for Business Relationships,
        Accountability, Sustainability and Society, Swindon, UK.

Oda, Yukiyo. 2005. “Women Working at Hairdressing: A Case Study of a Rapidly Increasing Business
       Among Women in Urban Ghana.? Supplementary issue, African Study Monographs, 29: 83–94.

Olaiya, T. A. 2014. “Youth and Ethnic Movements and Their Impacts on Party Politics in ECOWAS
         Member States.? SAGE Open 4 (1). doi: 10.1177/2158244014522072.
         http://sgo.sagepub.com/lookup/doi/10.1177/2158244014522072.

Olubomehin, O. O. 2012. “The Development and Impact of Motorcycles as Means of Commercial
      Transport in Nigeria.? Research on Humanities and Science 2 (6).

Onuoha, F. C. 2014. “Why Do Youth Join Boko Haram?? Special Report, US Institute for Peace,
      Washington, DC.

Oteng-Ababio, M., and E. Agyemang. 2012. “Virtue or Necessity? Urbanisation, Urban Growth and
       Okada Services in Accra, Ghana.? Journal of Geography and Geology 4 (1): 148–62.

Otoo, M., J. Fulton, G. Ibro, and J. Lowenberg-DeBoer. 2011. “Women Entrepreneurship in West Africa:
       The Cowpea Street Food Sector in Niger and Ghana.? Journal of Developmental
       Entrepreneurship 16 (01): 37–63.

Owusu, E. E., and G. Dwomoh. “The Impact of Illegal Mining on the Ghanaian Youth: Evidence from
       Kwaebibirem District in Ghana.? Research on Humanities and Social Sciences 2 (6).

Page, J. 2012. “Fragile States and Development in West Africa.? Report, United Nations Economic
         Commission for Africa, Niamey.
                                                    41
Peters, Krijn. 2011. War and the Crisis of Youth in Sierra Leone. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Philipps, J. 2013. Ambivalent Rage: Youth Gangs’ Inner?City Protests in Conakry, Guinea. Paris: Editions
        L’Harmattan.

Pijpers, R. 2011. “When Diamonds Go Bust: Contextualising Livelihood Changes in Rural Sierra Leone.?
         Journal of International Development 23: 1068–79.

Portland Communications. n.d. “How Africa Tweets.? http://www.portland-communications.com/wp-
        content/uploads/2014/03/How-Africa-Tweets.pdf.

Reitano, T., and M. Shaw 2014. “People’s Perspectives of Organised Crime in West Africa and the Sahel.?
        Report, Institute for Security Studies, Pretoria.

Richards, Paul. 1996. Fighting for the Rainforest: War, Youth & Resources in Sierra Leone. Oxford: Currey.

Richards, Paul. 2005. "To Fight or to Farm? Agrarian Dimensions of the Mano River Conflicts (Liberia and
        Sierra Leone)." African Affairs 104 (417): 571–90.

Richards, Paul. 2006. "Rebels and Intellectuals in Sierra Leone’s Civil War." African Studies Review 49 (1):
        119–23.

Richards, Paul, Khadija Bah, and Paul Vincent. 2004. “Social Capital and Survival: Prospects for
        Community-Driven Development in Post-Conflict Sierra Leone.? Social Development Papers No.
        12, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Schraven, B. 2013. “Youths Between Urbanization and Poverty: Livelihood Opportunities and Challenges
       of Informal Apprenticeships in Ghana.? In Apprenticeship in a Globalised World: Premises,
       Promises and Pitfalls, ed. S. Akoojee, P. Gonon, U. Hauschildt, and C. Hofmann. Zurich: LiT
       Verlag.

Skelton, R. 2013. “Meth Labs Found in West Africa as Transit Hub Turns to Producing.? Bloomberg.
        http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-03-15/meth-labs-found-in-west-africa-as-transit-hub-
        turns-to-producing.html.

Skinner, C. 2008. “Street Trade in Africa: A Review.? WIEGO Working Paper No. 5, Women in Informal
        Employment Globalizing and Organizing, Cambridge, MA.

Sommers, M. 2007. West Africa’s Youth Employment Challenge: The Case of Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone
      and Côte d’Ivoire. Vienna: UNIDO.

Sumberg, James, Nana Akua Anyidoho, Michael Chasukwa, Blessings Chinsinga, Jennifer Leavy, Getnet
      Tadele, Stephen Whitfield, and Joseph Yaro. 2014. “Young People, Agriculture, and Employment
      in Rural Africa.? WIDER Working Paper 2014/080, World Institute for Development Economics
      Research, Helsinki. http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/pdf/outputs/Futureagriculture/wp2014-080.pdf.

                                                    42
Tschakert, P. 2009. "Recognizing and Nurturing Artisanal Mining as a Viable Livelihood.? Resources Policy
       34 (1–2): 24–31.

UNDPKO (United Nations Department of Peacekeeping Operations). 2010. Second Generation
     Disarmament, Demobilization and Reintegration (DDR) Practices in Peace Operations. New York:
     UNDPKO.

UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa). 2011. “Addressing the Youth Education and
       Employment Nexus in the Global Economy.? Africa Youth Report 2011, Economic Commission
       for Africa.
       http://www.uneca.org/sites/default/files/publications/african_youth_report_2011_final.pdf.

UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime). 2013. “Transnational Organised Crime in West
      Africa: A Threat Assessment.? Final report, UNODC, Vienna.

Urdal, Henrik. 2006. “A Clash of Generations? Youth Bulges and Political Violence.? International Studies
        Quarterly 50 (3): 607–29.

USAID (United States Agency for International Development). 2013. “State of the Field Report:
       Examining the Evidence in Youth Workforce Development.? Report, USAID, Washington, DC.
       http://www.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/documents/1865/USAID%20state%20of%20the%20fiel
       d%20youth%20workforce%20development%20final%202_11.pdf.

Van der Geest, Kees. 2010. “Rural Youth Employment in Developing Countries: A Global View.?
       Overview/Synthesis No. 1, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.
       http://dare.uva.nl/document/333951.

Van Gyampo, R. E., and Obeng-Odoom, F. 2013. "Youth Participation in Local and National Development
       in Ghana: 1620–2013.? Journal of Pan African Studies 5 (9): 129–49.

de Verdière, M. C., C. Perret, R. Weber, and J. Brito. 2009. West African Perspectives Resources for
       Development. Paris: Sahel and West Africa Club and OECD.

Vigh, H. 2006. Navigating Terrains of War—Youth and Soldiering in Guinea-Bissau. Oxford: Berghahn.

Woltjer, L. 2006. “Analysis of Vocational Education and Training: Ghana.? Report, Woord en Daad,
        Gorinchem, Netherlands. http://www.search4dev.nl/download/372006/209975.pdf.

World Bank. 2011. World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security and Development. Washington
       DC: World Bank.




                                                    43
