                                                         98902

Responding to the Challenge of Fragility
      and Security in West Africa:
 Natural Resources, Extractive Industry
    Investment, and Social Conflict




  Dr. Roy Maconachie, Radhika Srinivasan, and Nicholas Menzies


              Fragility, Conflict, and Violence Group
                           World Bank
                              2015

                                                                 1
Table of Contents
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................................ 3
Abbreviations ................................................................................................................... 4
1. Introduction ................................................................................................................. 5
2. Interstate tensions and extractive industry expansion ................................................... 9
3. Intrastate conflict around revenue distribution ........................................................... 12
4. Extractive industry conflict within communities .......................................................... 17
   4.1     Labor conditions and employment ................................................................................ 18
   4.2     Loss of land and livelihood resources ............................................................................. 20
   4.3     Environmental degradation ........................................................................................... 21
   4.4     Insufficient community consultation and compensation................................................. 22

5. Conclusion .................................................................................................................. 23
   5.1     Broadening the view of governance ............................................................................... 24
   5.2     Deepening governance focus ......................................................................................... 25

References ..................................................................................................................... 27




                                                                                                                                 2
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Alexandre Marc, Michael Jarvis, Gavin Hilson, Elizabeth Fortin,
Richard Fanthorpe, Sophiko Skhirtladze, and Deval Desai for their helpful comments on a previous
draft of the chapter.




                                                                                              3
Abbreviations
ASM       artisanal and small-scale mining

CDA       community development agreement

CDC       Community Development Committee

CSR       corporate social responsibility

DACDF     Diamond Area Community Development Fund

ECOWAS    Economic Community of West African States

EIR       Extractive Industries Review

EITI      Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative

ESIA      environmental and social impact assessment

FPIC      free, prior, and informed consent

GDP       gross domestic product

GRA       Ghana Revenue Authority

IMF       International Monetary Fund

MDF       Mineral Development Fund

MNJ       Mouvement des Nigériens pour la Justice

SITR      standard international trade classification

WAEMU     West African Economic and Monetary Union




                                                          4
1. Introduction
The inability to unlock natural resource wealth for the benefit of developing countries’ local
populations—a phenomenon popularly known as the “resource curse? or the “paradox of plenty?—
has spawned extensive debate among researchers and policy makers in recent years.1 There is now a
well-established body of literature exploring the links between natural resources and conflict, with
some sources estimating that over the past 60 years, 40 percent of civil wars have been associated
with natural resources (UN, 2012a). The West African subregion is no stranger to the resource curse,
with numerous resource-rich states having strong links to instability and conflict (for example, Sierra
Leone, Liberia, Guinea, Côte d’Ivoire, Nigeria, Mali, and Niger). In a number of recent conflicts,
warring factions have been able to access “lootable? resources (that is, resources such as alluvial
diamonds and gemstones that have a high value-to-weight ratio, and can be easily appropriated and
transported by unskilled workers) through artisanal extraction, which some scholars have suggested
has been particularly amenable to fuelling and prolonging “greed-based? insurgency.2

While an informative debate has coalesced around the issue of violent conflict and the artisanal
extraction of lootable resources, West Africa’s recent boom in extractive industry investment has
become a new object of political and economic concern. Driven by soaring commodity prices and
heightened resource demands from the world’s emerging economies, the globalization of the
extractive industries has also led to dramatic technological, organizational, and regulatory changes in
resource-rich West Africa. Indeed, many governments have adopted new mining codes, or revised
existing ones, to stimulate a flood of foreign direct investment in mineral extraction (Otto et al.,
2006; Bridge, 2004).

The scope and impact of these investments have been remarkable, having profound ramifications on
economies and societies across the West African subregion. Six of the ten West African countries
represented in Table 1 are characterized as “resource rich? by International Monetary Fund (IMF)
classifications, with a number of economies demonstrating a high dependence on the export
revenues generated from the extractive industries. Nigeria, for example, receives 91 percent of its
export revenues from extractives (oil and gas). Meanwhile, Guinea possesses an estimated 30
percent of global bauxite reserves, and in 2012 mining accounted for approximately one quarter of
the country’s gross domestic product (GDP) and 85 percent of its export earnings.



1
  For example, the appropriation and mismanagement of high-value natural resources has been frequently
cited as a key factor in triggering, escalating, or prolonging conflicts in all corners of sub-Saharan Africa (see for
example, Collier and Hoeffler, 2001; Elbadawi and Sambanis, 2002; Ross, 2003; Bannon and Collier, 2003;
Fearon, 2004). However, there continues to be considerable disagreement over the causal factors of conflict in
resource-rich countries, with some scholars attributing conflict to resource politics (“grievance?) and others
basing their analysis on exploitative economic interests (“greed?). For a more complete overview of the “greed
vs. grievance? thesis, see Berdal and Malone (2001) or Collier and Hoeffler (2004).
2
  Many scholars have explored the links between lootable resources and civil violence, drawing different
conclusions from compiled datasets on wars and intermittent conflicts (for example, see Berdal, 2005; Collier
and Hoeffler, 2004; Korf, 2005; Regan and Norton, 2005). Humphreys (2005), for example, notes that
diamonds tend to shorten civil wars by facilitating military victories rather than negotiated settlements. Ross
(2004a, 2004b), on the other hand, observes that lootable resources could make conflict so profitable that one
or more combatants lose their incentive to reach a peace settlement, a view that is reinforced by le Billon
(2001, 2006).

                                                                                                                    5
                                                Table 1. Growth and significance of extractive industry investment in West Africa

                                                                                                                                            % of tax
                 GDP (in US$   GDP per capita   Real GDP                                                                                                    EITI
                                                           Extractive industry contribution to GDP    % export income from extractives   revenue from                                               IMF
                    2005        (in US$ 2005     growth                                                                                                 membership    Key natural resourcese
                                                                             (%)b                                 revenuesb               extractives                                          classificationf
                  billions)a       billions)a     ratea                                                                                                   statusd
                                                                                                                                           revenuesc
                                                 2005–
Country          2005   2012   2005     2012               2005g        2012h        2005–2012i      2005g      2012h       2005–2012i    2006–2010        2013                                    2012
                                                 2012
Burkina Faso     5.5    8.1    407      493       6%         0%          18%             6%           1%         78%            37%                     Compliant    Gold                      Resource poor
Côte d’Ivoire    16.4   19.0   941      958       2%        13%          18%            16%          28%         35%            32%                     Compliant    Oil/gas                   Resource rich
Ghana            10.7   18.4   502      724       8%         9%          19%            13%          34%         63%            53%                     Compliant    Gold/oil                  Resource poor
Guineaj          2.9    3.5    307      308       3%        23%          25%            24%          78%         85%            78%          23%        Candidate    Mining products           Resource rich
Liberia          0.5    1.2    166      276       11%                                                                                        16%        Compliant    Gold/diamond/iron ore     Resource rich
Mali             5.3    7.1    444      480       5%        14%          15%            17%          65%         71%            75%          13%        Compliant    Gold                      Resource rich
Niger            3.4    5.0    258      290       5%         7%          17%            11%          47%         76%            59%                     Compliant    Uranium                   Resource rich
                 112.   177.
Nigeria                        804      1052      6%        40%          21%            30%          98%         84%            91%          76%        Compliant    Oil/gas
                  2      6                                                                                                                                                                     Resource rich
Senegal          8.7    10.9   773      797       4%         4%          6%              5%          24%         32%            28%                     Candidate    Mining products           Resource poor
Sierra Leone     1.6    2.6    318      435       7%                                                                                                    Compliant    Diamond                   Resource poor




________________________
a
   World Development Indicators.
b
   Author’s calculations, World Integrated Trade Solutions (WITS) database , and World Development Indicators. Extractive export revenue comprises of the commodities in SITC sections 27
(crude fertilizer, minerals); 28 (metalliferous ores, scrap); 68 (nonferrous metals), 3 (mineral fuels), and 97 (gold nonmonetary excluding ores).
c
   IMF, 2012.
d
   EITI website, accessed May 27, 2014.
e
   EITI website and IMF, 2012.
f
  IMF, 2012. Country characterized as resource rich if it has either natural resource revenue or exports at least 20% of total fiscal revenue and exports, respectively over 2006 –2010 (average).
g
   2006 for Nigeria.
h
   2011 for Burkina Faso and 2008 for Guinea.
i
  Includes some missing values.
j
  Last available trade data for Guinea is from 2008.



                                                                                                                                                                                                             6
Moreover, it is anticipated that the country’s “tier-one? Simandou iron ore project will eventually
generate revenue in excess of 130 percent of the country’s current annual GDP, based on predicted
iron ore prices and production growth (MGI, 2013).

In reviewing Table 1, it is apparent that on average, all of the countries listed experienced positive
GDP growth rates between 2005–2012, and some countries performed exceptionally well. In Sierra
Leone, for example, World Bank estimates suggest that real GDP growth increased 13 percent in
2013, 15 percent in 2012, and 6 percent in 2011, due largely to the commencement of iron ore
production (World Bank, 2013). Likewise in Ghana, reports suggest that the production value of
mining, which is predominantly gold, has grown by 290 percent since 2000 (ICMM, 2012, cited in
Standing and Hilson, 2013), with mining accounting for over 25 percent of trade export in the
country. Other West African countries, such as Burkina Faso, Guinea, and Côte d’Ivoire have also
increased gold production dramatically, and Mali, which had no commercial gold industry in 1990,
has grown to become Africa’s third largest gold producer (Smith, 2012), with 71 percent of export
earnings coming from mining in 2012.

Proponents of extractive-led development trajectories, including the World Bank Group, have high
expectations and aspirations for the opportunities that natural resource wealth may open up to host
governments and the private sector. Indeed, if managed effectively, there is considerable scope for
resource endowments to generate significant revenue flows, which could translate into
improvements in the quality of life in one of Africa’s poorest regions. On the other hand, however,
this surge of investment has also been accompanied by an emerging increase in social mobilization
and conflict around the adverse effects of mining and hydrocarbon projects. The detrimental
impacts of extractive industry expansion have galvanized new interest in the “resource curse? thesis
for policy makers, international donors, and the media, as place-based struggles surrounding the
unequal patterns of extractive-led development have been identified as a possible trigger for
insecurity and conflict in fragile states.3 In some West African countries, extractive industry
investments have had more limited economic impacts, and there has been very little “trickle down?
to local populations. Though empirical work in Africa on the local welfare effects of resource booms
is underdeveloped, there is a nascent literature on the “capture of resource rents at the national
level with little spillover to local communities.?4 More problematic, however, is the fact that the
mining economy can lead to “enclave? development with few backward and forward linkages and
without sustained prosperity of a wider region (African Economic Outlook, 2013). As Ferguson (2006)
has warned, resource extraction that is concentrated in “exclusionary spatial enclaves? tends to
benefit elite groups, has little impact on wider society, and reproduces the inequalities that often
trigger conflict.



3
  In the context of this chapter, conflict can be defined as a process that takes place on a continuum, ranging
from low-level tension to scenarios where there is violence and a total breakdown of order. However, while
conflict is often driven by asymmetries and inequality, it should be pointed out that it is not always an
indicator of “development gone wrong? and may instead be a necessary force for positive social change (UN,
2012a). As Bebbington et al. (2008b) note, social protest and low-intensity conflict can induce the emergence
of more inclusive public institutions, some of which may lead to the greater defence of human and citizen
rights.
4
   As noted in World Bank (2014a), this gap in rigorous research is being addressed through systematic
empirical investigation in a forthcoming study.

                                                                                                             7
The task of achieving sustainable extractive-led development further remains challenging as
resource dependency exposes West African economies to “boom-and-bust? commodity cycles.5
Fluctuating global markets and a significant drop in commodity prices can place major strains on the
public finances of resource dependent countries, further deepening and extending poverty, and
potentially exacerbating horizontal divisions in populations (OECD, 2013). Figure 1 illustrates the
significant fluctuations in GDP growth rates over the period from 2005–2012, with the highest
variations being experienced in Côte d’Ivoire, Niger, and Sierra Leone. This volatility is particularly
alarming in the context of West Africa, considering that no region in the world has a higher
concentration of fragile states (Kaplan, 2013), and that the majority of countries in the region
continue to be highly susceptible to instability.

Figure 1. GDP growth rates, West African countries

                                                                                                Burkina Faso
                            15
                                                                                                Cote d'Ivoire
                                                                                                Ghana
     % Change in real GDP




                            10
                                                                                                Guinea
                                                                                                Liberia
                             5                                                                  Mali
                                                                                                Niger

                             0                                                                  Nigeria
                                 2005   2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012   2013   Senegal
                                                                                                Sierra Leone
                            -5
Source: World Development Indicators.

In short, while mining reform and its attendant international investment has, in many cases,
increased government rents and helped some countries achieve phenomenal economic growth,
international extractive industry expansion has had a range of social, political, and economic
implications for different actors at all scales—from the global to the local. In particular, however, the
livelihood impacts of intensified resource extraction at the community-level have been especially
varied and profound. Diverging local interests and agendas, and different positions on economic
opportunities, environmental compensation, or indigenous rights have generated complex and
diverse social responses (Horowitz, 2011). As a “new scramble? for natural resources in West Africa
has caused sweeping environmental and socioeconomic transformation, the conversion of resource
rents into sustainable meaningful development outcomes that address the “heterogeneous
subjectivities? within development outcomes at the community level has been an ongoing challenge
for national governments (Bebbington et al., 2013).




5
  For example, as noted by Boakye et al. (2012): “Between 2000 and 2011, the standard deviation of
international iron ore prices (in US$ terms) was equal to 67 percent of its average —and prices. So countries
will not only need to be prepared to absorb large shocks, but also manage the uncertainty related to it, with
strong implications for macroeconomic policy and the management of citizens’ expectations? (p. 3).

                                                                                                                8
In exploring the attendant challenges, obstacles, and constraints to effective governance of the
natural resources sector, the objective of this chapter is to identify and deepen understanding of the
factors that may exacerbate both interstate and intrastate conflict in resource-rich West Africa. In
doing so, we suggest that governance initiatives that seek to address the root causes of extractive
industry conflict must: (1) employ a broader perspective beyond the formal use of power by national
executives to include corporate governance, rich country regulatory regimes, and subnational state
and quasi-state authorities; and (2) be more deeply focused on creating equitable engagement
frameworks for each resource extraction site.

Following this introduction, Section 2 provides an overview of interstate tensions in West Africa in
order to improve understanding of the drivers of fragility that trigger conflict between countries
around extractive industry investment. Here, the discussion is grounded in examples in which
interstate tensions have been apparent, including the case of the Mano River Union—Côte d’Ivoire,
Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone—a region with a history of conflict, and where the exploitation of
commercial deposits of high-value resources may continue to have a potentially destabilizing effect.
Section 3 focuses on the decentralization of natural resource revenues, a process that proponents
believe can help manage grievances and defuse intrastate tension in areas directly affected by
resource extraction, but one that is also not without challenges. Drawing upon the case of Ghana’s
Mineral Development Fund, the section explores the potential for conflict (and conflict triggers) to
arise when the redistribution of extractive industry revenues to subnational regions takes place. In
doing so, it becomes apparent that the capture and misuse of revenues from the fund is as much a
political issue as it is a policy or technical one. This sets the stage for Section 4, which focuses in
greater detail on extractive industry-related conflict within catchment communities, and how
contestation is most often a result of unequal power relationships. Section 5, the conclusion,
summarizes and reflects upon some of the challenges and struggles over resource management
associated with West Africa’s recent resource boom, and draws out some of the cross-cutting
themes. Here, suitable entry points for future lines of inquiry and engagement are identified.

2. Interstate tensions and extractive industry expansion
Over the past two decades, West Africa has become one of the most unstable subregions on the
continent, with Liberia, Sierra Leone, Côte d’Ivoire, Nigeria, Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, and more
recently Mali and Niger all experiencing conflict or some degree of political instability. The roots of
West African conflicts, as Obi (2012) remarks, are complex and multifaceted, and embedded in the
“interplay of historical factors, socio-economic crisis, legacies of authoritarianism and the politics of
exclusion, international forces, and local struggles.? Not only are many West African countries
archetypical “fragile? states, but of particular concern is the strong possibility that localized conflicts
might spill over borders and draw in the populations of neighboring states where similar conditions
of sociopolitical instability exist. Indeed, in many countries, a toxic mixture of chronic poverty, ethnic
marginalization, and the widespread availability of small arms and weapons can serve as drivers of
subregional conflict that permit “contagion? effects to occur across porous borders.

In situations where the unequal distribution of resource rents happens to intersect with ethnic or
religious cleavages, the risk of ethnic rebellion or succession can escalate and spread (Østby, 2008;
Stewart, 2002). In the West African Sahel, for example, the recent Tuareg rebellions in Mali and
Niger between 2007–2009 were catalyzed by shared socioeconomic grievances and perceptions of

                                                                                                         9
marginalization (Emerson, 2011).6 In the case of Niger, the main ongoing grievance of the Tuareg
rebel group, Mouvement des Nigériens pour la Justice (MNJ), has concerned the recent expansion of
uranium mining in the Aïr-Talak-Tamesna region of the country, and demands for a more equitable
share of mining revenues (Keenan, 2008). As the Tuareg insurgency in Mali continues to destabilize
the north of the country, the possible spillover of conflict into Niger could have a debilitating impact
on uranium mining companies and communities, particularly the two largest mine sites at Arlit and
Akokan, which are controlled by the French corporation AREVA (Elischer, 2013). For some analysts,
the threat of a pan-Tuareg rebellion continues to generate concern for wider regional instability
(Keenan, 2008).

Indeed, porous and contested borders between West African states remain zones of unmonitored,
illegal activities, and in a number of cases have served as conduits by which intrastate conflicts spill
over into neighboring countries. The Mano River Union countries—Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, and
Côte d'Ivoire—provide a lucid example of how smuggling and the illicit trade of “lootable? resources
can exacerbate regional conflicts. Sierra Leone’s protracted civil war of the 1990s is a case in point,
where a cross-border exchange of diamonds-for-weapons took place with Liberian President Charles
Taylor, an arrangement that both fuelled and prolonged the decade-long war. Likewise, in Côte
d’Ivoire, evidence suggests that rebel groups illegally exploited and exported diamonds, gold, and
cocoa to finance the conflict that broke out in September 2002 (UN, 2012b). As Silberfein and
Conteh (2006) note, illicit resource flows across borders are very difficult to regulate or contain, and
they usually continue to occur even when sanctions and embargoes are in place because they are
often controlled by powerful private interests.

Associated with the ongoing issue of cross-border smuggling between the Mano River Union
countries is the tension placed on intergovernmental relationships due to tax avoidance and loss of
potential government revenue. The illicit transborder flow of lootable resources such as diamonds,
gold, or even timber represents a major obstacle for governments to regulate, and marks a
significant loss of revenue that could be used to promote development in the countries of
extraction. Although most artisanally mined diamonds and gold are sold through unregulated
informal channels, the harmonization of the 3 percent tax on diamond exports in Sierra Leone,
Guinea, and Liberia has been an attempt to minimize the extent to which rough diamonds disappear
across borders into clandestine trade networks. Evidence suggests that when there is a small
difference in diamond export taxes between neighboring states, smuggling will occur into the
country where tax rates are lowest (D4D, 2006).

While all four Mano River Union countries have in the past demonstrated clear links between natural
resources and instability, they continue to be vulnerable to tensions that are strongly influenced by
the recent discoveries of some of the richest mineral lodes in sub-Saharan Africa. A series of
significant mineral belts run through the subregion, and geological exploration has revealed a
multiplicity of economically exploitable low-value, high-bulk “mineral clusters? (for example, iron ore
and bauxite), which has attracted the attention of foreign investors (World Bank, 2010). Many of

6
  The Tuareg are a nomadic Berber group who are dispersed across northwest Africa. Emerson (2011)
estimates the Tuareg population to be 1.5–1.7 million, with more than two-thirds living in Mali and Niger.
However, due to postcolonial fragmentation, the Tuareg make up no more than 10 percent of the population
in every country where they are found, and because of their minority status they have often been the subject
of discrimination and economic marginalization (Emerson 2011).

                                                                                                         10
these deposits are located near national borders7 and if extraction progresses as planned, there will
undoubtedly be transborder social and environmental impacts to address. In particular, the Upper
Guinea Forest system and several major river basins stretch across all four Mano River countries,
and an integrated transboundary approach will be required to contain the spread of detrimental
impacts.

If the social and environmental impacts of transborder extractive industry investments can be
managed and monitored in a subregional context, and the appropriate institutional and regulatory
mechanisms are put in place, the chance of interstate conflict will be reduced. However, a further
regional issue of importance concerns possible tensions over the development of shared
infrastructure for the exportation of bulk minerals. The most economically viable route for mineral
exportation may often require regional integration, involving transborder rail transit or the use of
ports in a neighboring country. Harvey (2014), for example, suggests that iron ore production plans
at Guinea’s Simandou project are being severely impeded by infrastructure constraints. Most
notably, it remains unclear whether the most feasible option would be to upgrade the old Lamco
railway line through Liberia and ship ore out of the deep water port near Buchanan, or to construct a
new line from the mine site to Conakry. In such situations, governments must balance the political
and economic challenges of infrastructural development with concerns over security and the desire
to maintain control of the benefits of resource extraction and any positive economic spillover effects
that accrue. Owing to the extreme instability that has characterized the Mano River Union subregion
in the recent past, integrated regional political and economic cooperation is a necessity if tension
and potential conflict are to be avoided. At the same time, however, coordinated infrastructure
development also presents an opportunity to stimulate zones of new economic activity along
“resource corridors? that span national borders, as has been encouraged in other parts of sub-
Saharan Africa (for example, the Maputo Development Corridor between South Africa and
Mozambique) (World Bank, 2010).

In summary, recent extractive industry investments in the newly discovered “mineral clusters? of the
Mano River Union present a host of new interstate challenges for investors and governments alike.
However, these same contests may also have increasing salience in other porous boundary zones in
West Africa. Most notably, international attention has increasingly been focused on a series of new
hydrocarbon discoveries in the Gulf of Guinea. More specifically, the stretch of coastline spanning
from Gabon to Sierra Leone—an oil-rich area of strategic economic importance—has been identified
as a site of potential conflict. While the oil-rich Bakassi Peninsula between Nigeria and Cameroon
has already proven to be an area of extreme tension between the two countries in the past, new
offshore hydrocarbon discoveries in other areas of the Gulf of Guinea will likely create further
tension between other regional countries. Indeed, 70 percent of Africa’s oil production comes from
the Gulf of Guinea, and with increasing U.S. geostrategic interest in the region, production will
undoubtedly continue to rise. At the same time, the region has been described as one of the most
dangerous maritime areas in the world, with weak transborder policies and a lack of cooperation
between states, which has allowed criminal networks to diversify and flourish (International Crisis
Group, 2012).


7
 For example, a recent Mineral Sector Strategic Assessment of the Mano River Union carried out by the World
Bank (2010) identified the Nimba region of Sierra Leone, Guinea, and Côte d’Ivoire, and the Mano River
watershed spanning the Liberia-Sierra Leone border, as two transborder mining areas of regional sensitivity.

                                                                                                         11
In this light, there is an increasingly important role for regional governance bodies to play in
addressing the many interstate concerns associated with West Africa’s extractives boom. Most
notably, the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the West African Economic
and Monetary Union (WAEMU) have both assumed a more active role in mining policy and
governance. Thus far, these bodies have predominantly been concerned with supporting efforts to
harmonize regional mining policy and legal frameworks. For example, the ECOWAS directive aims to
unify mining legislation and support a regional common code, addressing key issues that include
lessening tax competition, promoting infrastructure at regional levels, and protecting the
environment (Mayer Brown, 2010). In a similar vein, the WAEMU Common Mining Code “regulates
the ownership and grant of mineral titles, adopts a program for the protection of the environment,
defines a tax system applicable to minerals, [and] governs the recruitment and procurement rules?
(Mayer Brown, 2010, p. 5). While both of these initiatives are currently in an embryonic stage, the
development and implementation of a unified mining code for West Africa is arguably a positive step
toward reducing instability and enhancing the benefits of mineral sector development across the
region.

3. Intrastate conflict around revenue distribution
In addressing the potential for grievance-driven resource conflict at the local level and pursuing
more sustainable community-led trajectories, the decentralization of natural resource revenues and
decision making has attracted considerable international attention in recent years (for example, see
Ribot, 2004; Larsen, 2004). However, wider readings of the literature on decentralization and
resource governance indicate that opinions on the effectiveness of revenue sharing remain varied
and diverse. For example, skeptics argue that decentralized revenue sharing is problematic in
contexts where resource endowments are unevenly geographically distributed, or where societies
are divided on ethnic, religious, or linguistic fronts.8 In such situations, the unequal control of natural
resource benefits can exacerbate tension and motivate ethnic or identity-based conflicts (Haysom
and Kane, 2009). However, a second position that has gained increasing momentum maintains that
if carried out in a “transparent? and “participatory? fashion,9 decentralized natural resource
management can be an effective means of channelling benefits to local communities, allowing
citizens to voice their concerns, as well as minimizing horizontal inequalities between groups (Ross
et al., 2012; Brosio and Singh, 2013; Brosio, 2003).10 This has given rise to what some have referred



8
   This may be apparent, for example, in the case of Nigeria, where 95 percent of export earnings and 65
percent of government revenues are derived from the oil and gas sector, but only 9 of a total of 36 states are
oil producing (Aguilar et al., 2011).
9
   It should be noted that despite the importance of the concept s of “participation? and “transparency? in
debates concerning natural resource governance, a number of scholars have become increasingly skeptical of
their uncritical use in development policy and practice. For example, Hickey and Mohan (2005) have argued
that such concepts are now so ubiquitous and enshrined in mainstream development policy and practice that
they can essentially be “co-opted within disempowering agendas? to take on any meaning whatsoever (also
see Rahman, 1995). While it remains difficult to criticize the well-intentioned rhetoric of participation or
transparency, and we make reference to these terms throughout this chapter, we are aware of their uncritical
use and employ these concepts cautiously.
10
    In addition to decentralization, Ross et al. (2012) note a variety of other tactics that are often employed by
governments to reduce horizontal inequalities in resource-rich areas, including “creating incentives to hire
local workers, restricting the migration of workers to extractive regions, investing in local development, using

                                                                                                               12
to as a new “localist policy paradigm? in natural resource management (Arellano-Yanguas, 2011, p.
618), an approach that is premised on three main components: (1) the redistribution of resource
revenues to subnational and local governments; (2) the provision for local citizens to participate in
decision making on how devolved revenues are spent; and (3) the encouragement of institutional
actors (including extractive companies and civil society groups) to be actively involved in decision
making.

While different countries in West Africa employ a variety of approaches in implementing natural
resource revenue decentralization, broadly, subnational governments receive decentralized
mineral/oil revenues in three different ways: (1) local taxes levied directly on the resource industry;
(2) direct transfers from central government (such as the derivation principle employed in Nigeria);
and (3) indirect transfers from the central government targeted at producing regions (for example,
trust funds for (re)distributing resource revenues). Each of these approaches varies in the way in
which decentralization is operationalized, and central and subnational governments frequently have
differing views on how wealth-sharing schemes should be executed. One iteration in favor of greater
centralization argues that because subnational bodies often suffer from weak institutions and low
capacity, the best approach is for the central government—most typically the Ministry of Finance or
the appropriate sector ministry—to collect all revenues and make allocation decisions (Ross et al.,
2012). Another position supporting this case suggests that in situations where there is an uneven
spatial distribution of natural resources within a country, heavily decentralized approaches to
revenue sharing can create wide income gaps between provinces and increase inequality
(Wennmann, 2012).

Given West Africa’s historical tendency for resource revenues to be captured by ruling elites and fuel
patronage politics,11 contests over resource revenue distribution between national and subnational
governments continue to be common. Corruption remains a longstanding issue in many countries,
and central governments may be resistant to devolving revenues to the local level or supporting tax
schemes that benefit catchment communities, because this redirects resources that could be
captured centrally. In Sierra Leone, for example, a recent task force revealed that tax concessions
and duty waivers—which are typically negotiated between the central government and extractive
companies in the absence of effective parliamentary or media scrutiny—tend to benefit the central
elite over mining-affected rural populations (Prichard, 2013). In addition, the central government is
also currently in the process of establishing new Community Development Committees (CDCs) in
each mining site to manage mining companies’ mandatory contributions to community
development, as set out under the Mines and Mineral Act of 2009, rather than allowing local
councils to solely manage them (World Bank, 2014b). This reluctance for central government to
devolve resources and decision-making abilities to local government structures in essence
undermines their ability to effectively function. At the same time, however, it strengthens the
position of Paramount Chiefs, reinforcing their relationships with central government elites who are



nongovernmental organizations to mediate between local communities and extractive companies, promoting
transparency, and distributing revenues directly to the population? (p. 254).
11
   According to Thompson (2004), patronage or “clientelism? is a form of political contract where a mutually
beneficial exchange takes place between an actor who has authority based on power or access to resources
(the patron), and a weaker actor (the client) who offers support to legitimize an d preserve the patron’s
elevated position.

                                                                                                         13
“intimately involved in centre-local networks anchored by chiefdoms and don’t have the same
connection to local councils? (Fanthorpe et al., 2011, p. 19).12

While the reluctance of national bodies to decentralize revenues to subnational entities has a
longstanding history and continues to be a source of ongoing tension, many of the most serious
conflict triggers emerge between subnational recipients, after revenues have been devolved. Here,
the experience of Ghana and its Mineral Development Fund (MDF) is instructive in highlighting some
of the potential flashpoints, as well as development benefits, associated with local-level benefit
sharing. While Ghana is often held up by observers as a model of best practice based on its policy of
returning a small percentage of resource revenues to producing regions, there are a number of
factors that have undermined the country’s success in redistributing resource wealth and pursuing
more sustainable pathways to development at the local level. As noted by Standing and Hilson
(2013), in Ghana “mining tends to display complex and at times contradictory social and economic
outcomes at the local level; it may raise average per capita income, but also it can introduce new
forms of inequality and insecurity? (p. 5).

At the local level, Ghana is governed by both formal government administration bodies and the
more informal “traditional authorities,? or chieftaincies. Formally, the district assemblies oversee the
administration of town, area, and zone councils. In addition, however, working alongside the district
assemblies are the traditional authorities, who govern the “Stool Lands,? which occupy 80 percent of
Ghana’s total land territory.13 Of the country’s 95 Paramount Chiefs, Standing and Hilson (2013) add
that “the majority [reside] in the rural areas where mining in Ghana takes place—33 in the Ashanti
region alone, which contains some of the most productive gold mines? (p. 4).

Mining companies currently pay the Ghanaian central government a flat mineral royalty rate of 5
percent on a quarterly basis, which is collected by the Ghana Revenue Authority (GRA) and
deposited into the general state account (the "Consolidated Fund?).14 Of this revenue, 80 percent is
retained by the central government for general budget support. The other 20 percent is set aside by
the GRA and transferred into the MDF, which is initially managed by the Ministry of Finance and
Economic Planning. The funds in the MDF are then divided into two portions: 50 percent is
dispensed to local governance structures (that is, the traditional authorities and the district
assembly) through the Office of the Administrator of Stool Lands,15 and the other 50 percent



12
   See also Baldwin (2011), who explores the relationship between politicians and traditional leaders in the
wider African context. She argues that politicians often cede power to the local level to secure social contracts
with chiefs, who possess the ability to mobilize electoral support from “politically unaligned ethnic groups.?
13
    In Ghana, the “stool? symbolizes an ethnic social unit. The Paramount Chief represents the stool and
executes judicial, governance, and land management functions on its behalf. Stool lands controlled by the
chief are predominantly located in regions where there is a strong centralized political system, as is the case in
the Akan areas in southern Ghana. In these areas, as Mahama and Baffour (2009) note, the chief, or traditional
authority, “is inexplicitly linked to land ownership and holds the allodial title in land? (p. 28).
14
   In 2012, Ghana changed its mine royalty rate from a variable 3 –6 percent to a flat 5 percent of profits. While
reports vary, and accurate economic data is difficult to obtain, evidence suggests that in 2011, US$131.3
million was paid by mining companies into the government’s Consolidated Fund, which accounted for 14
percent of Ghana’s total internal revenue collection (Standing and Hilson, 2013, p. 4).
15
    The Administrator of the Stool Lands is responsible for dispensing funds to grassroots beneficiaries, as
outlined in Section 267(6) of the 2006 Minerals and Mining Act. These disbursements include a 25 percent
payment to the traditional authority for the “maintenance of the stool,? a 20 percent payment to the

                                                                                                               14
remains in the MDF to finance projects that promote development in mining communities and to
compensate affected residents for the detrimental impacts of extraction. In theory, under the new
Minerals Development Fund Bill, funds that are used to support community development projects
will be managed by Local Management Committees, which will include representation from a wide
range of stakeholders including the local government, mining companies, and the community.16 In
addition to these disbursements, traditional authorities may also receive surface rents and other
direct payments from mining companies, in some cases for their participation on the boards of
companies.

Under the MDF, an unprecedented amount of mining revenue has been returned to producing
communities, and evidence suggests that some receiving areas have used the fund wisely, financing
local infrastructure projects and service provisioning.17 But in other cases, the devolution of
revenues to affected communities has also caused factionalism and distrust, with concerns being
raised on three main fronts: (1) a lack of effective use of funds; (2) poor transparency and
accountability; and (3) ineffective citizen participation in decision making. Each of these three
concerns are often underscored by a high degree of elite capture, patronage, and clientelism, which
can negatively affect community cohesion and increase the potential to exacerbate tension and
conflict.

A further significant problem critics have noted of the MDF is that it lacks an effective legislative
mechanism to govern the management of funds.18 Standing and Hilson (2013) point out that 45
percent of all mineral revenues disbursed to the grassroots level in Ghana pass through the hands of
traditional authorities. Although there is an unspoken assumption that funds will be used for
community development projects, there are no transparency or accountability mechanisms to
regulate spending. This ambiguity, of course, may serve an important “political bargaining? function,
as central government actors are able to secure the support of traditional authorities at the
grassroots level.19 Nevertheless, considerable evidence suggests that payments to traditional
authorities often tend to finance expenditures that do not benefit local communities (ICMM, 2007),


traditional authority himself, and a 55 percent transfer to the District Assembly located within the jurisdiction
of the Stool Lands (GoG, 2013).
16
   However, as Maconachie (2010) has demonstrated in the case of Sierra Leone’s Diamond Area Community
Development Fund (DACDF), the creation of CDCs—which are composed of a wide cross-section of community
stakeholders—does not automatically ensure fair and equal community participation in decision making. In the
case of the DACDF, many CDC stakeholders have been marginalized, with chiefs and elites dominating decision
making in the group.
17
   For example, in Asutifi District in central Ghana, where Newmont Mining Corp. is engaged in large-scale gold
mining, revenues from the MDF have funded new schools, teachers’ quarters, police posts, and a local
government building (Boampong, 2012).
18
   As Hilson notes, it is presently unclear how decisions are made concerning the use of funds; the government
has consequently discussed plans to implement a Minerals Development Fund Bill. This piece of legislation
would provide the legal framework that the management of the fund presently lacks, helping to enhance
accountability (personal communication with Gavin Hilson, April 22, 2014).
19
   In Ghana, traditional authorities are in a relatively strong position compared to politicians because they are
not and never have been part of the state apparatus. Under the Fifth Republican Constitution, chieftaincy
affairs are completely separated from oversight by the politicians. At election time, however, politicians at the
central government level look for tacit endorsement by the chiefs, although the latter are formally banned
from politics and are expected by their constituents to remain nonpartisan. In this respect, chiefs are often
used by politicians as “vote banks? and are an important instrument for gaining grassroots support (personal
communication with Paul Nugent, May 21, 2014).

                                                                                                              15
which further creates acrimony and mistrust between communities, district assemblies, civil society,
and the mining companies. In addition, reports indicate that there are serious concerns about
collusion between traditional authorities and mining companies, which can marginalize community
interests and damage cohesion, in some cases becoming a focus of conflict and factionalism in
communities (Standing and Hilson, 2013).

Supporters of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)—a policy mechanism often
touted by donors and Western governments as the key to facilitating economic improvement in
resource-rich economies—argue that its implementation at the subnational level could go a long
way in reducing the mismanagement and diversion of revenues from sustainable development
projects (Aguilar et al., 2011). However, others have noted that the capture and misuse of resource
revenues are as much political issues as they are policy or technical ones (Bracking, 2009).
Consequently, better transparency does not necessarily translate into enhanced accountability or
meaningful development outcomes (Desai and Jarvis, 2012). Policy “fixes? such as the EITI will not,
on their own, be able to effectively address the misuse of MDF revenues by elite actors such as the
traditional authorities or district assemblies (Hilson and Maconachie, 2009). In Ghana, as in other
West African countries, captured resources serve an important function in securing political
contracts, where revenues are used to strengthen relations with clients under systems of
patronage.20

In summary, the equitable redistribution of resource wealth to subnational levels remains a
challenging task, given the intensity of contests over natural resource wealth in West Africa. A
recurrent theme in the recent history of Ghana and other resource-rich countries in West Africa has
been tension between opposing groups seeking to capture the benefits of resources. Networks of
power structuring those contests are shaped by the nature and form of national and subnational
governments, and also in the struggles over different forms and symbols of authority at the local
level. Traditional authorities, district councils, and elites have all sought greater control over mineral
wealth, while indigenous communities have endeavored to minimize adverse impacts, assert claims
to identity and land, and, where possible, maximize their returns from mining. While the interests
and relationships between these groups remain fluid, and contests may shift over time and be
replaced by new coalitions, situated somewhere in the middle are the extractive companies, which
often seek the path of least resistance by siding with elite groups, seeking to reduce transaction
costs and enter into complex and nontransparent deals over access to resources. These exchanges
have produced institutional arrangements that have often prioritized corporate demands over local
development, resulting in what Bebbington et al. (2008b) refer to as “an extroverted state with
more legitimacy vis-à-vis international interests than national citizens? (p. 892).21

20
   As a consequence, it has been suggested by a number of scholars and policy makers (for example, see Moss,
2011; Standing, 2014) that cash transfer schemes—monthly revenue transfers paid in the form of direct cash
benefits to all citizens in a country—could be an innovative policy solution to help reduce the corruption and
elite capture associated with resource wealth. However, others have noted that politically there are probably
only a narrow set of conditions under which cash transfer schemes are likely to be sustainable policy options
(McGuirk et al., 2014).
21
   At the same time, it should be noted that the “path of least resistance? pursued by extractive companies can
also be highly fluid over the life cycle of a mine, which may involve displacing certain elites in favor of other
more cooptable actors. In this sense, companies may pit local actors against each other through a process of
“divide and rule,? using conflict as a form of control (also see Ferguson, 2006). We are grateful to Deval Desai
for sharing this point.

                                                                                                              16
4. Extractive industry conflict within communities
While catchment populations in resource-rich areas are often the hardest hit by the negative
externalities of mining and hydrocarbon projects, an important point of departure for any
assessment of the local impacts of extraction rests on the recognition that “communities? are not
bounded, homogenous entities. Rather, they are defined by social differentiation and micropolitics.
As argued by Leach, Mearns, and Scoones (1997), in trying to come to grips with how community-
level actors respond to development outcomes, an alternative perspective “starts from the politics
of resource access and control among diverse social actors, and sees patterns of environmental
change as the outcomes of negotiation, or contestation, between social actors who may have very
different priorities? (p. 4). In some cases, images of consensual, harmonious communities have been
strategically constructed by local actors themselves to present a contextually unified counter-
position to powerful external actors, such as mining companies (Ahluwalia, 1997).

Recent scholarship on the extractive industries and development has explored the twin processes of
“accumulation by exploitation? and “accumulation by dispossession? (after Harvey, 2003), to deepen
understanding of the uneven nature of global investments in mining and hydrocarbon projects, and
the impacts this may have at the community level (for example, see Maconachie, 2014; Holden et
al., 2011; Horowitz, 2011; Bebbington et al., 2008b). While the first form of accumulation has
historically been concerned with labor exploitation and unequal relations of production, the second
has addressed the appropriation of key livelihood resources, such as land, territory, minerals, and
water. Both forms of accumulation are presented by Harvey (2003) as phenomena with a real
existence based on how value is transferred to owners of capital. However, the way in which
different individuals in catchment communities perceive and respond to the accumulation
associated with extractive industry expansion often varies considerably, and is influenced by
historical and contemporary experience, expectations of the future (Ferguson, 1999), and how
different actors experience and make sense of extraction. Depending on the context, extractive
industry investments have been variously met with resistance and rejection, by acquiescence
combined with demands for better labor conditions, and in some cases, outright acceptance in
anticipation of gainful employment and other development benefits. One of the major challenges in
managing the extractive sector boom and trying to mitigate conflict, therefore, is to ensure that
public expectations of the benefits of extractive-led development trajectories are effectively
managed and address the needs of a diverse range of stakeholders.

A related point worth noting is that in many West African countries, the “rolling back? of the state
and privatization of social service provisioning under neoliberal reform has brought about intensified
pressure on industrial mining and oil and gas companies to become “development providers,?
particularly in their immediate regions of operation. As pointed out by Bridge (2008), the extractive
industries are no longer merely regarded as commercial activities but rather “a means for territorial
modernization? (p. 390). Large-scale mining and oil and gas projects are often legitimized and
justified by host governments with reference to theories of “big push? modernization or regional
“growth-poles,? as instruments to support the agglomeration of economic activity. According to this
position, extractive sector investments will stimulate infrastructure development and “multiplier




                                                                                                   17
effects? that will drive economic growth and provide opportunities for resource-rich regions to “plug
into? the global economy (Bridge, 2008, p. 391).22

Both governments and a diverse range of actors within catchment communities, therefore, may
have high development expectations of multinational extractive companies, which are not always
able to meet these demands and deliver the anticipated downstream benefits.23 This is
understandable to a certain degree, as the primary objective of a company is not to “develop?
communities but rather to maximize profits and protect their investments for shareholders. It
should, however, also be noted that much of the current mineral exploration in West Africa is
carried out by much smaller “junior? operators—companies that are often barely capitalized and
need to find mineral deposits quickly to recover their costs. As such, junior companies may lack
competent community relations strategies or the means to implement corporate social
responsibility (CSR) programs in communities, and they are therefore more likely to “mishandle
community relations? (Bebbington et al., 2008b). A major obstacle for larger companies that acquire
the successful juniors is that they can also inherit acrimonious relationships with communities, and
sometimes ongoing conflicts.

While the impacts that multinational extractive companies are having at both national and
subnational levels are varied, complex, and far-reaching, it goes without saying that natural resource
extraction can, and frequently does, generate serious social, political, and economic problems at the
community level. In the remainder of this section, a range of case examples are drawn upon to
explore some of the most common grievances reported by those living in catchment communities.
Many of these of triggers have been well covered by the literature; for example, the dislocation of
livelihoods when land and water sources are appropriated or destroyed through the creation of
pollution; or the tension that results through an influx of migrant laborers into resource
communities. However, it is also apparent that there are often deep-seated structural dimensions
common to many West African states that can exacerbate these flashpoints, and can potentially
transform resource extraction sites into zones of grievance-driven conflict.

4.1     Labor conditions and employment

Mining—whether large-scale or small-scale, regulated or informal, capital-intensive or artisanal—can
be an important source of income generation in poor, employment-constrained economies, either
directly or indirectly through upstream and downstream multiplier effects. Across West Africa,
artisanal and small-scale mining (ASM)—low-tech, labor-intensive mineral extraction and
processing—has long served as a magnet for young, single, unemployed, unskilled laborers in search


22
    Other commentators have pointed out that the growth pole approach can potentially provide host
governments with an opportunity to meet some of the growing expectations of those living in catchment
communities, through the utilization of extractive revenues to promote diversified development projects that
enhance sustainable local economic growth (see Fanthrope and Gabelle, 2013) —though whether growth poles
exacerbate or ameliorate the enclave tendencies of mining projects remains a matter for debate.
23
   This raises a deeper issue for extractive companies or development practitioners who wish to ensure that a
diverse range of expectations is more fully met in corporate controlled community development programs. A
richer appreciation of expectations will not necessarily be gained through superficial community relations
exercises, but must involve a deeper understanding of the intersubjective construction of what a mine is, and
how this might shape people’s imaginations of the future (personal communicati on with Deval Desai, May 24,
2014).

                                                                                                          18
of job opportunities. One study undertaken in Sierra Leone’s alluvial diamond mining areas, for
example, confirms the livelihood importance of temporary migration in these regions, suggesting
that some 10,000 seasonally mobile ASM workers support between 70,000 and 140,000 poor people
in sending districts (Amco-Robertson Mineral Services Ltd, 2002). Likewise, a number of more recent
studies have made the link between large-scale mining, increased levels of employment, and higher
aggregate incomes in catchment regions (for example, see Bloch and Owusu, 2012). This positive
relationship is also often used by host governments to justify the “flexibilization? of labor codes and
other regulations, as a means to attract foreign investment in the extractives sector, which in theory
will drive economic growth, reduce poverty, and create local employment. Although the
expectations placed upon large companies as employment generators are often very high, many
assume the form of resource “enclaves? disconnected from wider society (Ferguson, 2006; Ackah-
Baidoo, 2012). As a consequence, the expected multiplier effects in local economies often tend to be
weak, an issue that has clear relevance to the proliferation of offshore oil exploration and
development that is currently taking place in the Gulf of Guinea.

Any employment gains that do accrue from investments in extraction projects can often lead to
intensified competition and conflict between local actors, as they vie to capture available job
opportunities. Those who are able to secure jobs may do so by way of their connections to patrons,
and less powerful members of communities may be unable to capitalize on employment. However,
evidence suggests that because large-scale operations are predominantly capital rather than labor-
intensive, the actual number of jobs created is usually miniscule in comparison to the revenue
generated. For example, in Mali, estimates suggest that the Sadiola gold mine creates one mining
job for every US$700,000 invested, while the Randgold mine directly creates 127 jobs, or one job for
every US$1.23 million invested (cited in Pegg, 2006, p. 380). As such, some of the strongest
community resistance to recent extractive industry expansion in West Africa has been in response to
the poor track records of extractive companies in providing jobs (Pegg, 2006), which is often
accompanied by perceptions of poor working conditions and labor exploitation.24

Closely related to these observations on employment is evidence to suggest that labor migration
into catchment communities can, in itself, also be a considerable source of tension and conflict. One
of the most significant impacts of large-scale extraction on local communities is the rapid change in
the economic and social fabric of society that takes place when migrant “strangers? arrive in search
of opportunities. Communities’ social balance can be disrupted, which impacts resource availability
or places further competition on economic activities such as farming and hunting (Hilson, 2002). The
economic shifts caused by in-migration can also lead to increased prices for local goods, which can
widen disparities among local populations (Hilson, 2002). Compounding this problem, migrants often
lack strong social ties, live in disrupted contexts and on borrowed land, and work in harsh conditions
for limited incomes. As Weber-Fahr et al. (2001) suggest: “New types of poverty are therefore
created, with a mixture of ‘original residents’ who have been unable to share in employment
opportunities, and ‘newcomers’ who have migrated in with the hope of finding employment, but
have been unsuccessful in doing so? (p. 15). Dale (2008) further warns: “The intersection of uneven


24
   In the southern African context, as Bebbington et al. (2008b) report, entire regional economies organized
around “political and territorializing instruments? were designed to maintain and control pools of cheap
mining labor (p. 887–888). In the case of South Africa, this labor reserve economy played an instrumental role
in subsidizing the accumulation that controlled and permitted the apartheid economy.

                                                                                                           19
income distributions, poor working conditions, large migrant or transient populations, access to
drugs and alcohol, and illicit industries can create the potential for both small and large-scale
conflict? (p. 17).

4.2     Loss of land and livelihood resources

Although extractive industry investments can potentially provide important economic benefits for
catchment communities, the significant amount of land and other livelihood resources they
appropriate can also cause severe community dislocation and hinder local development. In many
rural stretches of West Africa, communities are often guided by a strong sense of indigenous rights
over natural resources, which may be deeply connected to identity and characterized by a firm sense
of local entitlement, all of which can lead to a resentment of outsiders who exploit local resources
for profit (Fanthorpe and Maconachie, 2010).

Further shaping questions around local access to resources within communities, unequal power
relationships are a pervasive feature of social dynamics, and diverse and conflicting resource
priorities between local actors can transform into contests of struggle or negotiation (Leach, Mearns,
and Scoones, 1997). Unequal access to resources and competing visions of rural capitalism can
therefore exacerbate tensions within communities, as well as between communities, governments,
and extractive companies. Conflict at the community level may ensue over “the control of space, the
governance of territory, access to land and water resources, the defence of human and citizenship
rights, and dissatisfaction over the distribution of mineral rents? (Bebbington et al., 2008 b, p. 893).
The loss of livelihood resources associated with large-scale open-pit mines are particularly damaging
to communities because they demand significant quantities of energy to operate. As Bebbington et
al. (2008b) further note, mine development is often integrated with the construction of dams,
hydroelectric plants, or other sources of energy, which can intensify existing competition over land,
water, and energy. In response to perceptions of accumulation by dispossession, local communities
may therefore mobilize around demands for distributive justice, “a more equitable distribution of
the benefits deriving from the exploitation of natural resources? (Perreault, 2006, p. 154).

Land use conflicts can become particularly intense when the issue of tenure becomes unclear. In
some cases, different systems of tenure may overlap (for example, customary tenure vs. state
ownership), disputes may arise over disagreements concerning surface vs. subsoil ownership, and
conflict may be ignited when different claims on valuable minerals or hydrocarbons are at stake.
Indeed, land acquisition associated with extractive industry investments can further obscure tenure
rights, particularly when they are insecure or contested (Cotula, 2014). In the case of Liberia, for
example, one recent report for the Government Land Commission suggests that the government has
issued concessions to commercial entrepreneurs, communities, and for conservation programs,
which exceed 50 percent of the country’s land area. Much of this land, the report adds, has long
been utilized by rural populations, opening up the inevitable likelihood for land disputes and conflict
to erupt (see Land Commission of Liberia, 2012; EWER, 2012).

In short, land confrontation may result between different stakeholders (for example, communities,
governments, and companies) simply because each places fundamentally different socioeconomic
values on land (Hilson, 2002). Even when mining or oil and gas companies agree to compensate local
communities for land appropriated, or relocate them to different areas, it often cannot adequately


                                                                                                     20
make up for losses, particularly when territory is so closely associated with social identity and there
is a strong cultural or spiritual connection to the land (Cotula, 2014). In the case of the longstanding
insurgency that has prevailed in Nigeria’s Niger Delta for over two decades, the entrenched nature
of conflict may be at least partially explained precisely because oil extraction occurs on indigenous
lands where different values between company and community are most extreme.

Coupled with the loss of land is the tendency for resource extraction to undermine income
generation associated with traditional livelihoods. Not only has this marginalized peasant agriculture
and led to the de-agrarianization of rural economies (Jønsson and Bryceson, 2009; Fisher, 2007), but
it has often territorially supplanted ASM activities—a major informal employer because of its low
barriers to entry. As Hilson and Yakovleva (2007) point out in the case of Ghana, central ministries
have been known to grant concessions to companies in areas already occupied by ASM operators. In
such situations, this has further “strained relations? between small and large-scale operators, usually
resulting in the (often violent) eviction of small-scale miners from the concession, but occasionally
resulting in some land being set aside for ASM activities to coexist with large-scale operations. In the
case of Liberia, for example, Hummingbird Resources, an exploratory gold mining company that
operates in the southeast region of country, has dealt with overlapping mineral concessions by
allowing ASM operators to mine in selected concession areas, and to sell their gold independently.
The company has also diffused tensions with the local population by employing former ASM
operators on six-month renewable contracts within its license area (Small, 2012).

4.3     Environmental degradation

As noted by Hilson (2012), “[f]ew industrial activities leave as great an environmental footprint or
are as capable of having as much influence on the wellbeing of a society as a large-scale mine or oil
and gas project? (p. 133). Since rural economies in West Africa are inextricably linked to the health
of natural resources such as forests, soil, rivers, wildlife, and fish, a threat to the ecosystem is
simultaneously a threat to the subsistence and income of local populations (Horowitz, 2011), placing
concerns on “the security and integrity of livelihoods? (Bebbington et al., 2008a, p. 2890). Indeed,
the environmental degradation caused by extractive industry projects can increase the vulnerability
of the poor, exacerbate tensions, and trigger conflict. Such sentiments are confirmed in a recent
study by Franks et al. (forthcoming), who examined publicly available information concerning 50
different cases of prolonged company-community conflict around mining operations and report that
environmental issues were identified as the most common triggers of conflict.

Large-scale natural resource investments can have significant environmental costs, including water
pollution, deforestation, loss of biodiversity, and soil degradation. In West Africa, there is perhaps no
clearer example of the devastation that the environmental impacts of extractive industry activity can
have on local-level livelihoods than the situation that has unfolded in Nigeria’s oil-rich Niger Delta.
Watts (2004) notes: “The consequences of flaring, spillage and waste for Ogoni fisheries and farming
have been devastating. Two independent studies completed in 1997 reveal total petroleum
hydrocarbons in Ogoni streams at 360 and 680 times the European Community permissible levels?
(p. 288). Such ecological damage on farming and fishing-related traditional livelihood structures has,
according to Pegg and Zabbey (2013), largely been accepted by the government as a legitimate cost
of doing business in the Niger Delta. It has also been a major factor in perpetuating oil-related
conflict for over two decades, first in the form of community protest against oil industry operations,

                                                                                                      21
and then as the main driver of the petro-violence associated with insurgency and counter-insurgency
responses by state security forces (Watts and Ibaba, 2011).

While some West African governments have been criticized for perpetuating a “race to the bottom,?
in effect turning a blind eye to environmental standards in order to attract extractive industry
investments, there is now a growing recognition that the environmental risks associated with the
natural resource extraction industries must be mitigated if they are to translate into more
sustainable development outcomes. Even so, there remains significant variation in the companies’
environmental behavior. (O’Faircheallaigh, 2008; Bebbington et al., 2013). However, in situations
where companies, elites, and politicians reap the benefits of extraction and producing communities
are not adequately compensated for bearing the social and environmental costs of extraction, the
potential grounds for grievance and conflict increases. As a consequence, many extractive
companies now take a more proactive role in making environmental considerations a central part of
their business strategy, not least because they cannot afford to have their operations paralyzed by
grievance-driven conflict. Indeed, the economic costs of lost productivity due to delay are
significant,25 and many extractive companies have embraced the opportunity to defuse potential
conflict through CSR programs, also seeing it as an occasion to enhance their reputations abroad and
strengthen their “social license to operate.?

While environmental and social impact assessments (ESIAs) are now enshrined in the legislation
governing mining and petroleum investment in most West African countries,26 they do not always
facilitate environmentally sound forms of development. Significant challenges exist in the effective
implementation of ESIAs, including insufficient company expertise, a lack of institutional government
capacity in the scrutiny of ESIAs, the failure to monitor compliance with rigorous management plans,
and weak negotiating powers of environmental agencies (Cotula, 2014). These regulatory
instruments may also be misused by politicians and elites to sway political decision making by
systematically overstating the benefits of investment and understating the adverse impacts. In many
cases, impact studies are financed by the investor, which creates potential conflicts of interest. More
needs to be done to insure that ESIAs do not merely become another mechanism for diverting the
benefits of extractive industry investment to elite actors. The involvement of multilateral lenders in
financing impact assessments, and further scrutiny from civil society actors, can help increase the
legitimacy and effectiveness of assessments (Cotula, 2014).

4.4     Insufficient community consultation and compensation

Finally, it is frequently the case that conflict within catchment communities can result from
grievances that stem from insufficient compensation for loss of resources, or inadequate
consultation with companies and governments. Although many countries have now adopted
community development agreements (CDAs) or similar arrangements in their mining laws,
companies still often deal directly with central government agencies, bypassing local stakeholders


25
   For example, Franks et al. (forthcoming) report a case of major world-class mining project with capital
expenditure of between US$3 and 5 billion, that suffered roughly US$20 million per week of delayed
production in net present value terms as a result of community conflict.
26
   Examples of such legislation include Ghana’s Environmental Protection Act of 1994, Cameroon’s Framework
Law on Environmental Protection of 1996, Senegal’s Environment code of 2001, Sierra Leone’s Mines and
Minerals Act 2009, and Mali’s Mining Code of 1999.

                                                                                                       22
altogether. In some cases where limited community consultation does take place, mining companies
may privilege relations with elites or traditional leaders, whose interests can diverge considerably
from those of the community. In such situations, elites may capture supplier contracts, employment
opportunities, and other benefits.

Community stakeholders often lack the power and capacity necessary to participate equitably in
consultation and decision-making processes, and as a consequence, remain marginalized and poor.
Even in situations when consultation does take place, it may not be meaningful and can be coopted
by the interests of more powerful actors (Maconachie, 2010). For example, in the context of the
major iron ore investments that have recently taken place in Sierra Leone, Fanthorpe and Gabelle
(2013) point out that “[c]ompanies are not required to secure local landowners’ consent in order to
obtain large-scale mining licences; they merely have to supply licensing authorities with evidence
that they have consulted with ‘interested and affected parties’? (p. 73). Responsibility to consult,
they go on, “does not grant communities a right of input into either the terms of mining license
agreements or the monitoring of environmental and social management programmes? (p. 73). In the
case of the Niger Delta in Nigeria, whether engagement with communities or community
development projects has led to meaningful pro-poor change is a matter of debate. Pegg and Zabbey
(2013) argue that there is a “fundamental incompatibility? in the relationships between oil
companies, governments, and catchment communities. Despite all the well-meaning rhetoric about
CSR, with vast sums of money being spent on community development projects, those living within
the oil-producing regions are among the most impoverished and marginalized in the country.

5. Conclusion
In the context of West Africa’s current extractive industry boom, it remains an ongoing challenge to
convert resource rents into sustainable development trajectories that provide space for meaningful
citizen engagement and accommodate the needs of all segments of society. While vast new
discoveries of valuable and increasingly accessible resources such as oil and iron ore have propelled
West African states to positions of unprecedented economic growth, history has shown that if such
resources are badly managed, mounting tension and conflict are inevitable.

It is also clear, however, that the conflict triggers associated with resource-related grievances are
most often connected to, and reinforced by, deeper structural drivers of change. In this respect,
operational interventions to mitigate conflict and yield more sustainable and equitable development
outcomes must be informed by a richer and more textured understanding of complex country
contexts. Indeed, it is not possible to engage with the broader issues of governance and
development without a more nuanced understanding of the political economy of extraction (Barma
et al., 2012), or an appreciation to how this is connected to wider patterns of accumulation and
distribution. Any attempt to reduce levels of conflict will therefore not only require attention to
“better? resource management, but also to local contextual political struggles and how they are
embedded within broader causal factors.

In exploring the attendant challenges, obstacles, and constraints to effective management of the
natural resources sector in West Africa, this chapter set out to deepen understanding of the factors
that can exacerbate both intra- and interstate conflict. An initial reading of the evidence suggests
that government dependency on extractive industry revenue can have a corrosive impact on both

                                                                                                  23
politics and governance, a process that increases horizontal inequality and opens the possibility for
conflict. This includes the historical trends of ineffective governance from which many countries
suffer, and also the problem of elite capture of resources and a lack of consideration for
communities’ economic and social rights. In addressing these problems, standard “blueprint?
approaches to governance reform—including those supported by the World Bank—have
emphasized solutions such as enhanced efficiency in public administration, stronger rule of law,
increased transparency, and better accountability.

However, given the importance of context and nuance in understanding how conflict triggers are
embedded within the wider political economy of extractive industry investment, we would also
argue that there is a pressing need for a more refined and situated understanding of the governance
agenda. In the context of this chapter, there are two important and interrelated governance “entry
points? for understanding and addressing the roots of fragility and conflict associated with extractive
industry investment. Each of these areas for engagement is elaborated upon below.

5.1     Broadening the view of governance

Following Desai and Jarvis (2012), we suggest that it remains vital to broaden the view of governance
beyond attempts at merely making improvements in the formal use of power by national executives.
Different scales of analysis remain important in understanding governance relationships, as does a
more complete understanding of the asymmetrical power dynamics between the different actors
involved. In broadening mainstream views of governance, we first suggest that there is a pressing
need to better understand political dynamics at the subnational level. An enhanced analysis should
incorporate both state and quasi-state actors, and must be sensitive to the historical tendency for
resource revenues to be captured by ruling elites and fuel patronage politics. Without an
appreciation of subnational power relationships, or how natural resource revenues are implicated in
political bargaining, donor-driven governance interventions are likely to yield disappointing results.

Second, a broader view of extractives governance must also encompass a more nuanced
appreciation of regional governance relationships between national states. As has already been
noted, at the interstate level weak governance zones such as the Mano River Union have historically
proven to be fertile grounds for “contagion? effects to occur, with the spillover of conflict being
facilitated by porous and unregulated borders. Consequently, there are a series of connections to
explore concerning the structural factors that weaken regional governance initiatives, including
those designed to contain contagion effects, address transboundary resource management issues
(such as shared infrastructural development and the mitigation of socioenvironmental impacts), or
confront factors that incentivize governments to “race to the bottom? in attracting extractive
industry investment.

Third, we argue for a more rigorous analysis of the strengths and limitations of governance
regulations that are being driven by developed countries, with a better understanding of how these
initiatives are shaped by a diversity of interests and agendas. While some well-intentioned
regulations may address specific concerns for large-scale companies or their shareholders, they may
neither recognize the needs of in-country actors nor have relevance, or be well suited, to local
contexts.



                                                                                                    24
Finally, and on a related note, a broader and more complete picture of corporate governance is also
necessary, with particular attention paid to exploring how companies interact with communities at
the local level. Desai and Jarvis (2012) remark that World Bank support for multistakeholder
initiatives, the enforcement of industry standards, and coalition building to enhance social
accountability are all positive steps. However, considerable concerns have been raised by other
scholars about the way that some extractive companies implement CSR schemes or community
development programs with little knowledge or understanding of the sociocultural contexts of the
people who reside in the areas where they operate (Hilson and Banchirigah, 2009; Tschakert, 2009).
In extreme cases (for example, see Gilberthorpe and Banks, 2012), an over-emphasis on meeting
global sustainability performance standards can lead to inappropriate and ill-conceived development
outcomes at the local level, which may result in further fragmentation and inequality. This also raises
the question of how sincere extractive companies actually are about their development initiatives,
and whether the pursuit of “blueprint? CSR schemes might instead play a role in decontextualizing
local development needs.

5.2     Deepening governance focus

Second, it also remains vital to deepen the governance focus, particularly at the subnational level
where many of the social, environmental, and political flashpoints associated with extractive
industry investment are located. This focus, it is argued, should be framed around two central
processes: transparency and participation.

Typically, transparency has been understood as the process of creating and disseminating
information to citizens (Desai and Jarvis, 2012). In the context of extractive industry development,
numerous initiatives have been instigated to facilitate this process, most notably the EITI. Yet it
should also be stressed that the drive for transparency must be extended beyond revenue reporting
to include the many other challenges that have been highlighted in this chapter. For example, the
social, environmental, and livelihood costs of extractive industry investment should be disclosed to
stakeholders through structured citizen engagement frameworks before a contract is signed, with
further opportunities for public consultation at different stages of the project life cycle. Increased
transparency around the benefits of extraction, including information on employment opportunities,
compensation processes, and monetary streams should also be a focus of community consultation.

But while transparency undoubtedly remains an important element in strengthening good
governance around oil, gas, and mining, it can also provide an arena for confrontation and conflict
between opposing groups of actors, and even retrenchment of existing power hierarchies. For
example, government, communities, and civil society, all of which have different agendas, will also
have a variety of positions on transparency. While governments may refuse to disclose information
to protect their hidden agendas, communities and civil society organizations are likely to be much
stronger advocates for transparency (Cotula, 2014). But the bigger question at stake concerns what
stakeholders can actually achieve with information once they have obtained it. While contract
disclosure, for example, may lead to better accountability, this only becomes useful to impacted
communities if the information obtained can be used in a meaningful way. The ability for different
actors to effectively use information is above all a function of political space, and as Cotula (2014)
notes, depending on context, this may require significant investments in capacity building at the
community level. Put simply, an integral part of ensuring that information translates into meaningful

                                                                                                    25
and inclusive development involves a better understanding of the politics of participation, and a
more nuanced understanding of how power shapes relationships between different stakeholder
groups.

While “participation? has become enshrined as a central tenet of development discourse and is now
widely accepted as “standard practice? in development policy and practice, more recent
explorations of participatory processes have been increasingly critical (Hickey and Mohan, 2005;
Mansuri and Rao, 2013). Even in situations where citizens are “invited? to participate in intentionally
designed institutional spaces (for example, within legal CDAs or voluntary CSR programs), the
inclusion of local actors in decision-making processes cannot be taken as a given (Maconachie,
2010). While the World Bank’s Extractive Industries Review (EIR) has concluded that the
participation of affected communities in processes of free, prior, and informed consent (FPIC) is a
necessary condition for extractive projects to contribute to poverty alleviation and sustainable
development, there has been significant debate and critique over the ways in which consultation
actually plays out. Indeed, oppressive histories, unequal power relationships, and a lack of capacity
can all inhibit citizen participation in extractive industry development.

In sum, a deeper focus on the politics of participation—whether through FPIC processes, ESIA
consultations, or CDAs—is an important first step in understanding how the spaces of public
participation can either thrive or become shut down. It is clear that unequal relationships within
communities, or between the national and subnational level, can limit or even derail the
participation process. While participation is often treated as a romanticized notion of democratic
space that remains unaffected by the real world, the reality in West Africa is quite different.
Ultimately, bringing questions of power and politics to the center of analysis is an important step in
ensuring that the extractive industries become a source of more inclusive and sustainable
development, rather than an arena of contestation and conflict.




                                                                                                    26
References
Ackah-Baidoo, A. 2012. “Enclave Development and ‘Offshore Corporate Social Responsibility’:
       Implications for Oil-Rich Sub-Saharan Africa.? Resources Policy 37 (2): 152–59.

African Economic Outlook. 2013. “Niger Country Profile.?
        http://www.africaneconomicoutlook.org/fileadmin/uploads/aeo/2013/PDF/Niger%20-
        %20African%20Economic%20Outlook.pdf.

Aguilar, J., G. Caspary, and V. Seiler. 2011. “Implementing EITI at the Subnational Level.? Extractive
         Industries for Development Series No. 23, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Ahluwalia, M. 1997. “Representing Communities: The Case of a Community-Based Watershed
       Management Project in Rajasthan, India.? IDS Bulletin 28 (4): 23–35.

Amco-Robertson Mineral Services. 2002. Sierra Leone Diamond Policy Study. Freetown: Department
      for International Development.

Arellano-Yanguas, J. 2011. “Aggravating the Resource Curse: Decentralisation, Mining and Conflict in
        Peru.? Journal of Development Studies 47 (4): 617–38.

Baldwin, K. 2011. “When Politicians Cede Control of Resources: Land, Chiefs and Coalition-Building in
       Africa.? Afrobarometer Working Paper No. 130.
       http://www.afrobarometer.org/files/documents/working_papers/AfropaperNo130.pdf.

Bannon, I., and P. Collier, eds. 2003. Natural Resources and Violent Conflict. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.

Barma, N., K. Kaiser, T. Minh Le, and L. Vinuela. 2012. Rents to Riches? The Political Economy of
       Natural Resource-Led Development. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Bebbington, A., D. Bebbington, J. Bury, J. Lingan, J. Muñoz, and M. Scurrah. 2008a. “Mining and
       Social Movements: Struggles over Livelihood and Rural Territorial Development in the
       Andes.? World Development 36 (12): 2888–905.

Bebbington, A., L. Hinojosa, D. Humphreys Bebbington, M. Luisa Burneo, and X. Warnaars. 2008b.
       “Contention and Ambiguity: Mining and the Possibilities of Development.? Development and
       Change 39 (6): 887–914.

Bebbington, A., T. Bornschlegl, and A. Johnson. 2013. “Political Economies of Extractive Industry:
       From Documenting Complexity to Informing Current Debates.? Development and Change.
       doi: 10.1111/dech.12057.

Berdal, M. 2005. “Beyond Greed and Grievance—and Not Too Soon.? Review of International Studies
        31 (4): 687–98.

Berdal, M., and D. Malone, eds. 2001. Greed and Grievance: Economic Agendas in Civil Wars.
        Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.


                                                                                                         27
Bloch, R., and G. Owusu. 2012. “Linkages in Ghana’s Gold Mining Industry: Challenging the Enclave
        Thesis.? Resources Policy 37 (4): 434–42.

Boakye, D., S. Dessus, Y. Foday, and F. Oppong. 2012. “Investing the Mineral Wealth in Development
       Assets: Ghana, Liberia and Sierra Leone.? Policy Research Working Paper 6089, World Bank,
       Washington, DC. http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/pdf/10.1596/1813-9450-6089.

Boampong, O. 2012. “Ghana’s Golden Opportunity: A District Struggles with Striking It Rich.?
      Revenue Watch Institute.
      http://www.academia.edu/4863436/Ghanas_Golden_Opportunity_A_District_Struggles_Wi
      th_Striking_It_Rich.

Bracking, S. 2009. “Hiding Conflict over Industry Returns: A Stakeholder Analysis of the Extractive
        Industries Transparency Initiative.? BWPI Working Paper 91, Brooks World Poverty Institute,
        University of Manchester.
        http://www.bwpi.manchester.ac.uk/medialibrary/publications/working_papers/bwpi-wp-
        9109.pdf.

Bridge, G. 2004. “Mapping the Bonanza: Geographies of Mining Investment in an Era of Neoliberal
        Reform.? Professional Geographer 56 (3): 406–21.

Bridge, G. 2008. “Global Production Networks and the Extractive Sector: Governing Resource-Based
        Development.? Journal of Economic Geography 8 (3): 389–419.

Brosio, J. 2003. “Oil Revenue and Fiscal Federalism.? In Fiscal Policy Formulation and Implementation
         in Oil-Producing Countries, ed. J. Davis, R. Ossowski, and A. Fedelino, 243–69. Washington,
         DC: International Monetary Fund.

Brosio J., and R. J. Singh. 2013. “Revenue Sharing of Natural Resources: International Practices and
         Possible Options for Africa.? Draft Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Collier, P., and A. Hoeffler. 2001. “Greed and Grievance in Civil War.? Policy Research Working Paper
         No. 2355, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Collier P., and A. Hoeffler. 2004. “Aid, Policy and Growth in Post-Conflict Societies.? European
         Economic Review 48 (5): 1125–45.

Cotula, L. 2014. Foreign Investment, Law and Sustainable Development: A Handbook on Agriculture
        and Extractive Industries. London: International Institute for Environment and Development.
        http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/17513IIED.pdf.

Dale, P. 2008. “Access to Justice in Sierra Leone: A Review of the Literature.? Justice for the Poor
         Project, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Desai, D., and M. Jarvis. 2012. “Governance and Accountability in Extractive Industries: Theory and
        Practice at the World Bank.? Journal of Energy and Natural Resources Law 30 (2): 101–28.

D4D (Diamonds for Development). 2006. “The Current State of Diamond Mining in the Mano River
       Basin and the Use of Diamonds as a Tool for Peace Building and Development.? Background


                                                                                                       28
        Paper, Diamonds for Development Sub-regional Conference, Monrovia, Liberia, June.

Elbadawi, I., and N. Sambanis. 2002. “How Much War Will We See? Explaining the Prevalence of Civil
       War.? Journal of Conflict Resolution 46 (3): 307–34.

Elischer, S. 2013, February 12. “After Mali Comes Niger: West Africa’s Problems Migrate East.?
         Foreign Affairs. http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/138931/sebastian-elischer/after-
         mali-comes-niger.

Emerson, S. 2011. “Desert Insurgency: Lessons from the Third Tuareg Rebellion.? Small Wars and
      Insurgencies 22 (4): 669–87.

EWER (Early Warning Response Working Group). 2012. “Agricultural Land Concessions and Conflict
       in Liberia.? Policy Analysis Brief, EWER, Monrovia, Liberia.
       http://www.lern.ushahidi.com/media/uploads/page/3/EWERPolicyBriefLiberia.

Fanthorpe, R., and C. Gabelle. 2013. Political Economy of Extractives: Governance in Sierra Leone.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.

Fanthorpe, R., A. Lavali, and M. G. Sesay. 2011. “Decentralization in Sierra Leone: Impact, Constraints
       and Prospects.? DfID R4D Research Document.
       http://r4d.dfid.gov.uk/PDF/Outputs/Mis_SPC/DecentralizationResearchReportFINAL.pdf.

Fanthorpe, R., and R. Maconachie. 2010. “Beyond the ‘Crisis of Youth’? Mining, Farming, and Civil
       Society in Post-War Sierra Leone.? African Affairs 109 (435): 251–72.

Fearon, J. 2004. “Primary Commodity Exports and Civil War.? Journal of Conflict Resolution 49 (4):
        483–507.

Ferguson, J. 1999. Expectations of Modernity: Myths and Meanings of Urban Life in the Zambian
       Copperbelt. Berkeley: University of California Press.

Ferguson, J. 2006. Global Shadows: Africa in the Neoliberal World Order. Durham, NC: Duke
       University Press.

Fisher, E. 2007. “Occupying the Margins: Labour Integration and Social Exclusion in Artisanal Mining
         in Africa.? Development and Change 38 (4): 735–60.

Franks, D., R. Davis, A. Bebbington, S. Ali, D. Kemp, and M. Scurrah. Forthcoming. “Conflict Translates
        Environmental and Social Risk into Business Costs in the Natural Resource Industries:
        Implications for Sustainability Science.? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

Gilberthorpe, E., and G. Banks. 2012. “Development on Whose Terms? CSR Discourse and Social
        Realities in Papua New Guinea’s Extractive Industries Sector.? Resources Policy 37: 185–93.

GoG (Government of Ghana). 2013. Performance Audit Report of the Auditor General on the
       Utilisation of Mining Development Fund by Metropolitan, Municipal and District Assemblies.
       Accra: GoG.

Harvey, D. 2003. The New Imperialism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

                                                                                                     29
Harvey, R. 2014. “Mining for Development in Guinea: An Examination of the Simandou Iron Ore
        Project.? SAIAA Policy Briefing 83, Governance of Africa’s Resources Programme.

Haysom, N., and S. Kane. 2009. “Negotiating Natural Resources for Peace: Ownership, Control and
      Wealth-Sharing.? HD Briefing Paper, Centre for Humanitarian Dialogue, Geneva.

Hickey, S., and G. Mohan. 2005. “Relocating Participation Within a Radical Politics of Development.?
        Development and Change 36 (2): 237–62.

Hilson, G. 2002. “An Overview of Land Use Conflict in Mining Communities.? Land Use Policy 19: 65–
        73.

Hilson, G. 2012. “Corporate Social Responsibility in the Extractive Industries: Experiences from
        Developing Countries.? Resources Policy 37: 131–37.

Hilson, G., and S. M. Banchirigah. 2009. “Are Alternative Livelihood Projects Alleviating Poverty in
        Mining Communities? Experiences from Ghana.? Journal of Development Studies 45 (2):
        172–96.

Hilson, G., and R. Maconachie. 2009. “Good Governance and the Extractive Industries in Sub-Saharan
        Africa.? Mineral Processing and Extractive Metallurgy Review 30 (1): 52–100.

Hilson, G., and N. Yakovleva. 2007. “Strained Relations: A Critical Analysis of the Mining Conflict in
        Prestea, Ghana.? Political Geography 26 (1): 98–119.

Holden, W., K. Nadeau, and D. Jacobson. 2011. “Exemplifying Accumulation by Dispossession: Mining
       and Indigenous Peoples in the Philippines.? Geografiska Annaler: Series B 93 (2): 141–61.

Horowitz, L. S. 2011. “Interpreting Industry’s Impacts: Micropolitical Ecologies of Divergent
       Community Responses.? Development and Change 42 (6): 1379–91.

Humphreys, M. 2005. “Natural Resources, Conflict, and Conflict Resolution—Uncovering the
      Mechanisms.? Journal of Conflict Resolution 49 (4): 508–37.

ICMM (International Council on Mining & Metals). 2007. “Ghana Country Case Study: The Challenge
       of Mineral Wealth: Using Resource Endowments to Foster Sustainable Development.?
       Report, International Council on Mining & Metals, London.
       http://www.icmm.com/document/301.

ICMM. 2012. The Role of Mining in National Economies. London: International Council on Mining &
       Metals.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2012. "Macroeconomic Policy Frameworks for Resource-Rich
        Developing Countries." IMF Policy Paper, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

International Crisis Group. 2012. “The Gulf of Guinea: The New Danger Zone.? Africa Report No. 195.
        http://www.crisisgroup.org/~/media/Files/africa/central-africa/195-the-gulf-of-guinea-the-
        new-danger-zone-english.pdf.




                                                                                                         30
Jønsson, J. B., and D. F. Bryceson. 2009. “Rushing for Gold: Mobility and Small-Scale Mining in East
       Africa.? Development and Change 40 (2): 249–79.

Kaplan, S. 2013. “West Africa: Ethnic Divisions, State Fragility, and Regional Solutions.? Fragile States.
        http://www.fragilestates.org/2012/05/02/west-africa-ethnic-divisions-state-fragility-and-
        regional-solutions.

Keenan, J. 2008. “Uranium Goes Critical in Niger: Tuareg Rebellions Threaten Sahelian
       Conflagration.? Review of African Political Economy 117: 449–66.

Korf, B. 2005. “Rethinking the Greed-Grievance Nexus: Property Rights and the Political Economy of
         War in Sri Lanka.? Journal of Peace Research 42 (2): 201–17.

Land Commission of Liberia. 2012. Land Rights, Private Use Permits and Forest Communities, by Paul
       De Wit. Consultant report, Monrovia.
       http://eeas.europa.eu/delegations/liberia/documents/press_corner/20130916_01.pdf.

Larsen, A. M. 2004. “Formal Decentralisation and the Imperative of Decentralisation ‘from Below’: A
        Case Study of Natural Resource Management in Nicaragua.? European Journal of
        Development Research 16 (1): 55–70.

Leach, M., R. Mearns, and I. Scoones. 1997. “Challenges to Community-Based Sustainable
        Development: Dynamics, Entitlements, Institutions.? IDS Bulletin 28 (4): 4–14.

Maconachie, R. 2010. “‘New Spaces’ for Change? Diamond Governance Reforms and the Micro-
      Politics of Participation in Post-War Sierra Leone.? Public Administration and Development
      30 (3): 191–202.

Maconachie, R. 2014. “Dispossession, Exploitation or Employment? Youth Livelihoods and Extractive
      Industry Investment in Sierra Leone.? Futures.
      http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.futures.2013.08.003.

Mahama, C., and A. Baffour. 2009. “Management of Stool Land Revenue in Ghana: A Study of the
     Nkawie and Toase Stools of the Atwima Nwabiagya District of the Ashanti Region.? Journal
     of Science and Technology 29 (1): 28–38.

Mansuri, G., and V. Rao. 2013. Localizing Development: Does Participation Work? Washington, DC:
       World Bank.

Mayer Brown. 2010. “Recent Legal Developments in the Mining Sector of West African States.?
       http://www.mayerbrown.com/files/Publication/a10390b1-79cb-4dee-b6bb-
       16bd5af12d96/Presentation/PublicationAttachment/653da675-bc14-439a-bc79-
       87abeb85ccbb/NEWSL_MINING_JAN10_BULLETIN_WEST_AFRICA.PDF.

McGuirk, E., A. Rajaram, and M. Giugale. 2014. “On the Political Economy of Direct Dividend
       Transfers in Resource-Rich Countries: A Theoretical Consideration.? Unpublished draft,
       World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                                                                       31
MGI (McKinsey Global Institute). 2013. Reverse the Curse: Maximizing the Potential of Resource-
      Driven Economies. New York: McKinsey.

Moss, T. 2011. “Oil to Cash: Fighting the Resource Curse Through Cash Transfers.? Working Paper
        237, Center for Global Development, Washington, DC.
        http://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/1424714_file_Oil2Cash_primer_FINAL.pdf.

Obi, C. 2012. Conflict and Peace in West Africa. Uppsala, Sweden: Nordic Africa Institute.
         http://www.nai.uu.se/publications/news/archives/051obi.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2013. Fragile States 2013:
       Resource Flows and Trends in a Shifting World. Paris: OECD-DAC International Network on
       Conflict and Fragility.

O’Faircheallaigh, C. 2008. “Negotiating Cultural Heritage? Aboriginal-Mining Company Agreements in
        Australia.? Development and Change 39 (1): 25–51.

Østby, G. 2008. “Polarization, Horizontal Inequalities and Violent Conflict.? Journal of Peace Research
        45 (2): 143–62.

Otto, J., C. Andrews, F. Cawood, M. Doggett, P. Guj, F. Stermole, J. Stermole, and J. Tilton. 2006.
         Mining Royalties: A Global Study of Their Impact on Investors, Government, and Civil Society.
         Washington, DC: World Bank.

Pegg, S. 2006. “Mining and Poverty Reduction: Transforming Rhetoric into Reality.? Journal of
         Cleaner Production 14: 376–87.

Pegg, S., and N. Zabbey. 2013. “Oil and Water: The Bodo Spills and the Destruction of Traditional
        Livelihood Structures in the Niger Delta.? Community Development Journal 48 (3): 391–405.

Perreault, T. 2006. “From the Guerra Del Agua to the Guerra Del Gas: Resource Governance,
       Neoliberalism and Popular Protest in Bolivia.? Antipode 38 (1): 150–72.

Prichard, W. 2013. “Building a Fair, Transparent and Inclusive Tax System in Sierra Leone.? Sierra
        Leone Report, Tax Justice Network Africa/BAN/NACE, Nairobi.
        http://www.nacesl.org/SaloneReport_Final%20print%20out.pdf.

Rahman, M. 1995. “Participatory Development: Towards Liberation and Co-optation?? In Community
      Empowerment: A Reader in Participation and Development, ed. G. Craig and M. Mayo, 24–
      32. London: Zed.

Regan, P. M., and D. Norton. 2005. “Greed, Grievance, and Mobilization in Civil Wars.? Journal of
        Conflict Resolution 49 (3): 319–36.

Ribot, J. 2004. Waiting for Democracy: The Politics of Choice in Natural Resource Decentralization.
         Washington, DC: World Resources Institute.

Ross, M. L. 2003. “Oil, Drugs and Diamonds: The Varying Roles of Natural Resources in Civil War.? In
       The Political Economy of Armed Conflict: Beyond Greed and Grievance, ed. K. Ballentine and
       J. Sherman, 47–70. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner.

                                                                                                      32
Ross, M. L., P. Lujala, and S. A. Rustad. 2012. “Horizontal Inequality: Decentralizing the Distribution
       of Natural Resource Revenues, and Peace.? In High-Value Natural Resources and Post-
       Conflict Peacebuilding, ed. P. Lujala and S. A. Rustad, 251–59. New York: Routledge.

Silberfein, M., and A. H. Conteh. 2006. “Boundaries and Conflict in the Mano River Region of West
         Africa.? Conflict Management and Peace Science 23: 343–61.

Small, R. 2012. “Artisanal and Small-Scale Mining in and Around Protected Areas and Critical
        Ecosystems Project: Liberia Case Study Report.? Final report, Estelle Levin Limited and WWF.
        http://www.estellelevin.com/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/ASM-Liberia-Final.pdf.

Smith, M. 2012, December 5. “The Impact of Mali’s Political Problems on the Gold Industry.? Gold
        Investing News. http://goldinvestingnews.com/30155/mali-political-problems-gold-industry-
        coup-great-quest-metals-mining.html.

Standing, A. 2014, June. “Ghana’s Extractive Industries and Community Benefit Sharing: The Case for
       Cash Transfers.? Resources Policy 40: 74–82.
       http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.resourpol.2014.03.003.

Standing, A., and G. Hilson. 2013. “Distributing Mining Wealth to Communities in Ghana: Addressing
       Problems of Elite Capture and Political Corruption.? U4 Issue No. 5, Anti-Corruption
       Resource Centre, Bergen, Norway.

Stewart, F. 2002. “Crisis Prevention: Tackling Horizontal Inequalities.? Oxford Development Studies
       28 (3): 245–62.

Thompson, A. 2004. An Introduction to African Politics. 2nd ed. London: Routledge.

Tschakert, P. 2009. “Recognizing and Nurturing Artisanal Mining as a Viable Livelihood.? Resources
       Policy 34 (1–2): 24–31.

UN (United Nations). 2012a. Extractive Industries and Conflict: Toolkit and Guidance for Preventing
       and Managing Land and Natural Resources Conflict. New York: UN Interagency Framework
       Team for Preventive Action.
       http://www.un.org/en/events/environmentconflictday/pdf/GN_Extractive_Consultation.pdf.

UN. 2012b. “Fragile States and Development in West Africa.? Economic Commission for Africa, Sub-
       Regional Office for West Africa, Niamey, Niger.

Watts, M. 2004. “Violent Environments: Petroleum Conflict and the Political Ecology of Rule in the
       Niger Delta, Nigeria.? In Liberation Ecologies: Environment, Development, Social Movements,
       2nd ed., ed. R. Peet and M. Watts, 273–98. London: Routledge.

Watts, M., and S. I. Ibaba. 2011. “Turbulent Oil: Conflict and Insecurity in the Niger Delta.? African
       Security 4 (1): 1–19.

Weber-Fahr, M., J. Strongman, R. Kunanayagam, G. McMahon, and C. Shelton. 2001. Mining and
      Poverty Reduction. Washington, DC: World Bank.



                                                                                                         33
Wennmann, A. 2012. “Sharing Natural Resource Wealth During War-to-Peace Transitions.? In High-
     Value Natural Resources and Post-Conflict Peacebuilding, ed. P. Lujala and S. A. Rustad, 225–
     50. New York: Routledge.

World Bank. 2010. “West Africa Mineral Sector Strategic Assessment (WAMSSA): An Environmental
       and Social Strategic Assessment for the Development of the Mineral Sector in the Mano
       River Union.? Report No. 53738-AFR, World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Bank. 2013. Draft PAD Sixth Governance Reform and Growth Credit. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.

World Bank. 2014a. Concept Note: Socioeconomic Impact of Mining on Local Communities in Africa.
       Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 2014b. Growth Poles Program: Political Economy of Social Capital. Washington, DC:
       World Bank.




                                                                                                34
