                                                     98901

Land Conflict, Migration, and Citizenship in
   West Africa: Complex Diversity and
           Recurring Challenges
               A Desk Study




                        Kerry Maze



           Fragility, Conflict, and Violence Group
                        World Bank
                           2015

                                                             1
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements ............................................................................................................... 3
Abbreviations ........................................................................................................................ 4
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................................... 6
   1.1 Background context ..................................................................................................................6
   1.2 Purpose of the report ...............................................................................................................6
   1.3 Structure of the report ..............................................................................................................7
   1.4 Report parameters ...................................................................................................................7

2. Intraregional migration in West Africa ............................................................................... 9
   2.1 Migrant groups ....................................................................................................................... 11
   2.2 Impacts of migration ............................................................................................................... 15
   2.3 Regional migration policies ..................................................................................................... 16
   2.4 Citizenship .............................................................................................................................. 18
   2.5 Regional pastoral migration policy .......................................................................................... 20

3. Land tenure and management in West Africa ................................................................... 20
   3.1 Land tenure systems ............................................................................................................... 21
   3.2 Dimensions of legal pluralism in land tenure ........................................................................... 23
   3.3 General land management policy ............................................................................................ 24
   3.4 Land tenure and migrants ....................................................................................................... 32
   3.5 Land conflict ........................................................................................................................... 34

4. Land and migration (meta-) trends and fragility ............................................................... 41
   4.1 The context of fragility and human and economic development in West Africa ........................ 42
   4.2 Meta-trends, land, and migration............................................................................................ 46
   4.3 Common recommendations to address the land and migration nexus ...................................... 55

5. Conclusion ....................................................................................................................... 59
   5.1 Ways forward ......................................................................................................................... 60

References .......................................................................................................................... 63




                                                                                                                                                  2
Acknowledgements
The author would like to first thank the team members of the International Organization for Migration
Land, Property and Reparations (LPR) unit for helping in the preparations of this report. In particular,
Peter Van der Auweraert, LPR Head, oversaw the report’s development and provided important
structural and substantive guidance, while Ina Rehema, research assistant, provided invaluable content
support, particularly with respect to the case studies. Much appreciation is also extended to Ethel
Gandia, LPR Officer, for covering the institutional processes related to the report.

Across the Institute of Migration, Claudia Pereira prepared the maps on population growth and
intraregional mobility. The report also benefited from input from colleagues at headquarters and in the
field, including from Ana Maria Barbosa de Melo, Enira Krdzaliac, Giovanni Cassani, Laura Lungarotti,
Louis Hoffmann, Sanusi Savage, and Timon Van Lidth.

IOM further extends its gratitude for the collaboration and support received from the World Bank, in
particular Deborah Isser, Senior Counsel, LEGJR & Program Manager, Justice for the Poor, who provided
continuous comments and guidance throughout the preparation of the report. Many thanks as well to
World Bank colleagues who provided substantive inputs during a brown bag lunch held at the World
Bank; as well as to Neelam Verjee and Lauri Scherer for seeing the report through its production.
Gratitude is extended as well to Tony Elumelu in ECOWAS for clarifying migrants’ rights in land
purchases.




                                                                                                      3
Abbreviations
ADR       alternative dispute resolution
AfDB      African Development Bank
ALC       African Leadership Centre
AOPP      Association of Professional Farmers’ Organisations
AU        African Union
AUC       African Union Consortium
CoFo      commissions foncières
CNOP      National Coordination of Farmers’ Organisations
DFID      Department for International Development
ECA       Economic Commission for Africa
ECOWAS    Economic Community of West African States
EU        European Union
FAO       Food and Agriculture Organization
GDP       gross domestic product
HDI       human development index
IDMC      Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre
IDP       internally displaced person
IFAD      International Fund for Agricultural Development
IIED      International Institute for Environment and Development
ILO       International Labour Organization
IOM       International Organization for Migration
IUCN      International Union for Conservation of Nature
LDC       least developed countries
MBSA      Mali Biocarburant SA
MCC       Millennium Challenge Corporation
MDGs      Millennium Development Goals
MINUSMA   Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
MNLA      Mouvement nationale pour la liberation de l'Azawad
NRC       Norwegian Refugee Council
                                                                      4
OECD      Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
SEXAGON   Union of Farmers in the Office du Niger
SoSuMar   Markala Sugar Company
UNDP      United Nations Development Programme
UNECA     United Nations Economic Commission for Africa
UNHCR     United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNODC     United Nations Office on Drug and Crime
USAID     US Agency for International Development




                                                                  5
1. Introduction
1.1 Background context

Land and property rights, migration, and citizenship are complex issues that cut across all social,
economic, and political spheres of West Africa. These issues are at the core of regional integration and
economic development, but are also key drivers of conflict and fragility.

In the Gulf of Guinea, the interplay of these issues resulted in devastating civil conflicts that spilled over
to neighbors and destabilized economic growth across the region. The Sahel is marked by low-intensity
but escalating violence caused by decreasing access to quality rangeland, competition for resources,
poverty, and social marginalization. Tensions around river basins in Senegal and the Gambia,
respectively, have been highly politicized under simmering conflict.

There is an abundance of literature on land conflict, migration, and citizenship, both individually and on
different aspects of how they intersect. Being generally descriptive or extremely technical in detail, the
literature paints a highly complex, overwhelming, and even contradictory picture of mutually reinforcing
cause, causality, and consequence of fragility and conflict.

Nevertheless, the hallmark challenges throughout the literature remain the same: legal pluralism in land
governance; ineffective management; unequal distribution; discriminatory policies; and the
consequences of artificial boundaries, all of which stem from colonial periods. Similarly, there is no
shortage of articles that point to the contemporary challenges of population growth, land scarcity,
urbanization, environmental degradation, and climate change. The varying impacts and prioritization of
these concerns expressed in the literature depends on the lens worn by the economists,
environmentalists, agricultural and livestock management sectors, development sectors, and the
humanitarian sector, which has more recently joined the discourse.

Regardless of the sector, the challenges in understanding these issues in relation to the West African
context, specifically in terms of conflict and fragility, is compounded by the region’s historical,
geographical, cultural, economic, and sociopolitical diversity. Moreover, programmatic implications vary
significantly according to the different situations and conditions of each of the main migratory groups:
pastoralists; economic and labor migrants; and forcibly displaced persons.

Despite the broad and long-standing recognition of the need to address these issues, little progress has
been made. The region therefore faces continued risks of further escalations of violence.

1.2 Purpose of the report

This paper provides an overarching scoping of the most pressing contemporary issues related to land,
migration, and citizenship, including how they intersect in various contexts and locations in West Africa.
While the information presented here is not based on new research, the way issues are analytically
framed captures structural challenges and sets them against the regional and global “meta-trends? of
which policy makers and practitioners should be aware for conflict-sensitive planning. The paper points

                                                                                                            6
to some of the effective practices in managing and mitigating these issues and also raises several
questions on areas for future research.

1.3 Structure of the report

Part I lays out the migratory context in West Africa. It points to the type, nature, and extent of mobility
that characterizes the region. Given the region’s commitment to regional integration and free
movement of persons, high levels of migration will likely continue, heralding benefits but also pressures
that intensify certain state weaknesses and fragilities, including with respect to citizenship and social
marginalization.

Part II sets out West Africa’s land tenure and management systems, including structural challenges,
general management policies, and key issues related to land tenure and migrants. It then continues to
highlight the most significant land conflicts that have occurred in the region. Although the conflicts
involve a range of drivers, there are common characteristics regarding land grievances before, during,
and after the conflicts.

Part III frames the key land and migration meta-trends in the context of fragility. Its purpose is to
highlight how contemporary global and regional trends relate to the land and migration nexus and how
their impacts may be experienced across the region. It then points to the typical recommendations that
come out in the literature for addressing the nexus and also highlights certain positive practices.

Part IV concludes with an overall exploration of the paper’s results and puts forward a series of research
questions that are necessary in order to discern the most effective and realistic operational approaches.

1.4 Report parameters

The terms of reference limit this report to desk research and consultations. Thus the first task in
preparing this report involved an extensive literature review of key concepts and principles.

It is important to note that despite the plethora of literature on each of the subject matters and country
cases, many of the most comprehensive comparative studies are dated. Furthermore, with certain
exceptions, most of the literature relies on general recycled data and sweeping generalized
statements—despite the diversity of culture, policies, and climate across the region. This is partly due to
the lack of up-to-date documentation, the often limited state capacity, slow administrative progress,
and the limited availability of data associated with low-income and so-called fragile states. It also stems
from the nature of irregular migration, transhumance mobility, and unwritten customary practices.
Indeed, Adepoju et al. (n.d.) state, “There is a profound lack of access to accurate migration information
in the subregion, which is neither centralized in an ECOWAS database nor readily available at the
national level?; and quote an International Labour Organization (ILO) report stating “existing statistics on
international labor migration in the subregion are generally agreed to be scarce, unreliable, and subject
to problems of comparability and availability? (p. 4). The desk-based literature review conducted for this
study has aimed to use and fact-check the most recent data, though gaps may remain, particularly with
respect to the most current laws, regulations, and administrative procedures. The author welcomes all

                                                                                                          7
updates and corrections.

Given that Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) member states have a distinct
regional integration policy that also significantly impacts how they approach mobility, the study limits its
country focus to the fifteen ECOWAS member states: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cape Verde, Côte d’Ivoire, the
Gambia, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo.

These countries cover a vast ecological landscape where land and migration issues manifest differently
even within the same country. These range from the super-arid pastoral area across Mali and Niger; the
Sahelian arid pastoral area that stretches along Cape Verde, Senegal, Mali, Burkina Faso, and Niger; the
Sudano-Sahelian semiarid pastoral area that follows from western to eastern Africa, including Senegal,
Mali, Burkina Faso, Togo, Benin, Niger, and Nigeria; the Sudano-Guinean subhumid pastoral area that
includes Senegal, the Gambia, Guinea, southern Mali, Côte d’Ivoire, southern Burkina Faso, and central
Nigeria. Country cases and examples are weaved throughout the report.

 Box 1. Key terminology

 Citizenship—for the purposes of this paper, citizenship is addressed in both formal national terms and
 informal and customary notions of “foreigner? and “outsider,? all of which have implications for land
 access and local tensions that fuel conflict and fragility.

 Conflict—disagreement that arises within a group when the beliefs or actions of one group are either
 resisted by or unacceptable to one or more members of another group (UNDP, 2003).

 Fragility—a continuum of various stages of state weakness particularly expressed in lack of institutional
 capacity and lack of resilience in the face of instability (ALC, 2008).

 Internally displaced persons (IDPs)—persons or groups of persons who have been forced or obliged to
 flee or leave their homes or places of habitual residence, in particular as the result of or in order to avoid
 the effects of armed conflict, situations of generalized violence, violations of human rights, or natural or
 human-made disasters, and who have not crossed an internationally recognized state border (IOM,
 2011).

 Irregular migration—the migration of people across national borders or the residence of foreign
 nationals in a country in a way that violates the destination country ’s immigration laws.

 Migration—the movement of a person or a group of persons, either across an international border, or
 within a state. It is a population movement, encompassing any kind of movement of people, whatever
 its length, composition, and causes (IOM, 2011).

 Land disputes—competing claims between or among individuals, communities, and state authorities
 about access to, control of, or use of certain pieces of land. All types of land can be subject to such
 competing claims, including urban land, rural land, constructed land, and land containing high-value
 natural resources (Van der Auweraert, 2013).



                                                                                                                  8
 Land grabbing—denotes the illegitimate or illegal appropriation of land, often by economically or
 politically dominant actors (often national elites) (IFAD, 2011).

 Labor Migration—movement of persons from one State to another, or within their own country of
 residence, for the purpose of employment (IOM, 2011).

 Land tenure—the system of rights, rules, institutions, and processes under which land is held, managed,
 used, and transacted. It relates to all natural resources, including trees, forests, freshwater lakes, rivers,
 and groundwater overlay. Land rights include ownership and a range of other land-holding and use
 rights (leasehold, usufruct, servitudes, grazing rights), which may coexist over the same plot of land.
 Land rights may be held by individuals, groups, or the state (Cotula and Toulmin, 2004).

 Land tenure security—the degree of reasonable confidence to not be arbitrarily deprived of the land
 rights enjoyed and/or the economic benefits deriving from them, including both “objective? elements
 (such as nature and enforceability of the rights) and “subjective? elements (such as landholders’
 perception of the security of their rights) (Cotula et al., 2004).

 Pastoralism—any predominantly livestock-based production system that is mainly extensive in nature
 and uses some form of mobility of livestock (IUCN, 2008).

 Refugee—a person who is outside their home country because they have suffered (or feared)
 persecution on account of race, religion, nationality, or political opinion (IOM, 2011).

 Remittances—money transfers from migrants to their countries of origin; grown to surpass official
 international development assistance (IOM, 2011).

 Transhumance—the seasonal movement of people with their livestock between pastures, often over
 long distances (Abdoul, 2011).



2. Intraregional migration in West Africa
Today, West Africa boasts one of the most mobile populations in the world. About 7.5 million, or 3
percent, of its population are migrants; most originate from and remain within the region (Bossard,
2009).

The region’s migratory culture begins with its long nomadic history and borderless sociocultural
connections. Local chiefs relied upon migrants to cultivate their land and populate their villages.
Colonialists later imposed forced labor practices that pushed entire families, particularly from Burkina
Faso, Guinea, Niger, Mali, and Sahelian countries to the cocoa and coffee plantations in Ghana and
forestry industries in Côte d’Ivoire. These practices left generations to build their livelihoods as
“outsiders? in other lands. Males from Mali and Guinea were also sent seasonally to the groundnut
production areas of Senegal and the Gambia. Following colonialism, in the first decade after
independence in 1957, Ghana’s cocoa and gold attracted a high number of migrants. From the 1970s,
migrants were drawn to Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire, where they played an important role in building the
                                                                                                                  9
respective cocoa and coffee economies; to Nigeria for its petroleum and spin offs from the oil boom;
and to Senegal for the trade and groundnuts.

Today, migration can take very different forms, depending on who is migrating (individuals or entire
households), the motivations to migrate (seasonal, economic, conflict, political changes) and the
duration of their stay (seasonal, short term or long term) (Cotula and Toulmin, 2004). Among West
Africa’s migrant populations are pastoralists (or herders) in the Sahel; cross-border labor and economic
migrants (skilled and unskilled); and those displaced by conflict and insecurity within the region (see
Table 1).

Table 1. Number of emigrants and immigrants in West African countries
                                           Stock of        Stock of         Stock of       Stock of
 Country                                  emigrants       emigrants       immigrants     immigrants
                                           (1,000s)      (% of pop.)        (1,000s)     (% of pop.)
 Benin                                        532             5.8             232             2.5
 Burkina Faso                               1,576             9.7            1,043            6.4
 Cape Verde                                   193            37.6             12.1            2.4
 Côte d’Ivoire                              1,171             5.4            2,407           11.2
 The Gambia                                   65              3.7             290            16.6
 Ghana                                        825             3.4            1,852            7.6
 Guinea                                       533             5.2             395             3.8
 Guinea-Bissau                                111             6.8              19             1.2
 Liberia                                      432            10.5              96             2.3
 Mali                                       1,013             7.6             163             1.2
 Niger                                        387             2.4             202             1.3
 Nigeria                                     1000             0.6            1,128            0.7
 Senegal                                      636             5.0             210             1.6
 Sierra Leone                                 267             4.6             107             1.8
 Togo                                         369             5.4             185             2.7
 Sources: World Bank, 2011; UNDP, 2013.




                                                                                                       10
2.1 Migrant groups

Pastoralists. In the arid and semiarid and subhumid regions of
                                                                              Nomadic pastoralists (or herders)
West Africa, movement is a way of life for the pastoralists and a             follow livestock resources;
necessary strategy for coping with seasonal and climatic variations.          Transhumant pastoralists follow
Centuries of practice have refined the pastoralist’s innate ability to        specific corridors of grazing and
survive and even sometimes prosper despite the extreme adversity              water areas, often circular in
of an otherwise impossible environment. Pastoralism supplies the              nature and eventually returning
                                                                              to a home base;
bulk of livestock for domestic meat markets and makes up to 10–
                                                                              Agro-pastoralists     are    semi-
15 percent of the GDP in Burkina Faso, Mali, Niger, and Senegal               sedentary groups that participate
(OECD–SWAC, 2006).                                                            in smaller livestock rearing as
                                                                              they also tend their own farms.
Figure 1. Pastoral mobility in the Sahel




Source: Climatic zones: WMO 2001 in Bossard, 2009; Mobility drawn from OECD, 2007a.


Throughout the region and across the Sahel, the pastoralist population reaches over 20 million.1 It is
comprised of the mainly Muslim Fulby (also known as Fula, Fulbe, Fulani, Peuhl), scattered throughout
Burkina Faso, Nigeria, Niger, Mali, Guinea, Cameroon, and Senegal, as well as the Tuareg (Mali, Niger)

1
 This figure represents the full Sahel area, which includes Mauritania, Chad, Sudan, Somalia, and Kenya, among
other countries not included in this study (FAO, 2001). A specific figure for just the ECOWAS countries has not been
documented in the literature and is difficult to ascertain, as overall it is difficult to track due to pastoralists’
mobility and the fact that many births are not registered with government administrations and rarely constitute a
categorized statistic in registers (World Bank, 2014).
                                                                                                                 11
and the Moors (Senegal). The migration flows are mainly north-south and west-east. The type and
duration of the mobility vary depending upon the local environments and types of livestock reared.

Pastoralist communities generally live in isolated, underdeveloped, and conflict-prone areas associated
with high vulnerability. In addition to typically having limited political representation—which is
exacerbated by their remoteness and mobility, being far from political and economic centers (African
Union, 2013)—they are often socially and politically marginalized.

Economic and labor migrants (skilled and unskilled). Among the nonpastoralists, about 5.5 million
economic emigrants are working in other countries across the region (World Bank, 2011; UNDP, 2013).
However, this neither includes undocumented migrants nor accounts for the considerable national
rural-urban labor migration.

Previously, mobility was associated with the short-term migration of young single males as part of
adulthood initiation or adventure.2 They would return a few years later to marry or takeover as head of
a household following the death of an elder (Konseiga, 2005). As part of a broader family or community
strategy, the villages would send younger replacements for the returning migrant (Charrière and Frésia,
2009). The migratory flows involved out-migration from the north or inland regions, especially Burkina
Faso, Mali, and Togo, toward the resource-rich coast, especially Nigeria and Côte d’Ivoire. In Mali, large
portions of the active labor force would leave to work on cocoa farms in Côte d’Ivoire, and return home
to cultivate cotton and grain during the short Sahelian rainy season (Konseiga, 2005; Shaw, 2007).

Mobility patterns, however, are shifting. Economic fluctuations and instabilities, high unemployment
(particularly among the youth), the search for higher education, population growth, land scarcity, and
climate change, among other factors, all drive migrants further afield. This is compounded by
globalization and advances in technology and remittance mechanisms that enable migrants to explore
alternative destinations for medium-to-longer-term migration opportunities while retaining stronger
economic, social, and political ties than ever before (Page and Plaza, 2005). Families, particularly among
the pastoralist and rural populations, will sponsor adult male members to go to the cities to secure
stable salaried jobs as alternative sources of income (Adepoju, 2006). Furthermore, increased education
has been correlated with the increase in the number of skilled women entering the migration streams,
especially skilled women from Ghana who migrate to Côte d’Ivoire, Togo, and Nigeria (Cotula et al.,
2004). As a consequence, many traditionally sending or receiving countries now simultaneously contain
a notable mix of immigrants, emigrants, or transiting migrants (Adepoju, 2006), commonly with
individuals who migrate multiple times to different destinations. In 2009, the OECD highlighted Côte
d’Ivoire’s increasing role as a transit country, notably “a stepping stone for wealth accumulation before
proceeding to other regional or international destinations? (Bossard, 2009, p. 75). Senegal in particular
has steady levels of in- and out-migration for economic reasons.

Forced displacement. West Africa has also been severely affected by forced displacement. While
pockets of low intensity and pastoral violence have always characterized the region, its recent past has


2
    Between the ages of 17 and 35.
                                                                                                       12
seen an increase in the severity of low-grade conflict, as well as the crippling effects of major war and
civil strife in Liberia (1989–1996, 1999–2003), Sierra Leone (1991–2002), Côte d’Ivoire (2002, 2010),
Guinea-Bissau (1998), and, to a lesser but noteworthy extent, Togo (2008). In 2013, insurgencies in the
Sahel have surfaced in Mali and Niger, while parts of otherwise stable Ghana, Nigeria, and Senegal
(Casamance) continue to grapple with simmering and sporadic low intensity conflicts (Annan, 2014).

Figure 2. Intraregional migration among ECOWAS countries




With the exception of Cape Verde, each of the West African countries simultaneously host refugees
while also having at least some of their nationals classified as refugees in other countries (see Figure 1).
In the past three years, the crisis in northern Mali (2012) has produced the largest flow of refugees
(175,000) and IDPs (353,455). Following Côte d’Ivoire’s postelection violence in 2011 in, 93,738 refugees
remain outside the country and another 24,000 are still considered internally displaced. Flows of
refugees have also turned to West Africa from Libya, north Cameroon, the Central African Republic,
Chad, and western Sudan (Darfur).

While many pastoralists are not classically classified as refugees or IDPs, the same causes of forced
displacement severely constrain their migration, livelihoods, and the coping mechanisms; these can still
be seen as a form of “displacement,? as pastoralists can no longer access their normal resources or
follow typical patterns. The limited access to pastoral corridors also means they “move into areas where
they face new tensions as they compete for resources with resident farmers? (World Bank and UNHCR,
2013, p. 6). They have consequently suffered significant losses in livestock and risk falling into deeper
poverty (World Bank and UNHCR, 2013).

                                                                                                         13
Figure 3. Displacement figures for West Africa, 2014


                                          394,615 West Africans
                                               as refugees


                                             377,455 IDPs



                                                 271,363 refugees
                                                      hosted




Figure 4. Breakdown of forced displacement in West Africa
 100,000                                                                    400,000
  90,000                                                                    300,000
  80,000                                                                    200,000
  70,000                                                                    100,000
  60,000                                                                         -
                                                                                      Mali
  50,000

  40,000

  30,000

  20,000

  10,000

      -




                        Refugees hosted      Own nationals as refugees   IDPs


 Source: UNHCR, 2014.




                                                                                             14
Moreover, returning displaced populations, particularly in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, and Sierra Leone,
number over 120,000. As will be discussed below, questions, uncertainty, and insecurity over land
ownership is one of the biggest factors impeding their return and reintegration.

2.2 Impacts of migration

The benefits of migration to economic development are well reported. Migration enables pastoral
livestock to contribute to the region’s agricultural GDPs, ranging from 5 percent in Côte d’Ivoire to 44
percent in Mali (African Union, 2013); and to enable employment in the Sahel for about half of the
economically active population.3 Indeed, half the meat and over two-thirds of the milk consumed in the
coastal cities of West Africa come from the Sahelian region (World Bank, 2013a). The expansion and
successes of the cocoa and coffee industry in the Gulf of Guinea is closely linked to the presence of
migrant farmers and laborers, with many others drawn to the cities and finding employment in the
informal sector (IIED, 1999).

Indeed, for destination countries, migration helps maintain stable labor market conditions that are
conducive for economic growth. It positively impacts the economy of origin through the flow of
remittances, and in some cases skill and knowledge transfer. In Senegal, 30 to 50 percent of active men
are absent from their villages, and remittances are estimated to account for 30 to 70 percent of the
family budget (Cotula and Toulmin, 2004). Inflows of remittances may be channeled toward community
development projects such as schools, health centers, and wells (Cotula and Toulmin, 2004). Migrants
also send out secondhand goods, spare parts, vehicles, and other items to support their relatives’
businesses (Cotula and Toulmin, 2004).

In contrast, although remittances boost out-migration countries’ economies, migration is also linked to
worsening socioeconomic conditions. In particular, a substantial outflow of skilled and educated
migrants leads to a decrease in the quality of public service. Similarly, the loss of a large portion of
young labor may produce shortages in agriculture-based economies. Some development actors raise the
concern that economies become overly and unsustainably dependent upon remittances, which makes
them vulnerable to external shocks and reliant upon family members (particularly their descendants)
who feel less and less obliged to send home remittances (Cotula and Toulmin, 2004).

Migration also adds pressure to areas suffering from high unemployment and urbanization, land
scarcity, and social resistance to higher numbers of “outsiders.? It can burden meager resources and
limit hosting areas’ ability to deliver services and carry out other responsibilities. Particularly in difficult
economic times, nationals often target migrants with hostility, blaming them for the country’s
economic, social, and political problems; as youth unemployment grows, migrants are also accused of
taking jobs from nationals (Adepoju, 2005).




3
  However, the regional supply of meat and dairy products is far lower than demand, resulting in a large net
importation livestock products; this trend is expected to increase in future the (African Union, 2013).
                                                                                                             15
Table 2. Remittances as a percentage of GDP (2010)

Country                                                                    % of GDP
Benin                                                                         3.78
Burkina Faso                                                                  1.08
Cape Verde                                                                    8.36
Côte d’Ivoire                                                                 .78
The Gambia                                                                    11.02
Ghana                                                                         .42
Guinea                                                                        4.28
Guinea-Bissau                                                                 5.76
Liberia                                                                       2.71
Mali                                                                          4.63
Niger                                                                         1.63
Nigeria                                                                       5.1
Senegal                                                                       10.47
Sierra Leone                                                                  3.01
Togo                                                                          10.49
These figures include remittances from all West African migrants abroad and do not include national rural-urban
remittances.
Source: UNDP, 2013.

2.3 Regional migration policies

Similar to the European Union (EU), ECOWAS member states share a regional external border with
essentially free mobility across national borders. In 1980, member states ratified the Protocol on Free
Movement of Persons and the Right of Residence and Establishment. In addition to the right to enter
countries within the region for 90 days without a visa, the Protocol entitles community citizens to enjoy
the right of stay, residence (including the right to seek and carry out income-earning employment),
establishment (establish enterprises) and access to the Community Court of Justice. It includes
provisions in favor of equal treatment, protection against “collective and arbitrary expulsion,? and
protection of the fundamental human rights of all migrants, regardless of status (Addy, 2005, p. 2). As
such, while still requiring a residency permit, community citizens have the right to integrate into
member states’ territories and to own land and properties in accordance with national legislation.



                                                                                                           16
However, Article 4 of the Protocol gives states a considerable exception: the “right to refuse admission
into their territory any Community citizen who comes within the category of inadmissible immigrant
under its [national] laws? (ECOWAS Protocol A/P.1/5/79). This provision continues to give member
states the ability to discriminate based on very restrictive and for the most part severely outdated
domestic inadmissibility laws (Adepoju et al., n.d.). In particular, Adepoju et al. (n.d.) observe that while
the dated nature of these domestic laws may account for the “discriminatory language of some of the
provisions (idiots, epileptics, lepers)? it does not, however, “render them inoperative? even if they
contradict the principles of nondiscrimination in the Protocols (p. 3).

Indeed, the Protocol is riddled with unqualified language, giving states wide room for interpretation and
manipulation (Adepoju et al., n.d.). For instance, in contradiction to the aims set out in the regional
ECOWAS policies, several countries have periodically enacted laws that essentially restrict
“foreigners?—including nationals of member states—from participating in certain economic activities.
As detailed in this report, Côte d’Ivoire restricted Burkinabés’ land rights, which fueled tensions and was
a key trigger of conflict (see Box 4). Moreover, in response to worsening economic conditions and rising
employment in Nigeria in the 1980s, the Nigerian government revoked articles of the Protocol in 1983,
expelling around a million irregular migrants, mostly from Ghana (Adepoju, 2006), and doing the same in
1985 (Adepoju, 2005). Moorish traders were expulsed from Senegal in 1989. In addition, border disputes
between Senegal and Mauritania, and Ghana and Togo have also resulted in expulsion of Community
citizens (Adepoju, 2005). Therefore, despite member state agreement across the region over the
treatment, conditions, and protection of migrants, there is little enforcement of the policies or sanctions
against states that randomly apply and revoke the provisions to suit their own purposes.

Overall, there have been different levels of progress in the Protocol’s national implementation and it has
had limited monitoring at the Community level due to:

       poor linkage between migration and development processes;
       inadequate administrative and institutional capacity for effective migration policies and
        management;
       lack of protection for migrant workers; and
       poor quality of migration statistics and faltering political support that hinders effective
        intraregional mobility of labor (Robert, 2004).

Particularly with respect to the rights of residency and establishment, as well as issues of the mutual
recognition of qualifications, gaps have also undermined the mobility and development objectives of the
Protocol (AfDB, 2013b). Another layer of ambiguity relates to the status of the Protocol in relation to
refugees, particularly in terms of residency and establishment. In theory, refugees from ECOWAS
member states would be entitled—as Community citizens—to secure residence and the right to seek
and carry out such work (Adepoju et al., n.d.). However, the Protocol is not a refugee instrument and
was not drafted with refugees in mind, particularly as the most significant intraregional displacements
have taken place since the Protocol was established. While the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR) and ECOWAS “appear to believe that they do? apply to refugees, many member
states are sensitive and equivocal to the issue (Adepoju et al., n.d., p. 15). Given the exceptions stated in

                                                                                                          17
the Protocol, states have the discretion related to inadmissibility and expulsion for “those determined to
be dangers to national security or public order? (Adepoju et al., n.d., p. 15). Adepoju et al. write:

       “The principal fears of host states appear to be twofold: first, that large numbers of
      refugees pose a threat of instability through --the perception of—disproportionate
      involvement in common crime or in support for dissident political factions in their
      countries of origin; second, that recognizing an entitlement of refugees to remain in the
      host states on the basis of the ECOWAS protocols will ipso facto terminate the status of
      the refugees and result in a withdrawal of support to the refugee communities from
      UNHCR and other actors? (p. 16).

While many of the security concerns (particularly those related to crime) are not quantitatively founded,
states nevertheless remain empowered to apply the exceptions in the Protocol to deny refugees the
rights and privileges of Community membership. Given the overall challenges to the Protocol’s
implementation, in 2014 ECOWAS launched a process for its review. In particular, the residency permit
has been identified as a source of discrimination and harassment, and thus the review process aims to,
among other things, eliminate the permit requirement (Osayande, 2014).

2.4 Citizenship

As seen, ECOWAS’s regional integration policies aim to establish both a normative and legislated identity
of the “Community citizen,? which in principle, albeit limited in practice, aims to give migrants equal
rights and protections as national citizens. Indeed, the process to eliminate the need for residency
permits removes another hurdle for establishing livelihoods in other countries. Another significant
measure aimed at creating a regional identity was the establishment of the ECOWAS passport in 2000,
with a view toward replacing national passports.

However, many West African nationals, particularly rural dwellers, do not possess national passports
due to reasons such as illiteracy, poverty, and reportedly the corruption of officials (Adepoju, 2006).
Given the limited institutional presence in many areas, many also are unable to (or do not see the need
to) travel the distance to major centers and pay the costs associated with obtaining a passport,
residency permit, or visa longer than the 90 days. In the same way, few are aware of the existence of the
ECOWAS passport, and far fewer have access to or incentives to use it.

Another notable complication for obtaining passports relates to the fact that many West African births
are unregistered. Therefore, significant portions of the population lack identity and citizenship
documentation, making it impossible for them to obtain a passport, access services, or, as is relevant to
this paper, register/title land. Given the porous borders and weak migration management, many
migrants’ movements are undocumented, and/or they have or end up with an irregular migration status
in the host country. This leaves them vulnerable to exploitation and outside the protections warranted
to them as Community citizens; and on the other hand it gives them little legitimacy and protection in
their home state if and when they return.

The lack of national registration and identity documentation raises several difficulties relevant to this

                                                                                                       18
paper. It fuels the political and social marginalization of transhumance pastoralists. It also means that
undocumented citizens (and migrants) are unable to purchase, register, or title property or land. This
has facilitated corrupt sales of land, where vendors use forged paperwork or unwritten customary
practices to wrongfully claim rights; while those unable to purchase land formally (undocumented
citizens and migrants) are more prone to purchase land informally, which leaves them without actual
legitimate rights or vulnerable to exploitation in rental and leasing agreements (see Section 3.4).

Apart from the political application of citizenship, the context in West Africa is further complicated by
historical and cultural notions of “foreigner? and “outsider? that have equally marked the character,
migratory trends, and inter-ethnic conflicts across the region. As Section 3.1 points out, customary rules
and policies are governed by the local land chiefs, and their authority over their customary land is
recognized at the state level, including in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Burkina Faso, Ghana, Nigeria, and
Niger, among others. Ownership of customary land typically follows lineage inheritance, and anyone
from another village or outside the immediate region, is deemed an outsider or foreigner, regardless of
whether they are nationals of that country. As such, foreigners and outsiders, being composed of both
national and cross-border nationals, are expected to follow the norms and practices set out by the land
chief, and their ability to secure land tenure is severely constrained (Section 3.4). Therefore, in principle,
regardless of one’s national status, notions of citizenship itself have little relevance in much of the land
area that remains under customary ownership (which is most of rural West Africa).

The impact of the notions of “foreigner? and “outsider? has underscored most of the land conflicts that
have taken place in West Africa. For instance, in Liberia, the Mandingo are a Muslim group widely
regarded to be of Guinean origin. They are commonly referred to as newcomers or foreigners, even
though they may have been in Liberia since the 18th century. They could only access land by entering
subordinate relationships through the tutorat institution, which kept them subordinate to their patrons
despite their general wealth. When Samuel Doe came to power in 1980, as the first indigenous head of
state he politically affiliated himself with the Mandingo while cleansing the indigenous Gio and Mano
from the political elite. This outraged many Liberians, who regarded the Mandingo as foreigners. Inter-
ethnic conflict was one dynamic that shaped civil war violence. Members of ethnic groups claiming first-
comer or indigenous status attempted to expel members of the “foreigners? or migrant ethnic groups
from their land, and in particular members of the Mandingo. The Mandingo claimed they too were
indigenous to Liberia, at least in some regions. Inter-ethnic land disputes were a significant conflict
driver in the lead-up to the Liberian civil war (NRC, 2012). Similarly, Sierra Leone is home to about
sixteen ethnic groups, the largest being the Temne, Mende, Limba, and Fula. The Fula, Muslim traders,
are often portrayed as “foreigners? by other Sierra Leoneans, which results in frequent struggles over
property and land access. However, the application of “foreigner? and “outsider? exists to different
degrees in every country throughout the region, especially among the transhumance pastoralists.

The impacts of citizenship, formal as well as cultural notions of outsiders, are explored in greater depth
in Section 3.5 on land conflict. Most notably is the case of the Côte d’Ivoire conflict (see Box 4), which
embodies all elements of land, migration, and citizenship before, during, and after the conflict.



                                                                                                           19
2.5 Regional pastoral migration policy

With a view toward regulating transhumance, in 1998, ECOWAS heads of state agreed on a regional
framework (Decision A/DEC.5/10/98) for regulating cross-border transhumance among its fifteen
member states. The decision was then backed by Rule C/REG.3/01/03 (adopted in 2003). Together, the
decision and rule define the conditions for movement of livestock; looking after animals; and hosting
transhumant cattle. Notably, they:

       affirm the strategic importance of pastoral mobility;
       recognize the viability and economic efficiency of a pastoralist livelihood;
       support the need to provide a secure environment for pastoralism;
       assert the importance of policy reforms and pastoral legislations; and
       promote risk management, particularly related to drought and calls for governments to
        mainstream risk management into policy frameworks (Abdoul, 2011).

The chief outcome of the Decision was the establishment of an International Transhumance Certificate.
The certificate indicates the number and types of animals, vaccinations received, and the itinerary
planned. The purpose of the certificate and the regulations more broadly are to:

       allow a control of departing livestock herds;
       assure the protection of animal health of local herds in the host country;
       inform in good time the populations of “welcoming areas? of the arrival of herds from
        neighboring countries;
       calls for herders, farmers, local government representatives, and other concerned parties to
        form dispute settlement commissions (African Union, 2013).

While host country legislation must protect the rights of nonresident mobile herders, the herders must
also abide by the laws of the host country in relation to forests, wildlife, water points, and pastures
(African Union, 2013).

Despite the policy developments, difficulties and conflicts continue over the movement of herds in the
region. The bureaucratic procedures and administrative red tape hinder the cattle migration. Further,
many are faced with illegal taxes per animal, and a fee, depending on whether one is demanded at
police, customs, or gendarme checkpoints (OECD-SWAC, 2007). Furthermore, frequent reports surface
over serious incidents, including violence, in pastoral areas due to failure to comply with national and
regional regulations, damage to fields and harvests, grazing in protected areas, and loss of animals
(OECD-SWAC, 2007). There have been no assessments conducted on the impact of the regional policy on
pastoralism.




                                                                                                     20
3. Land tenure and management in West Africa
Land and natural resources are key assets for economic        Land is connected to:
development, food security, and poverty reduction.              basic needs—shelter, livelihood, food
Most West African economies still rely heavily on land,         identity, emotional, cultural and social
agriculture, and resources for a significant share of their     power, politics and governance
GDP, employment, and export earnings (Cotula et al.,            public spaces, infrastructure and
2004; African Union, AfDB, and ECA, 2011). Likewise,              development
land and resources are vital for the livelihoods, income,       strategic socioeconomic assets
and employment of a large portion of the population.            environment protection and
                                                                  conservation
In many areas, however, land is becoming increasingly
                                                            Source: IOM, UN-Habitat, and NRC, 2014.
scarce. A variety of pressures, including demographic
growth, migration, and climate change (which will be explored below), have increased the competition
for land among multiple land users (farmers, pastoralists, and so on), government municipalities, urban
elites, and foreign investors. The scarcity has also increased the value of the land, making its
ownership—and clarity therein—all the more desirable. These tensions have major political and social
implications, as they involve issues of broader resource control and exploitation and the distribution of
wealth and power in society (Cotula et al., 2004).

As Cotula et al. (2004) write, land rights are the backbone of a land tenure system. Land tenure is the
system of rules, rights, institutions, and processes that govern the way in which land is held, managed,
used, and transacted. Land rights include ownership as well as the coinciding range of other land holding
and usage rights, such as leasehold, usufruct, servitudes, and grazing rights, among others (Cotula et al.,
2004).

The complexity of land issues in West Africa stems from the coexistence of several formal and informal
systems that govern much of the same areas: customary and statutory land tenure, Islamic Sharia law,
informal arrangements, and a hybrid of them all. This legal pluralism often leads to overlapping rights,
contradictory rules, and competing authorities (Cotula et al., 2004). Generally, statutory systems govern
urban areas, while rural areas—which constitute the majority of West Africa’s land area—are covered
under customary systems. The peri-urban lands fall between the two, creating opportunities for those
who are better connected and informed (Cotula et al., 2004).

3.1 Land tenure systems

Customary systems. In customary systems, access to land and resources is an integral part of social
relationships. Historically, land ownership was determined by first clearance of the land. Common
principles hold that land belongs to a community (family, lineage, village) as opposed to individuals;
there are often spiritual or sacred dimensions to the land imposed by that social group; and
theoretically, it is inalienable, meaning it cannot be “sold? (Zongo, 2010, p. 1).




                                                                                                        21
Beyond these historical commonalities, the content of customary systems is based on extremely
diverse—even incompatible—localized practices and norms.4 Being largely unwritten, customary
systems are flexible and negotiable and continuously evolving to accommodate external influences, such
as Islamic law,5 economic factors, and other cultural and political interactions (Cotula et al., 2004). Land
chiefs typically derived their authority from original occupancy (descendants of community founders),
conquest, or from the magic/religious alliance with the genii loci (spirits of the place) (Delville, 1998).

Land chiefs have the right to accept or refuse the settlement of a new household on the land. Family
landholdings have cultivation or administration rights, and they can then lend those rights to “outsiders?
in the form of leasing, tenancies, and share contracts, as well as short-term or often unlimited leases
that are conditional on the outsider conforming to local norms and customs (Cotula, 2007, p. 36).
Tenants thus typically have secondary or derived rights (IIED, 2001). Outsiders may be able to change
their landholding status and become full members of the community through marriage. However,
regardless of who is using the land, the primary rights holders usually remain along the
family/community/lineage. As explained below, this principle of lending or renting land to outsiders for
a long duration becomes a particular point of contention between different land tenure systems.
Significantly, many migrants may have thought they purchased land that indigenous populations
consider as on long-term loan or lease. In Ghana during the 1980s, for instance, traditional authorities
attempted to re-appropriate lands that had previously been sold outright to migrant populations, and
consequently even now many migrants “have felt that they have been swindled or defrauded by chiefs
who have reneged on contracts and demanded increasingly arbitrary extractions? (Mitchell, 2012, p. 5).

Statutory systems. The colonial period gave rise to state/statutory systems of land tenure, the principles
of which derive from citizenship, nation building, and constitutional rights. Land rights are allocated and
confirmed through the issuance of titles or other forms of ownership registration (Cotula et al., 2004).
Unlike its customary counterpart, state systems are based on written laws and regulations, acts of
centralized or decentralized government agencies, and judicial decisions.

Colonial policy in the francophone countries adopted another principle referred to as “land to the tiller?
or mise en valeur, whereby rights are obtained by putting land to use for a certain period of time, which
is a principle also found in Sharia law. Several countries have since affirmed this principle in government
policy and legislation. While on the one hand this reaffirmed many customary claims of “first clearance?
rights, on the other hand it opened the gate for government expropriation of unused (or underused)
customary landholdings. In particular, this has negatively affected pastoralists, as “grazing? is not
considered to be land cultivation and thus there is no limit to agricultural settlement and commercial


4
  There can be competing customary claims between, for example, the descendants of “firstcomers? and those of
“latecomers,? between maternal and paternal lines, and between those who worked the land at different periods
throughout history. Dispute settlement in these cases often depends on the relations of power (IIED, 1999).
5
  Sharia law has influenced the customary systems in parts of Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Niger, Nigeria, the Gambia,
and Mauritania. Sharia law recognizes universal land rights for all Muslims. Private rights are established via 10
years of continuous occupation and land use, and landholders who do not cultivate their own land are obliged to
have it worked on by others, otherwise their ownership lapses. Women may own land, but do not inherit it,
leading to conflict with some other customary principles of succession, notably among matrilineal societies.
                                                                                                               22
ranching upon pastoral corridors. Only two countries, Mali and Niger, provide protection for pastoral
land by recognizing grazing as a legitimate use of land (Cotula et al., 2004).

The statutory land tenure and management systems introduced in the colonial period have generally
limited coverage (African Union, AfDB, and ECA, 2011), which is reinforced by the states’ often absent or
ineffective management of its resources (Cotula et al., 2004). As a consequence, the local populations
continue to turn to informal and customary practices, especially as customary systems are generally
better able to recognize multilayered rights—of usage, seasonal passage, and sacred areas, which may
be undermined by a formal ownership system. However, migrants and women may feel that the formal
statutory system better protects their rights over land than would be possible under certain
discriminatory customary norms.

In countries such as Liberia and Côte d’Ivoire there is a movement to regularize and title customary land.
While this offers the advantages of tenure security, it also poses challenges, especially for women. As
such, formalizing customary rights consolidates the discriminatory norms on the one hand without
compensating for the subtle use rights that do exist within the customary system on the other (Isser,
2014).

Informal arrangements/systems. Land tenure can also be arranged informally, or as in Burkina Faso,
Benin, and Côte d’Ivoire, through processes of “informal formalization? (Zongo, 2010, p. 3). Land
transactions are recorded on written documents signed by the parties and by witnesses, and validated
by either local administrative or customary authorities. Farmers trust that having the agreements in
writing gives their land rights more stability; however, while sometimes accepted as legitimate, they
often they have little or no legal value, particularly under formal statutory law. Given their informal and
unregulated nature (in addition to a lack of paralegal skills at the local level), the written documents are
often incomplete, and their full terms and conditions unclear. This gives rise to exploitable loopholes
and misunderstandings. Moreover, the informal written agreements may conflict with previous
landholders’ preexisting, unwritten agreements.

3.2 Dimensions of legal pluralism in land tenure

On the one hand, legal pluralism is not necessarily a problem. It provides management and dispute
settlement for those who otherwise do not have the means to access formal systems (or in a timely
manner). In many instances, customary arbitration is the first line of dispute settlement and only if it
fails does the case pass through to the formal systems. This is especially true in postconflict settings,
where the process of developing new or modified legislation is slower than the social dynamics and
changes taking place on the ground (Unruh, 2009). Legal pluralism enables individuals to settle their
issues through the quickest and most suitable system at that moment (Unruh, 2009). In post-war Sierra
Leone, “customary law officers? served as an interface between the legal fields (Unruh, 2009). In
postconflict Liberia, the formal system was perceived as failing in terms of affordability, accessibility,
timeliness, and cultural relevance in terms of reflecting local values, principles, and belief systems. It was
also widely regarded as impartially skewed toward the interests of the wealthy, powerful, and socially
connected individuals or groups (Isser, 2009).

                                                                                                           23
On the other hand, customary systems also carry with them layers of discrimination against “outsiders?
from other communities, particularly when there is ethnic or religious diversity or among specific groups
such as migrants and women (see Box 9). Further, confusion and tension is inevitable when there are
too many competing authorities claiming legitimacy in overlapping jurisdictions.6 This leads to, as many
authors claim, “forum shopping?—seeking out the system that is most likely to side in their favor
(Delville, 1998). Being unaware of the terms of different systems and often unable to afford to travel to
present their claims in towns and cities, the less-educated and poorer populations are more likely to fail.
Moreover, losing parties will appeal to alternative systems, and thus rulings are likely to be challenged
and cancelled. Therefore, it has been argued that the challenge is not legal pluralism per se, but the lack
of authority and conviction of the decisions made (Delville, 1998).

    Box 2. Competing land claims between two systems

    In 2000, the mayor of a commune close to Bamako, Mali (Dialakologi) claimed that the municipality
    owned some 300 peri-urban plots. He sold several of the plots for residential purposes. However, a local
    landholding family claimed customary rights over the same area, and argued that municipality’s land
    title was forged. The family also sold some plots within the area. Despite the competing claims, those
    who had bought the land from both sides began to build on it. In August 2003, the Tribunal of Kati
    decided in favor of the municipality, and ordered that the houses built by those who had purchased the
    land from the landholding family be demolished. However, in November 2003, the Court of Appeal in
    Bamako reversed the decision, decided in favor of the landholding family, and ordered the demolition of
    the buildings of those who had bought from the municipality. The dispute’s resolution is not recorded.

    Source: Cotula and Toulmin, 2004.

3.3 General land management policy

During the colonial period, French efforts to convert public land to leasehold and freehold, and to have
the indigenous population register their land, had little effect. Large parts of land were declared as
public domain. Customary systems persisted (and continue to persist) with little intervention. In
contrast, the British sought to establish territorial control by forming alliances with senior customary
rulers. They introduced a system of freehold tenure in particular regions (such as Sierra Leone), with a
juxtaposed adaptation of land administration based on customary law. Regardless of the system,
enforcing land law has been difficult, and decisions about land claims have more often reflected the
power, influence, and vested interest of the various stakeholders (IIED, 1999).

Government policies over other renewable natural resources (forest, inland, marine fisheries, pastures,
and so on) were also (and for the most part remain) “state-centric.? In countries such as Guinea and
Côte d’Ivoire, the state had centralized control notably over forests, irrespective of established
customary use and land rights. This continues to have particular ramifications over use of specific forest
resources, including rights to harvest commercial use timber, non-timber forest products (NTFPs), and


6
 Land chiefs, village chiefs, administrative executives, regional customary authorities, religious authorities, local
government bodies, judges, or various village/inter-village or communal committees.
                                                                                                                  24
minerals (IIED, 1999; USAID, 2013e).7 Often, despite customary claims of those who reside in the forests,
governments grant concessions or designate protected areas, backed by statutory law or disregard of
customary claims (USAID, 2013e). In Guinea, farmers have no incentives to conserve timber trees on
their farmland, since they are the property of the state (IIED, 1999).

In addition, colonial regimes appropriated prime agricultural and urban land resources to foreigners,
their descendants, and investment companies. Postcolonialism, substantial assets were passed on to
political elites, their affiliates, and multinational corporation. Moreover, land grabbing was particularly
rampant and abused (IIED, 1999). Consequently, across West Africa land was, and in many ways
continues to be, unequally distributed; the number of people who are “land poor? in both rural and
urban areas has increased. Unfarmed land, which may actually be fallow, grazing land, or a community
agricultural reserve, is viewed as unoccupied and thus the state’s “eminent domain? (IIED, 1999, p. 10).
However, as noted, given the state’s limited intervention in these areas, they have often become de
facto open-access regimes (IIED, 1999). However, this open access is increasingly insecure for users as
land becomes increasingly scarce.

Following the weakening of the central state in many of the countries, the 1990s witnessed a wave of
democratization processes (notable exceptions being the Togo, Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone).
Particularly in the francophone countries, there was a shift toward increasingly decentralized
government structures, and in many countries (such as Ghana, Senegal, and Burkina Faso) smallholders
started to set up farmers’ associations, national networks, and federations (Nelen et al., 2013).
Decentralization has been underway most notably in Senegal for some time, which has raised the need
to amend statutory systems to provide more room for local level governance and land management
(IIED, 1999). An approach known as the gestion de terroirs villageois has increasingly gained traction
since the 1980s in a large number of francophone countries. The approach, which usually emerges as
part of supported development projects, aims to place decision making over land use, natural resource
management, and socioeconomic planning at the local level under village-level authorities. However,
legal recognition of the village-level authorities for this has yet to occur. Certain challenges have also
emerged in some cases. For example:

      The approach has enabled rural communities to assert largely exclusive rights over their
       territories to the determinant of non-permanent residents and mobile populations (IIED, 1999),
       a notable example is pastoral herders in Burkina Faso, a situation that gave rise to local tensions
       and rivalries (Cotula et al., 2004).
      Several areas may rely upon the same resources (such as wetlands), but these may be situated
       under another area’s jurisdiction. This requires and depends upon reliable cooperation in
       managing and settling disputes over such resources (IIED, 1999).

7
  USAID (2013e) writes: “Even where laws on carbon rights may be present, they may not distinguish between
rights of local communities to sequestered carbon (actually stored carbon); carbon sinks (natural entities that
retain the carbon, including land (above and below ground); subsurface carbon; tree ownership when separate
from land ownership; carbon sequestration potential; carbon credits (the right to pollute an amount equivalent to
the carbon sequestered in, or emissions avoided from, a natural sink) ; and use rights (e.g., easements, leases,
profits)? (p. 18).
                                                                                                              25
     The initiatives have typically depended on international assistance, and there has been a
      tendency for them to fall aside once funding has finished (IIED, 1999).

Currently, less than 5 percent of West Africa’s land area is held under a formally registered title. These
areas are mainly urban or within high return projects, such as in irrigation. The challenges to registration
include:

        the high cost of mapping and registering titles to many small plots;
        maintaining an updated register;
        the fact that titling processes tend to favor the literate and wealthier groups; they tend to
         register primary rights holders and exclude secondary or derived rights, particularly women who
         gain land through marriage and herders who may be allowed to graze their animals on crop
         residue;
        the social impact of breaking down the social and cultural connections to land;
        resistance in areas with a strong customary practice; and
        conflict where resources are of considerable value and thus subject to substantial competition
         and dispute (Cotula et al., 2004).

Alternatives to titling have been tested in a number of countries, including community land use planning
projects and pilot registration schemes in Côte d’Ivoire and Benin. However, the impact of these
schemes is yet to be understood.

 Table 3. Current land management in West Africa
 Country         Land policies                                                           Sources*

 Benin           Top of political agenda since the 1990s and reforms have been Ouedraogo et
                 under review. Consultations have been underway since 2005. The al., 2006
                 goal is to integrate statutory and customary land tenure
                 arrangements.                                                  MCC, 2013a
                 The 2007 Benin Rural Landholding law recognizes customary
                 rights in land as equal to civil law property rights. It identifies
                 written documents such as the rural landholding plan and rural
                 landholding certificate as recognized instruments for asserting and
                 protecting these rights.




                                                                                                         26
Burkina      Several reforms were undertaken, notably in 1960, 1984, 1991, Ouedraogo et al.,
Faso         1996, and 2005. All policies reflect the duality of statutory and 2006
             customary systems.
                                                                               USAID, 2010a
             Revisions have been underway since 2006. These aim to produce
             a document that addresses the land rights of rural actors,
             particularly poorer small farmers; decentralizes rural land
             management systems and local participation; and promotes
             alternative land dispute resolution mechanisms, among others.

             The 2009 Rural Land Tenure law enables local recognition of
             customary land rights. The law also reinforces the devolution of
             authority over land issues and provides for the formalization of
             user rights and the possibility of transforming such rights into
             private titles.
Cape Verde   There are no preexisting systems of indigenous tenure since it was IIED, 1999
             uninhabited prior to Portuguese occupation.
                                                                                USAID, 2007
             Land tenure has not been a key concern and the country largely
             relies on preindependence legislation. An important exception is MCC, 2013b
             the 1981 Agrarian Reform Act which sought to distribute
             unproductive landholdings over 5 hectares.

             In 2012, the government financed the scanning and digitizing of
             record books that guarantee existing land property rights in the
             capital Praia and on the island of Sal, and built a software system
             to computerize transactions at the land registry offices on both
             islands.
Côte         Since the colonial period through today, all vacant and USAID, 2013a
d’Ivoire     uncultivated land has been deemed state property.

             The 1998 Rural Land Law stipulates the transformation of
             customary land rights to private property rights regulated by the
             state. The 2000 Constitution guarantees the right of property to
             all.

             In August 2013, parliament extended implementation of the 1998
             Rural Land Law by 20 years. As of yet, however, no money has
             been allocated to its full implementation.
The Gambia   Land legislation is underlined by legal pluralism.                    Ouedraogo et al.,
                                                                                   2006
             During the 1990s, several changes were simultaneously underway
             related to “the conversion of customary tenure to leasehold
             tenure; the centralisation of the planning process and powers of
             the State; the devolution and decentralisation of land
             management; and the reinforcement of customary tenure? (p. 6).

                                                                                                   27
          The policy and administration changes were occurring at different
          levels and have strained the land tenure situation.
Ghana     Over 80 percent of land in Ghana is customarily owned. The Ouedraogo et al.,
          country is plagued by conflicting and overlapping land legislation, 2006
          and there are more than 150 pieces of legislation that directly
          relate to land administration.                                      USAID, 2007

          The 1992 constitution upholds the authority of local chiefs to USAID, 2013b
          manage and allocate land, and divides land into both public and
          customary tenures (the latter has substantial differences between
          the north, south, and west of the country). It allows foreigners to
          lease land for terms of up to 50 years.

          A dual tenure and management systems prevails, running in
          parallel rather than in coordination with each other, producing
          contradictions and insecurities. A government and donor-led
          large-scale land reform project was launched 2003, culminating in
          the Land Commission Act in 2008. Established by merging the
          country’s major land sector agencies, the Ghanaian Land
          Commission is now the dominant land management institution.
Guinea    The 1990 Constitution guarantees its citizens the right to private Ouedraogo et al.,
          property and the unalienable right to benefit from the country’s 2006
          natural resources.
                                                                             USAID, 2010b
          The 1992 Guinea Land Code (Code Foncier et Domanial) affirms
          the rights of individuals to obtain land ownership. Vacant sites
          without owners belong to the state. The code is strongly oriented
          toward the urban environment.

          The Pastoral Rights Law of 1995 (Loi du 29 Août 1995 Portant Code
          Pastoral), grants herders open and free access to pastoral areas
          and natural resources in pastoral areas.

          Land legislation has remained ineffective in rural areas. Most of
          Guinea’s land is unregistered, governed by customary law, and
          vulnerable to transfer by the state or privatization.

Guinea-   The Portuguese colonialists permitted land expropriation out of Ouedraogo et al.,
Bissau    public interest, and local dispossession of land increased following 2006
          certain decrees in the 1960s. The decrees classified the lands
          (urban, shared use according to local custom, vacant lands) and as
          the colonial authorities were the sole decision makers, many
          abuses were reported during this process.

          Following independence, all land was nationalized under state

                                                                                             28
          ownership, but the 1961 decree remained. Revisions were
          attempted in the 1980s and 1990s.

          The Land Law of 1998 sets out to guarantee farmers access
          land; integrate customary rules and practices into the new
          law; and stimulate the development of the land market.
Liberia   Based on a double land system. Americo-African settlers occupied Rincon, 2010
          the coastal area. All other land belonged to the state. The inland
          remained indigenous and followed customary practices.              USAID, 2010f

          A customary authority on behalf of the community manages local
          land resources in the rural area. Access rights under the customary
          regime are restricted to village inhabitants who are members of a
          certain lineage, which are under the chief’s authority. The system
          penalizes youth, who are historically marginalized regarding
          access to land resources. Women and migrants are in an even
          more precarious position.

          The Land Commission was created in 2009 to review and analyze
          Liberia’s land laws and formulate a new land rights policy, which
          was adopted by the Republic of Liberia in May 2013. It clearly
          defines the various categories of land (public, government,
          customary, and private land, as well as protected areas) and
          addresses historic inequalities by giving customary and private
          lands equal protection with a specific emphasis on gender
          equality.
Mali      The 1992 constitution guarantees citizens the right to own Djiré, 2006
          property and provides for the protection of property.
                                                                                USAID, 2010c
          Legislation (the 2000 Land Code) stipulates that all land is
          nationally owned, and that customary and so-called vacant land LANDdac, 2012
          enters into private state domain. It is a highly centralized piece of
          legislation with no domains assigned to local government.

          The Pastoral Charter of 2001 (implementation decree in 2006)
          recognizes and explicitly protects the mobility of pastoralists in
          the country. However the Pastoral Charter has not been fully
          implemented and the extent to which local governments enforce
          the charter’s mandates remains unclear.

          As of May 2014, consultations are underway to discuss final
          changes to the country’s new land policy (Politique Foncière
          Agricole), to be adopted later this year. The draft policy foresees
          the creation of special land management committees that have to
          play a leading role in mediation and resolving land-related
          conflicts. It also promotes positive discrimination, as for each new
          state land development, plots must be allocated to women.

                                                                                               29
             Currently, customary practices—and especially in the north, also
             Sharia law—continue to dominate Malian land tenure systems.
Mauritania   With the Land Reform Act of 1983, customary land management Ouedraogo et al.,
             and administration officially ended. All land that was not in public 2006
             domain or private property was declared covered under Islamic
             law.                                                                 USAID, 2008

             Production from pastoral activities contributes to 80 percent of
             the country’s GDP, and pastoralists exert considerable political
             influence. Law governing land tenure is primarily ensconced in the
             2000 Code Pastoral (implemented in 2004). A combination of
             traditional and Sharia legal instruments, the Code Pastoral is
             deemed to be one of the most far-reaching examples of national
             codification of customary tenure of nomadic pastoralists in Africa.

Niger        The Rural Code (1993) recognizes customary rights and allows Ouedraogo et
             them to be registered. Both statutory and customary land rights al., 2006
             benefit from equal protection of the law and judicial institutions.
             The Rural Code also established land commissions on the USAID, 2010d
             department, commune, and village level, which are tasked to
             allocate and register land claims, control regional land use, and
             offer land dispute mediation. However, the legislation has not
             been effectively implemented in much of the country.

             The Rural Code also grants pastoralists common use rights in
             grazing areas and “priority use rights,? which give clear
             recognition of their rights to pastoral lands without excluding
             other users.
Nigeria      The controversial 1978 Land Use Act (revised in 1990 and 1997) Ouedraogo et al.,
             vests all land in each state (except for federal land) exclusively in 2006
             the state governor, who holds it in trust for the population and
             administers it on behalf of and for all Nigerians.                    Shen and Sun
                                                                                   2012
             The governor has the power to grant land to any person with
             occupancy statutory rights, as well as with customary rights of USAID, 2010e
             occupancy for agricultural, residential, and other purposes.

             It is commonly argued that the law has contributed to further
             distortions and abuses of citizens‘ rights to access and own land.

             In 2010 the Lower House of the National Assembly rejected
             President Umaru Musa Yar'Adua's bill to establish a National Land
             Reform Commission to restructure land matters across the
             country.




                                                                                              30
Senegal   The first postindependence land legislation is the 1964 National Ouedraogo et al.,
          Domain Law, which introduced decentralized management 2006
          mechanisms. It renders all non-registered land before 1964 as
          state-owned, which applies to 97 percent of all land in Senegal. Faye, 2008

          Locally elected officials in rural communities can allocate land USAID, 2010g
          according to customary practices as long as lands are productively
          used. Pastoralism is not recognized as a viable form of land use,
          though a 1980 decree allowed certain grazing areas to be
          reserved. However, the areas were not clearly defined and
          continue to be a source of tension.

          The 2004 Framework for Agro-Sylvo-Pastoral Development
          recognizes the importance of supporting family farming,
          developing commercial agriculture, protecting the country‘s
          forests water resources, promoting social equity, developing the
          livestock sector, and establishing the need for secure land
          tenure. Implementing legislation has not yet been enacted.

          A land law commission has been established with a view toward
          reviewing the 1964 law and to prepare a land reform law.
Sierra    Land in Sierra Leone is classified as state, private, or communal. Unruh and Turray,
Leone     The capital, Freetown, and its surroundings (Western Area) are 2006
          governed under statutory law, while customary law governs the
          provinces.                                                         USAID, 2010g

          The 1960 Provinces Land Act and the 1966 Non-Citizens (Interest IRIN, 2012
          in Land) Act provide for a strong customary basis in land law. They
          stipulate that customary land is overseen and administered by
          paramount chiefs. Land rights of nationals of other communities,
          youth, and women are limited and submitted to decisions under
          this chieftaincy structure. Local chiefs’ legitimacy and power was
          reaffirmed after the Civil War (1991–2002) through the 2009
          Chieftaincy Act.

          The 2005 National Land Policy supports the inalienability of land
          with regard to the landowning families, and the role of
          descendants in claiming rights to land. Hence, the evolution
          toward freehold tenure in the rural areas appears to be
          discouraged, instead focusing on leasing arrangements for
          investment.

          The 2007 Devolution of Estate Act criminalizes preventing a
          woman from inheriting her husband's property after his death,
          and also recognizes the property rights of polygamous spouses.

          The government is currently in the process of streamlining land

                                                                                            31
                sector agencies to establish a permanent Land Commission as the
                central agency for land management in the country. Many
                observers point to the increasing insufficiency of current
                legislation to manage the complex land issues currently facing the
                country.

 Togo           The law (1974) recognizes local communities’ customary land Ouedraogo et al.,
                rights under the condition that they are effectively in use or 2006
                possible to use. Unused lands (including through absenteeism)
                become part of the national domain of lands.

                Customary land rights are largely unregistered because the local
                population deemed the process complicated and costly.

                The 1974 law is considered positive, even though its
                implementation is patchy. No implementation regulations have
                been established, and agricultural development projects have
                never come to fruition. Recommendations have called for an
                assessment of the 1974 reform to enable effective land tenure
                security for rural producers.
 *Sources are based on what was available in a desk-based literature review as of May 2014. The author
 welcomes any information on further updates or amendments in land laws, regulations, and administrative
 policies.

3.4 Land tenure and migrants

Throughout West Africa, and particularly in Ghana, Côte d’Ivoire, and Senegal, customary chiefs
traditionally sought migrants to help cultivate their land and to populate villages under their control as a
way to build their political and economic power (Cotula et al., 2004). In return for access to the land,
typically tenancies (known also as tutorships) required that the migrants comply with local traditions
and customs, refrain from getting involved in political affairs, and pay their respects to the landlord’s
family through regular gifts (Zongo, 2010).

However, this relationship between the landholders and the migrants is not only eroding but
increasingly prone to disagreement and conflict due to the conflicting tenure systems, divergent
interpretations over monetary transactions, sociogenerational changes, and increasing land scarcity.

Indigenous populations rely on the rights of first occupancy, but this means that migrants—even after
they have farmed the land for generations—will never accede to full rights and will always depend on
their patrons. Migrants thus appeal to the “land of the tiller? principle, which is espoused in many
government policies as well as Sharia law. This principle gives migrants the right to acquire full land
rights after cultivating a plot for a certain length of time. In particular, descendants of migrants who
have been working the land for generations question the land transactions concluded by their parents
and press for the “land to the tiller? principles of formal systems. Descendants of natives may also
question the arrangements to which their elders have agreed, calling for higher rates and cash payments
that the migrants must pay to avoid eviction (Cotula et al., 2004; Zongo, 2010). The contentions

                                                                                                         32
between the two principles are well studied across diverse settings “ranging from cocoa and plantation
crops in southern Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire, to irrigated plots in northern Nigeria and Senegal, areas of
large in-migration in south west Burkina Faso, and high density and peri-urban zones in southeast
Nigeria and Southern Benin? (IIED, 2001).

Furthermore, whereas the indigenous landholders consider monetary payments to be part of the
lending transaction (Zongo, 2010; Cotula et al., 2004), for many migrants the transaction confers them
irrevocable ownership. In many cases, the sellers—including family members of the original landholding
family—did not have the authority to sell the land deeds. In Ghana, for instance, in order to profit from
growth in the cocoa frontier, many local chiefs bypassed paramount chiefs in order to sell lands directly
to migrant populations (Mitchell, 2012). Indeed, this is common throughout West Africa and has posed
significant challenges for returning displaced populations in Côte d’Ivoire (see Box 4) and Liberia (see
Box 5). Moreover, informal sale arrangements may have been unclear over their precise details: “in the
bush,? “at some distance south of the village,? or even unspecified delimitation of the boundaries of the
land sale (Zongo, 2010, p. 3).

Large domestic landholding units are fragmenting into smaller family units for external and internal
reasons that change customary practices. Sons may have no choice but to migrate, as they no longer
have the security of gaining land from their fathers due to land shortages and sales of land outside the
lineage (IIED, 2001). Younger generations, meanwhile, also choose to migrate for economic
opportunities elsewhere. Those left behind thus sharecrop or lease land belonging to their immediate
kin, and may sell parts of the land out of economic necessity or, in many cases, personal profit. As family
or community members return, they consider sales illegitimate given their own inalienable rights to the
land (see Box 3).

Out-migration is a significant economic strategy within the Sahel. Whether they have been gone for a
matter of months, years, or decades, returning migrants often come back to their land and settle into
farming (IIED, 1999). However, this strategy is only possible by virtue of their membership in landholding
families or community lands, and the confident knowledge that they have inalienable access to the land
upon their return (IIED, 1999). Migrants, along with women, are among the most vulnerable to
landlessness. Farming out-migrants may be unable to maintain their rights in their homelands during
their absence, because of a break-up of holdings among members of the same families; the
unauthorized sale of land by the immediate kin; or their inability to contest encroachment and
competing claims. If the same farmers were unable to purchase land as in-migrants, they are left
landless and increasingly vulnerable (IIED, 1999).




                                                                                                        33
Box 3. Illegitimate land sales to migrants

In Banko, a village close to Bamako, Mali, a migrant purchased ten hectares of land for the equivalent of some
€4,500. However, the land was part of an area used communally by the village, and the seller had no right to
sell it. The buyer met with resistance from the local community when he tried to occupy the land, and was
unable to attain the required authorization to legitimize the sale. The fraudulent seller vanished with the
money.

Source: Djiré, 2004.

3.5 Land conflict

Section 3.4 highlighted the multifarious tensions that can rise regarding land tenure and migrants.
However, as Alden Wily notes, “even in peaceful agrarian societies land disputes account for 40–60
percent of cases entering the courts? (quoted in Pantuliano, 2009, p. 32). It is when tensions and
insecurity over land and property rights are interconnected with other unaddressed or neglected issues,
stresses, or events that the tensions escalate to violence or lead to wider-scale conflicts (OECD, 2005).

Moreover, as Berry notes, “Land conflicts
                                                 Land conflict scenarios
reflect more than economic and
demographic pressures. In post-colonial
                                                   Territorial disputes between two sovereign states
societies of West Africa, land is also seen
                                                   Competition over land between distinct ethnic,
as a form of political space? not only at
                                                    religious, and cultural groups, and/or between different
the state level but also by the families,
                                                    elite groups (such as national vs. local elites)
village authorities, and chiefs that
                                                   Land occupation following large-scale displacement
control land under customary systems
                                                    and/or breakdown of law and order
(Berry, 2009, p. 29). In addition, for
                                                   Illegitimate, illegal, or contested large-scale
dissident or insurgent groups, it is a key
                                                    dispossession, such as for political or economic
platform for challenging state power
                                                    development reasons
(ousting the current leader or gaining
                                                   Inequalities and lack of access to land for significant
political      participation),       forcing
                                                    population groups
concessions, or negotiating access to
                                                   Generational conflicts: the traditional vs. the modern
resources Other factors—such as the
access and availability of weapons and             Weak(ening) or collapse of land management
the spillover effects of previous or                institutions and structures
neighboring conflicts—further escalate
the intensity of the violence and                Source: IOM, UN-Habitat, and NRC, 2014.
destruction.
As the case studies in this section demonstrate (see Boxes 4, 5, 6 and 7), actual or perceived injustices
related to land can all be leading or contributing causes of conflict. These can also surface or be
intensified during a conflict, and manifest again postconflict if here has been significant levels of
occupation of displaced populations’ land; if changes to the status quo affect access to resources and its
associated wealth; and if preexisting land tensions were among the root causes of conflict.

                                                                                                                 34
Figure 5. Land and conflict: Before, during, and after



                                      Grievance—latent issues: access
                                        to land; historical injustices;
                                      insecure tenure; environmental
                                                 pressures.




  Postconflict—land grabbing;
     return; evictions; value                                                 Insecurity—mobilization on land
    increases; investments;                                                   issues; institutions weaken; land
  structural problems persist;                                                   grabbing increases; private
      institutions still weak.                                                dispute resolution is on the rise.




         Peace negotiations—land
                                                                          Conflict—displacement (occupation
     grabbing persists; consolidation of
                                                                          of land); institutional collapse; land
     conflict gains; given the sensitivity
                                                                             and resources fuel and sustain
      and power associated with land
                                                                            conflict; new land and property
        issues, it may or may not be
                                                                                         relations.
      included in peace negotiations.


Source: IOM, UN-Habitat, and NRC, 2014.


As a contributing trigger to conflict, the perceived or real injustices can include historical imbalances or
inequities in land distribution, competing systems of land tenure, tenure insecurity, and social exclusions
to land rights, especially among youth (Sierra Leone, Liberia), transhumance pastoralists (Sahel region)
or migrants (Côte d’Ivoire), as well as corrupt transactions and sales (OECD, 2005). Significant changes to
land’s socioeconomic value or sudden shifts in its use (such as large-scale land acquisitions and natural
resource investment, environmental factors, or when there is a sudden rise in crop demand) can also
exacerbate land grabbing, expropriations, efforts to clarify or increase tenure security, and overt
manipulation of gaps between customary and formal system (such as in Liberia, Sierra Leone, Guinea
and Ghana). Frustrations mount against those who are considered to have undeserved (and often
profitable) control of or access to land, possibly going back generations (OECD, 2005).

Even if land issues were not a leading factor in the outbreak of the conflict, as the conflict proceeds —
and even more so the longer it continues—issues surrounding land and resources take on a number of
forms. It may give space for latent frustrations or inequities to surface, especially if opposing forces use
such grievances to score political points, rally support, or build up their alliances (such as in Côte
d’Ivoire). Control over land and resources during conflict can also become highly politicized—serving as

                                                                                                                   35
a symbol of power or war gains (such as in Liberia and northern Mali); be critical to funding the war
efforts (such as in Côte d’Ivoire, Liberia, Sierra Leone); or be geographically strategic for hosting forces
(throughout). While land, property, and assets can be severely damaged, belligerents may also use the
land for opportunistic personal enrichment or as a spoil of war (Sierra Leone and Liberia are particularly
renowned examples). The longer the conflict continues, the more difficult it is to resolve issues related
to dispossession and occupation, especially given the breakdown of norms and systems during the
conflict; customary ownership is often undocumented, and what is documented may be lost or
destroyed during the conflict.

Following a conflict, land disputes usually center around a clash of rights between the returnees and the
current occupiers of the land (Van der Auweraert, 2013), and can be a major obstacle to building
sustainable peace (Pantuliano, 2009). In particular, the risks depend on whether land had already
featured among the root causes or drivers of conflict, and the underlying issues remain unaddressed; if
there is a sudden return of numerous displaced persons; whether the displaced populations’ land and
property have been significantly occupied; if the damage of homes, properties, and land is significant
and widespread so that large segments of the population are unable to reestablish their livelihoods; and
if the postconflict state lacks the means and infrastructure to manage and settle land and property
disputes (Van der Auweraert, 2013).

Some of the most common postconflict land and property rights challenges include (Pantuliano, 2009):

       overlapping rights and claims to land and natural resources
       lack of a relevant land policy in a context of rapid change
       a dysfunctional land administration system
       destroyed or lost documentation
       land grabbing
       weak or divided security agencies and difficulty enforcing laws
       lack of shelter due to destruction of housing stock
       large numbers of female- and child-headed households, and other vulnerable households
       a political focus on emergency actions (such as shelter for IDPs) rather than reestablishing
        systems
       vested interests in maintaining a certain degree of chaos amongst stakeholders engaged in
        illegal activities
       ambiguous, controversial, or unenforceable laws




                                                                                                         36
Box 4. Land conflict, migration, and citizenship in Côte d’Ivoire

Once considered a beacon of political stability in postcolonial Africa, Côte d'Ivoire has struggled with an internal
crisis for more than a decade. Exclusive citizenship laws that restrict access to resources —particularly land in the
forest regions of western Côte d’Ivoire, the heartland of the country’s cocoa economy—featured prominently
among the main triggers of war and continue to challenge the country’s recovery .

From the 1930s, the French colonial government heavily recruited farmers from other regions of Côte d'Ivoire,
Mali, und Burkina Faso. By independence (1960), 700,000 internal and cross-border farmers provided a steady
labor force to the plantations (Manby, 2009). As part of a broader political encouragement of economic migration,
the 1961 constitution granted citizenship to every person born in Côte d’Ivoire regardless of their parents’
nationality (Dorman et al., 2007). Then-President Félix Houphouët-Boigny famously proclaimed that Ivorian land
belonged to those who agriculturally develop it, irrespective of origin; local village authorities were instructed to
not seek rent payments from migrant farmers (Dorman et al., 2007). Until the 1980s, Côte d’Ivoire experienced
sustained economic growth lauded as le miracle ivoirien.

Coinciding with Houphouët-Boigny’s death in 1993, global cacoa prices fell and Côte d’Ivoire experienced a
pronounced economic recession. Faced with harsh urban prospects, well-trained youth increasingly returned to
their communities in the plantation areas. However, as most failed to secure land access (Ouedraogo et al., 2006),
land disputes proliferated, as did xenophobic sentiments toward the migrant farmers (Geschiere, 2009).
Presidential successor Henri Konan Bédié exploited the growing resentment with the ultranationalist concept of
Ivoirité, and in 1994 decreed that only those whose father and mother were of autochthonous Ivorian origin could
obtain citizenship. This change in legislation rendered 30 percent of Côte d'Ivoire’s 16 million inhabitants foreign
(Africa Files, n.d.). The new citizenship laws created a division between the mainly Muslim north, where most of
those considered "foreign" were living, and the mainly Christian south. The 1998 Rural Land Law further politicized
citizenship and land issues by only allowing Ivorian citizens to own rural land (Ouedraogo et al., 2006). Under
president Laurent Gbagbo, who was elected in 2000, the concept of “foreigner? gradually also incorporated
second-generation immigrants born in Côte d’Ivoire (Bovcon, 2009).

The government’s National Identification Operation (NIO), which called on all Ivorians to return their village of
origin in order to register as lawful citizens, became the direct trigger of an armed rebellion in northern Côte
d’Ivoire in 2002. For the rebels, the war became a means to fight for their identity cards (Manby, 2009). During the
uprising, 200,000 Burkinabes, 70,000 Guineans, 48,000 Malians, and 44,000 Liberians fled the country, and 3,000
people lost their lives (Nyce, 2003). Fighting split the country into the rebel-held north and the government-
controlled south. A proposed peace agreement (the Ouagadougou Agreement) in 2003 failed to end hostilities,
but it set a first framework for revising the country’s citizenship law. Ivorian citizenship was now granted to
anyone who could prove that their father or mother were of Ivorian origin. When the next election scheduled for
2005 finally took place in 2010, xenophobic rhetoric nonetheless powerfully reemerged. President Gbagbo called
to exclude non-Ivorians from the electoral roll, which he suggested numbered up to 400,000 individuals. In the
aftermath of the election, in which Gbagbo did not accept defeat against his rival, current President Alassane
Ouattara, violence erupted countrywide. The 2010 postelection crisis in Côte d’Ivoire internally displaced 700,000
people, while more than 250,000 sought refuge in neighboring countries (NRC, 2012.)

President Ouattara has made revising the citizenship law a priority. From August 2013, foreigners can now acquire
citizenship upon marrying an Ivorian national, while foreign-born residents who have lived in Côte d’Ivoire since


                                                                                                                  37
before independence can now attain Ivorian citizenship along with their descendants (Aboa, 2013). Yet, the
postelection violence and breakdown in law and order has contributed to a renewed increase in land conflicts
between migrants and local communities, especially in protected forest regions of western Côte d’Ivoire (UNDP
and IOM, 2013). According to Human Rights Watch, subprefect authorities have received thousands of land
dispossession complaints since the crisis. In particular, land disputes and occupation/dispossession are the major
reasons why many of the displaced populations, primarily from the Guéré ethnic group (natives of western Côte
d’Ivoire), are reluctant to return home (NRC, 2012).

In particular, following the postelectoral crisis, over 200,000 Guéré were displaced. Upon their return (or as the
stated reason why they cannot return), many found their land had been occupied. Indeed, in a minority of cases
Burkinabés used force to take over the land; they justified this by the fact that they had been previously expulsed
in 2002 and were unable to rightfully recover their land. However, in the majority of cases, the land was
purchased from other Guérés, often youth in neighboring villages or even by the same family pretending to be the
real owners of the land. Human Rights Watch (2013) notes, “While some Burkinabé buyers purchased in good
faith, others were complicit, clandestinely buying enormous parcels of land from young Guérés whose legal
authority to sell such land [especially given the youthful age] would have been questioned by any reasonable
person.?

In August 2013, the Ivorian parliament extended implementation of the 1998 Law on Rural Land Tenure by 20
years to ease local tensions over land. As of yet, however, no money has been allocated to its thorough
implementation. Adding to land tensions are the government’s recent attempts to evict cocoa farmers from
protected forests in the western region (Voice of America, 2013), suggesting that half the 4.2 million hectares of
protected forest reserves are illegally occupied (Reuters, 2013).


Box 5. Land, displacement, and returning populations in Sierra Leone

The principle laws and policies governing land access and tenure in Sierra Leone are the Provinces Land Act (1960),
the Non-Citizens (Interest in Land) Act (1966), and the National Land Policy (2005). Statutory tenure is recognized
only in the Western Area (which includes the capital, Freetown), while in all other areas, land is legally governed
through customary systems. As decreed in the Provinces Land Act, customary land is overseen and administered
by local chiefs. Customary law prohibits the sale of chieftaincy land to non-family or non-community members.

In the provinces, chiefs are the sole authority for deciding whether a newcomer may access land. Those who are
outside the chiefdom are considered strangers and are often excluded from equitable land access (Unruh and
Turray, 2006). Although “outsiders? may be invited to settle and farm, they cannot resort to customary courts to
report and settle land disputes. Furthermore, even if allowed to farm within a chiefdom, they are prohibited from
making improvements to the land (such as planting trees) to which they are temporarily given access (Unruh,
2008b).

During the Sierra Leonean Civil War from 1991 to 2002 —which was prominently fueled by social exclusion to land
rights of the country’s bulging youth—50,000 people were killed and up to 3 million were displaced. Many who
were forced to abandon their land continue to face a process fraught with difficulties and which threatens to
impede post-war recovery. These difficulties primarily stem from the fact that the war has severely impacted the
social fabric: paramount chiefs have been displaced or killed during the war, and local land authorities have often
ceased to function. During the 11-year-long war, the widespread destruction of evidence of land ownership is


                                                                                                                38
another major obstacle to reclaiming one’s property. Furthermore, for those displaced for longer periods of time,
secondary occupation of their plots has frequently become a real obstacle to a durable return.

While the Sierra Leone Civil War resulted in a near-complete breakdown of customary authority structures, the
authority of paramount chiefs was restored through the 2009 Chieftaincy Act in order to reestablish stability in the
rural areas. However, this has been met with resistance from migrant communities, and youth in particular. In the
face of increased official lobbying efforts to grant refugees and IDPs access to land, this has led to an increased
reluctance to allow strangers onto land over the long term. Land issues hence remain controversial, and in some
areas continue to obstruct postwar rehabilitation efforts.


Box 6. Land conflict, displacement, and returning populations in Liberia

The Liberian Civil War (1989–1996 and 1999–2003) claimed the lives of 200,000 people and led to widespread
displacement. Liberia is currently plagued by severe land disputes between returnees, which often play out
between Mandingos and other ethnic groups in Liberia (Rincon, 2010). Questions regarding autochthony are
particularly acute in Lofa and Nimba county, which were hit hardest by the war and are the most populous and
heterogeneous counties (NRC, 2012).

Land tenure in Liberia is based on a double system. Historically, the coastal areas are under statutory land tenure,
while the inland areas are largely governed under customary land tenure. Local chiefs manage customary land
according to family lineage, which puts migrant “newcomers? as well as women and youth at the risk of
marginalization.

During the Liberian civil war, about 750,000 people fled the country and abandoned their land. Reestablishing land
access has thus become very explosive in the postconflict return period. In particular, the conflict focused
attention on historic grievances regarding land in and around Ganta, the second largest city. Gio combatants
learned about historical grievances and came to consider the area as wrongfully taken over. They captured the
land during the conflict and remained, with many others joining as squatters after the war. For them, the rebels
used the land as a “reward? for supporting the government during the war. At the same time, displaced members
of the Mandingo ethnic tribe—a tribe of Guinean origin who were typically considered “outsiders,? presented
papers that they claimed legitimized their ownership of the land. The papers’ legitimacy and the process to resolve
the issue remain serious obstacles to the country’s postconflict recovery.

The war also disrupted the already weak bureaucratic administration system, and the destruction of written
records has rendered the administration system vulnerable to manipulation (NRC, 2012). In a context where
settlement patterns and customary authority have been significantly altered from their prewar forms, land
conflicts increasingly feature an ethnic dimension (Rincon, 2010).

The 2010–2011 postelection crisis in neighboring Côte d’Ivoire brought many refugees into southeastern Liberia,
which further increased land pressure (NRC, 2012). Land disputes remain a major obstacle to building sustainable
peace, and as Liberians commonly say, “the next war will be about land? (Sawyer, 2009). In this charged context,
between 2006 and 2011 the government nonetheless granted concessions for about one-third of Liberia's land to
investors (Provost, 2012), which carries further potential for unrest.

President Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf has expressed concern over the proliferation of land disputes as a major obstacle

                                                                                                                 39
to postwar recovery (Global Land Tool Network, n.d.). A Land Commission was created in August 2009 and a land
rights policy was presented in 2013. The policy officially recognizes public land, government land, customary land,
and private land. It is the first policy to recognize customary ownership as legitimate and equal to private land
claims (Kaba, n.d.).


Land conflict and pastoralism. Conflicts between pastoralists and farmers, and between different
pastoralist groups, have long been endemic to the region. On the one hand, pastoral and farming
livelihoods have typically depended on mutually beneficial negotiated, nonexclusive access to water and
reciprocal land use agreements. During the dry season, pastoral livestock graze the fallow lands and land
unsuitable for cropping, and move further away during the rainy season until after the harvest. Often in
exchange for manure to fertilize the field, pastoral livestock benefit from the post-crop residue (fodder)
and the farmers and pastoralists benefit from trading between livestock and food products and more
robust market interactions (Van Driel, 2001; African Union, 2013; Bello Tukur, 2005). However, conflicts
arise when crops are damaged, or access to corridors, water points, and other resources are blocked.
Until the 20th century, the prevalence of livestock diseases such as tsetse and low settlement densities
kept the clashes limited and sporadic (Bello Tukur, 2005). Increased herd sizes and access to veterinary
drugs that prevent and treat diseases, in addition to environmental degradation, have broadened the
landscape for herders; meanwhile, agriculturalists (especially large-scale agri-business) increasingly
encroach upon transhumant corridors and access to resources. Political and social marginalization, the
spillover from regional ethnic, religious, and political tensions, and the intensification of traditional
cattle rustling practices due to the influx of weapons have thus increased not only the frequency but
also the intensity of the confrontations, turning many of them violent (Bello Tukur, 2005).

Box 7. Land conflict and the Tuareg rebellion

The Tuareg are semi-nomadic pastoralists who traditionally migrated throughout the western Sahel, criss-crossing
the countries of Algeria, Burkina Faso, Libya, Niger, and Mali. Before colonialism, the Tuareg ruled much of
northern Mali, yet under French colonialism and in postcolonial Mali, they were faced with extensive state
repression. They were coerced into forced labor situations; conscripted as soldiers; and dispossessed of grazing
lands. The precolonial customary system of land tenure in Mali was based on collective ownership; although it did
not grant automatic land rights to everyone, it was adequately flexible for both pastoralist and farmer livelihoods
(Abdalla, 2009). The French colonial government was swift to introduce a policy of land registration, causing many
Tuaregs to lose their customarily negotiated access to grazing land. In 1959, legislation was passed that allowed
the Malian state to use land held under customary tenure for large-scale development projects. As such, vast
tracts of land were considered public property, and commercial agriculture on such land was strongly encouraged
by the state. Through these modernization and sedentarization policies, the Tuareg —defined by their pastoralist
livelihoods—have been socially and economically marginalized (Benjaminsen, 2008).

Land grievances and state repression triggered increasing calls for statehood among Mali’s Tuareg population, and
culminated in armed rebellions in 1960, 1990, and 2007, respectively. These conflicts are fueled by the Tuaregs’
lack of political and social integration, due to their traditional nomadic and pastoralist life style (M’Cormack,
2011), and are rooted in the tensions regarding the control over natural resources, especially land (Abdalla, 2009).
The situation is further exacerbated by increasingly precarious environmental conditions: northern Mali has been
drastically affected by the Sahel’s desertification and increasingly plagued by protracted droughts. This has led to

                                                                                                                 40
local conflicts among Tuareg for diminishing resources, and increased tensions between Tuareg pastoralists and
local non-nomadic populations (Abdalla, 2009). Indeed, among the main causes of Tuareg discontent are limited
access to arable land during and after the colonial period; the degradation of the land; and the resulting threat to
their nomadic livelihoods (Jalali, 2013).

With the fall of Muammar Gaddafi and the influx of weapons and militants from Libya, several Tuareg factions
formed the National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad (Mouvement nationale pour la liberation de
l'Azawad, the MNLA) and launched a rebellion against the Malian government in January 2012. The Tuareg
proclaimed their own country Azawad in northern Mali in 2012 after capturing the three northernmost provinces
of Timbuktu, Gao, and Kidal. However, the Tuareg rebellion was effectively hijacked with the influx of radical
groups linked to al-Qaeda that took over most of the conquered territories (IRIN, 2013a). By early 2013, there
were around 300,000 refugees as a result of the Malian crisis. This figure includes between 200,000 and 230,000
IDPs, 40,000 Malian refugees in Burkina Faso, and 50,000 in Niger (UNHCR, 2013).

In mid-2013, a French-led military operation drove back the fighters and quelled down the insurgency. In April
2013, the United Nations deployed its Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA). As of
May 2014, Tuareg separatist still hold the city of Kidal. Prime Minister Moussa Mara has said his country is at war
with Tuareg separatists, yet the Mali government has in theory agreed to grant more autonomy to its Tuareg
population. (Al Jazeera, 2014). By April 2014, just over 137,000 people continued to be internally displaced,
roughly half of whom have been left behind in urban centers in southern Mali (Internal Displacement Monitoring
Centre, 2014). The conflict’s land issues, including with regard to pastoral livelihoods, remain unaddressed, fueling
the potential for future unrest.



4. Land and migration (meta-) trends and fragility
The previous section made clear the link between land and conflict as well as challenges that migrants
face in terms of land and property rights, tenure insecurity and landlessness, the notions of “outsider,?
and tensions that can escalate to conflict.        In reference to case studies conducted in Africa,
                                                        including Burkina Faso, Senegal (Casamance), and
However, as also noted, while the land and
                                                        Niger, the authors observed: that “there is no
migration nexus may be a contributing factor
                                                        mechanical link between factors of tension
to conflict outbreak, much depends on other
                                                        (demographic pressure, land and natural resources
social, economic, and political dynamics
                                                        scarcity, environment degradation, economic
juxtaposed within weak infrastructure,
                                                        inequality, social exclusion, political instability) and
governance, and capacity to settle disputes
                                                        the outbreak of conflicts. The mutation of tensions
peacefully. In this way, “fragile? and low-
                                                        into conflict has its own dynamics, as well as the very
performing states are considered more likely
                                                        process of conflict unfolding.?
to have disputes and tensions escalate into
broader conflict.
                                                        Source: Le Meur et al., 2006, p. 84.
The following section thus underlines certain
existing fragilities in West Africa that land and migration pressures could intensify. The section then
turns to several overarching trends, or meta-trends, pointed out in the literature such as population


                                                                                                                  41
growth, urbanization, growing agri-business and new forms of “land grabbing,? climate change,
environmental degradation, and cultural and generational shifts. These trends will increasingly bring
tensions surrounding land and resources to the fore. Moreover, these trends will influence migratory
patterns that will further alter socioeconomic balances between in- and out-migration countries and
potentially intensify and exacerbate existing tensions and fragilities, especially in already fragile or low-
performing states.

4.1 The context of fragility and human and economic development in West Africa

Broadly defined, ten of the fifteen ECOWAS members are considered to be fragile: Burkina Faso, Côte
d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, and Togo.8 The label
“fragile state? is an evolving and somewhat controversial term applied to countries facing particularly
severe development challenges, high socioeconomic inequalities, weak institutional capacity, and poor
governance (UNECA, 2012, p. 9). Such states often feature areas with high levels of violence or slow
recovery from armed conflict. Simply put, they are states with low capacity and poor performance with
respect to security and development (Cilliers and Sisk, 2013). Lack of access to natural resources (water,
land, and forestry, among others), demographic stress and proximity to fragility and conflicts in
neighboring countries and conflicts can also incite and perpetuate fragility (UNECA, 2012). These factors
are neither exhaustive nor fixed determinants of the outbreak of conflict, but they do speak to how
vulnerable a state is to conflict triggers in the face of external and internal shocks.

From a development perspective, the UN classifies eleven of the fifteen countries in the region as “least
developed countries? (LDCs): Benin, Burkina Faso, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali,
Niger, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and Togo. Moreover, West Africa as a region scores low on the human
development index (HDI). Depending on the source, most West African states face difficulties in meeting
the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), though four countries (Cape Verde, Ghana, Mali and
Liberia) are considered on track to meet the goals by 2020.9

The HDI sets out indicators related to health, education, and living standards as a way to measure the
gaps between a country’s material wealth and its population’s well-being. Ranked at 135 out of 187,
Ghana ranks the highest in the region and along with Cape Verde fall within the “medium human
development? range. The rest of the countries in the region are classified as “low human development .?
Niger rounds up the bottom of the list, ranked as 186 out of 186 in 2013 (UNDP, 2013).




8
  Although most institutions use similar fragility indicators, their interpretation and ranking of the criteria often
differ. This paper explores land and migration issues in the context of fragility as a whole and thus has included all
of the states listed as fragile one way or another by the World Bank, the African Development Bank, and the OECD,
the most prominent and frequently sourced institutions on the subject. The World Bank and African Development
Bank include Liberia, Sierra Leone, Togo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia, Guinea, and Guinea-Bissau, while the OECD
includes these countries along with Burkina Faso, Niger, and Nigeria. For an excellent overview of how different
institutions determine fragility, see Table 1.3 in UNECA (2012, p. 21).
9
  Latest statistics available on www.MDGtrack.org.
                                                                                                                   42
While a full analysis of country-level indicators of fragility and economic and human development is
beyond the scope of this report, such indicators reveal important points of consideration regarding the
push-pull for migration. Table 4 lists selected human development indicators that have implications for
migration. The table also lists indicators related to natural resources, including natural resource
depletion, percentages of the population living on degraded land, and availability of forests, agricultural
land, and freshwater withdrawals. It does not however, account for the aggravating tensions
surrounding access and ownership of land resources, which are already a challenge and which increased
migration could exacerbate. A more in-depth study of these indicators in relation to the land and
migration nexus would be useful not only to better understand how future land and migration trends
and pressures could affect the different countries, but also to help incorporate key land and migration
issues within early warning mechanisms and conflict prevention measures.




                                                                                                        43
                                                                                             Table 4. Selected human development indicators for West Africa (2013)




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Youth unemployment
                                                                                                                                                Population (%) below
                                                                                                                                                national poverty line




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Perception of safety
                                                                                                                                                                        Population living on




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Population living on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           withdrawals (%) of
                                                                                   Median age (2010)
                                           growth 2010/2015




                                                                                                                            Multi-dimensional
                                           Population annual




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   degraded land (%)
                                                                                                       Life expectancy at




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (% answering yes)
                                                               (% of population)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Adult literacy (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Natural resource
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (% of land areas)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Agricultural land
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Trust in national




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           water resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           total renewable
                                                                                                                                                                        < US$1.25 a day




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (% of land area)
                                                                                                                                                                                               (male/female)
                          Population (in




                                                               Urban in 2012




                                                                                                                            poverty index




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                depletion (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                               participation
Country




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         government
           (out of 187)
           HDI ranking




                                                                                                                                                                                               Labor force




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Freshwater
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Forest land
                          millions)




                                                                                                       birth




                                                                                                                                                                                                               (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                               78.2 /
Benin      166            9.4              2.7                 45.6                17.9                56.5                 0.412 39.0                                  47.3                                   N/A                  42.4                 78.0                58.0                   29.8                41.2               0.5                  0.3                2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               67.4
Burkina                                                                                                                                                                                        90.4 /
           183            17.5             3.0                 27.4                17.1                55.9                 0.535 N/A                                   44.6                                   4.6                  28.7                 55.0                62.0                   43.7                20.6               7.9                  4.3                73.0
Faso                                                                                                                                                                                           77.5
Cape                                                                                                                                                                                           83.3 /
           132            0.5              0.9                 63.4                22.8                74.3                 N/A                 N/A                     N/A                                    N/A                  84.3                 N/A                 N/A                    21.8                21.1               6.8                  0.1                N/A
Verde                                                                                                                                                                                          50.8
Côte                                                                                                                                                                                           81.2 /
           168            20.6             2.2                 52.0                19.2                56.0                 0.353 42.7                                  23.8                                   N/A                  56.2                 42.0                47.0                   63.8                32.7               1.7                  3.9                1.0
d’Ivoire                                                                                                                                                                                       51.8
The                                                                                                                                                                                            83.1 /
           165            1.8              2.7                 57.9                17.8                58.8                 0.324 48.4                                  33.6                                   N/A                  50.0                 N/A                 N/A                    66.5                48.0               0.9                  0.8                18.0
Gambia                                                                                                                                                                                         72.4
                                                                                                                                                                                               71.8 /
Ghana      135            25.5             2.3                 52.6                20.5                64.6                 0.144 28.5                                  28.6                                   N/A                  67.3                 68.0                78.0                   68.1                21.7               1.8                  8.0                1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               66.9
                                                                                                                                                                                               78.3 /
Guinea     178            10.5             2.5                 35.9                18.3                54.5                 0.506 53.0                                  43.3                                   N/A                  41.0                 77.0                62.0                   58.0                26.6               0.7                  14.3               1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               65.4
Guinea-                                                                                                                                                                                        78.2 /
           176            1.6              2.1                 44.6                19.0                48.6                 N/A                 N/A                     N/A                                    N/A                  54.2                 N/A                 N/A                    58.0                71.9               0.6                  0.5                1.0
Bissau                                                                                                                                                                                         68.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               64.4 /
Liberia    174            4.2              2.6                 48.5                18.2                57.3                 0.485 63.8                                  83.8                                   6.6                  60.8                 54.0                38.0                   27.1                44.9               0.1                  6.4                N/A
                                                                                                                                                                                               57.9
                                                                                                                                                                                               70.0 /
Mali       182            16.3             3.0                 35.6                16.3                51.9                 0.558 47.4                                  50.4                                   N/A                  31.1                 71.0                80.0                   33.7                10.2               6.5                  9.8                60.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               36.8
                                                                                                                                                                                               89.9 /
Niger      186            16.6             3.5                 18.1                15.5                55.1                 0.642 59.5                                  43.6                                   N/A                  28.7                 78.0                81.0                   34.6                1.0                7.0                  2.4                25.0
                                                                                                                                                                                               39.9

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           44
                      166.                                                  63.3 /
Nigeria    153               2.5   50.3   18.5   52.3   0.310 54.7   68.0            N/A    61.3   55.0   69.0   81.8   9.9    3.6    22.0   12.0
                      6                                                     47.9
                                                                            88.4 /
Senegal    154        13.1   2.6   42.8   17.8   59.6   0.439 50.8   33.5            20.1   49.7   30.0   55.0   49.4   44.0   5.7    0.8    16.0
                                                                            66.1
Sierra                                                                      69.1 /
           177        6.1    2.1   39.6   18.4   48.1   0.439 66.4   53.4            N/A    42.1   58.0   50.0   47.7   38.1   0.3    2.1    N/A
Leone                                                                       66.3
                                                                            81.4 /
Togo       159        6.3    2.0   38.5   19.7   57.5   0.284 61.7   38.7            N/A    57.1   51.0   52.0   62.1   5.3    1.2    3.4    5.0
                                                                            80.4
Source: UNDP, 2013.




                                                                                                                                     45
4.2 Meta-trends, land, and migration

Land scarcity. Increasing scarcity of land is one of the most frequently mentioned drivers of land
tensions, competition, and conflict. And yet, only 36 percent of West Africa’s cropland is actually
cultivated (Bossard, 2009). The OECD points out that major valleys of the Senegal and Niger rivers have a
future as irrigated farmland, but are still very much under-used (Bossard, 2009). The issue is thus not
simply about less availability of land but rather one of land access and distribution, where fewer people
own larger tracts of land, or the land that is available cannot be purchased. Moreover, much of the land
across the subregion is held by the state, where the state has been largely absent and the land remains
uncultivated. This land becomes treated de facto as open access, with populations utilizing it and its
resources. Consequently, if and when the state makes claims upon it, landlessness and displacement are
likely to ensue, particularly in light of the region’s growing agri-business sector and urban speculations.

As noted in Table 4, large segments of the population are living on degraded land, most notably in
Burkina Faso (73 percent), Mali (60 percent), Niger (25 percent), Gambia (18 percent), Senegal (16
percent), and Nigeria (12 percent) (UNDP, 2013). Land quality is likely to deteriorate over the next 30
years on account of population growth, landholding fragmentation, and climate variability (UNDP,
2013).

In the Gulf of Guinea, long natural fallow periods are increasingly shorter and the cultivated plots are
ever exploited, resulting in soil deterioration and thus lower productive capacity and a reduction in
yields. Farmers must use more inputs and in some cases temporarily or permanently abandon certain
plots (Bossard, 2009). Projections in the subregion assert that by 2020 there is unlikely to be any new
unfarmed land available. Rising populations and urbanization are also going to increase the demand for
energy, which is already the leading cause of deforestation (Bossard, 2009).

Pastoralist rangelands are also facing severe environmental degradation and deterioration due to
erosion, soil fragility (Kandji et al., 2006), the limited mobility to allow pastures to regenerate, and the
effects of dam construction and irrigation projects. For instance, in the now overcrowded and degraded
“peanut basin? of eastern Senegal, the groundnut monopoly has led to the large-scale clearance of
forests and rangelands, prohibiting pastoral access. Likewise, in the Senegal River Valley, irrigated
agriculture has occupied floodplain pastures and obstructed pastoral watering points. Irrigation
development along the Gambia and Casamance rivers has imposed similar difficulties (IIED, 1999).

Rising land values is a key repercussion of land scarcity. When land was abundant and local landholders
sought migrants to populate their land, they were able to negotiate mutually beneficial arrangements
including the outright “sale? of land, leasing, and rental arrangements and sharecropping (whereby the
sharecroppers often ended up effectively owning land), as well as wage labor contracts. In the Gulf of
Guinea, much of the coastal forest is farmed under a mix of arrangements. With rising populations and
less available land, migrants’ negotiating powers are greatly reduced. Moreover, landholders are
increasingly aware of the value of their land, leading them to renegotiate the arrangements. This thus



                                                                                                         46
brings the focus back to the legitimacy of migrant farmers’ land claims under the complex mixed
systems (IIED, 1999).

Modern “land grabbing? and agri-business/investment. In the 1960s–1970s, governments across West
Africa attempted to promote large-scale industrial farming, for which land was expropriated from
communities (Hilhorst et al., 2011). Most of the state farms failed and many caused long-term natural
resource degradation, the effects of which remain apparent to this day. This approach was further
complemented by intense efforts to sedentarize pastoralists. However, this too failed, and most ranches
were abandoned after the droughts of 1973 and 1984. The failures of large-scale farming and
sedentarized livestock management experiences led to a renewed interest in supporting livestock
mobility and promoting smallholder farming for food security and economic development. In the 1990s,
smallholders started to set up farmers’ associations and national networks (Hilhorst et al., 2011).

Since 2000, a new trend in agri-business and investment has emerged. Promoters view the trend as
modernization and professionalization that will create opportunities for a new type of investment and
access to markets, and generate employment for the host community and support community
development (Hilhorst et al., 2011). Foreign and domestic investors buy, lease, or otherwise acquire
concessions to large tracts of land with a view toward accessing cheap land for food or fuel production
(Lund, 2011). Indeed, the importance of food cropping is rising due to the growing demand from urban
centers, and in many areas is likely to surpass commercial tree cops (cocoa, coffee, palm oil) in
importance (Bossard, 2009).

In contrast, many firms have been criticized for allegedly buying up the bulk of fertile land and
marginalizing small-scale rural farmers while focusing on productions of little contribution or relevance
to West Africa (that is, as opposed to food production). Indeed, many see it as a new form of agricultural
colonialism, a return to the failed large-scale efforts of the 1960s–1970s that will spur new conflicts
where competing land claims are already a source of conflict. Results of a case study conducted in
Benin, Burkina Faso, Niger, and Mali revealed:

        marked lack of transparency in the transactions;10
        groups with secondary rights, particularly pastoralists and migrants, lost land;
        lack of clarity in the terms of the agreements, particularly in relation to the longstanding
         contention between purchases and loans;11
        increase of formalized “land grabbing? by unspecialized city-based dwellers and elites (giving
         rise to the term “weekend farmers?), where much of the land goes unused;12
        occurrences of displacement;13



10
   Landholding families neither kept records nor did they share the information within the community, let alone
with the local government. Most transactions had not been formalized.
11
   Most agro-investors were of the opinion that they have purchased the plot (58 percent) or that the land was
leased to them (36 percent). However, these perceptions may not be the same for those who transferred the land.
12
   Among the study sample, 45 percent of the investors were based in the local government area or in the
province, 37 percent lived in the capital city, and 10 percent were living abroad.
                                                                                                            47
        loss of reciprocity in access to ranch resources;
        few gains for the community members, as promised infrastructure and other benefits did not
         materialize and few jobs were created for locals;14
        growing fear of lack of farm land in the future;
        the smallholder sector is losing control over a large part of its main productive assets (land,
         natural resources, and water) to domestic investors in land; and
        pastoralists have suffered from restricted access to resources; between pastoralists and agro-
         investors, evictions have become more common and violence has surfaced.

The precise magnitude of rural land under the control of agro-investors outside the community is
unknown, as the majority of transactions have been unwritten and conducted under customary systems.
In many instances, the procedures for formalizing the full property title are considered “lengthy and
fastidious? and implicate taxes based on the investment. In Burkina Faso, many investors are t hus not
overly concerned about formalizing the titles, and instead accept what is known as procès verbal de
palabre, which is a written account of the minutes of a discussion held in the presence of an authority
and without technical and administrative services. Others obtain provisional land allocation certificates
that are valid for a five-year period.15 As agri-business grows, investors will likely seek stronger tenure
security by obtaining statutory of freehold rights, which again could bring the underlying tensions of
conflicting systems to the fore (Le Meur et al., 2006).

As land is sold, inequalities in land distribution between the rich and poor become increasingly
pervasive. Given the region’s weak legal systems and rule of law, elites and other powerful individuals
can manipulate purchases and neglect to adequately compensate the communities and families who
reside on the land. The majority of the rural populations in the region depend upon agriculture for their
livelihood and may have little or no legal recourse once they are evicted. Without fair and adequate
compensation, the communities and families—especially those with secondary rights—suffer significant
losses in assets and livelihoods, both for their families and future generations (USAID, 2013d). As the
head of the Millennium Challenge Corporation (MCC), an organization focused on strengthening rural
land governance in Burkina Faso, has pointed out, “We have noted underhand land transactions done in
a manner in which the one with the money acquires large land reserves to the detriment of the villagers,
who depend on the land for their survival? (IRIN, 2013b).



13
   The number is not officially quantified, but in 28 percent of the cases, the land was already (partly) in use for
farming, which implies displacement for the former land users.
14
    The study noted that the yields of agro-investors are comparable to or less than those obtained by family
farmers in the same area.
15
   In the case of Burkina Faso, many villages lack clarity regarding the nature of sales (whether it be a gift, loan, or
purchase) by those who cede the land. However, children of those who have ceded land nevertheless have the
right to renegotiate the transaction with the new actors, and convert a loan of indefinite duration into a sale.
While the new actors insist that they have bought the land, customary authorities and other family members may
claim that the lands are only under loan. When sales are recognized, it happens that not all members of the family
are informed of or associated with the transaction, and “in such cases, the sale may be negotiated by only one
person, who tends, equally, to be the only person to pocket the money? (GRAF, 2011, p. 7).
                                                                                                                     48
River basins in the Gambia and Senegal, including in Casamance, are a limited example of areas that will
continue to be key targeted for land development, settlement, and enterprise development. This has
already led to an increase in disputes in these areas. Questions over access to land in the Senegal River
Valley has become highly politicized with Mauritania. The already fragile Casamance area has seen an in-
migration of northern farmers who claim statutory rights to plots of land found on state-sponsored
irrigation schemes, which conflicts with indigenous claims (IIED, 1999).

As noted, the rise in investments and large-scale acquisitions will herald the construction of dams for
hydropower and the extension of the electricity network, further altering the pastoral landscape and
affecting access to water points.

Box 8. Risks and opportunities of large-scale land acquisition in Mali

Mali has been experiencing a global wave of land acquisition for agri-business, particularly in the Office du Niger
area, where its significant irrigation potential has attracted particularly intense investor interest. Previously, all
schemes in the area were publicly funded. However, following the food and financial crisis and a boom in biofuel
interest, private investment has risen dramatically—over 2004–2009, 871,267 ha were allocated to investment
projects, which covers an area almost 10 times the size of the irrigation schemes set up since colonial times.

A study by the IIED on agri-business and investment in Mali provides two examples of positive practice amidst the
broader criticisms. Among the leading criticisms associated with large-scale land acquisitions for agri-business are
the increase in tenure insecurity, equity concerns, and small-scale producers’ economic marginalization. The study
aimed to test the emerging line of recommendations that call for more inclusive investment models that “involve
smallholders in production and benefit-sharing, or engage them in related activities that provide opportunities to
minimise the risks and maximise the benefits of agricultural investment? (Djiré et al., 2012, p. 7).

Overall, many of the investment projects have reportedly side-stepped or ignored legal requirements on managing
environmental and social impacts, while leases and “letters of intent? were transacted in the absence of strategic
planning. The government has taken steps to address these challenges. However, “many provisions of national law
are incomplete, ineffective and out of touch with the local socioeconomic reality, particularly in rural areas. Some
national law norms are so ambiguous that they lead to confusion, resulting in conflicts and abuses, and in the
ensuing tenure insecurity and poor land governance? (Djiré et al., 2012, p. 67). Moreover, multiple pressures from
the competing land claims and conflicts have created “fertile ground for land speculation and corruption, abuses of
all kinds and insecurity of tenure for the most disadvantaged groups? (Djiré et al., 2012, p. 67).

The study focused on a biodiesel project run by Mali Biocarburant SA (MBSA) in the Koulikoro Region and a
sugarcane plantation and processing facility run by Markala Sugar Company (SoSuMar) in the country’s Office du
Niger area. The first is an example of agricultural investment that does not involve land acquisitions and has made
the inclusion of small-scale producers a central pillar of its business model; and the latter is an example of “public–
private–community? partnership.

Although both projects are still in their early stages, they have laid the groundwork for benefiting local groups
through development opportunities. Their institutional models promote the inclusion of local farmers and address
social and environmental issues, such as combatting soil erosion. In MBSA, the farmers are organized in a co-
operative that has an equity stake in the company’s Malian subsidiary, and thus also have representation on the


                                                                                                                    49
company board. Seeds are sourced from local farmers on the basis of contract farming and, through a profit-
sharing principle, smallholders have potential to earn additional income. The Markala Sugar Company is positioned
to provide benefits such as job creation and development of processing capacity, and open opportunities to
smallholders and local businesses, such as improved access to energy.

However, neither project is without challenges. These range from delays caused by opposition groups, to slow-
pace implementation, disagreements between members of the farmer cooperatives, and production difficulties,
which have undermined the impacts of the anticipated benefits.

The study concludes that agri-business presents both opportunities and risks. To optimize the former and minimize
the latter, the study points to several recommendations related to the Mali case and agri-business in general.
These include:
 filling gaps in governance of land tenure and agricultural investments at both the local and national level;
 accelerating the implementation of the provisions set out in its Framework Law on Agriculture;
 strengthening institutional arrangements to monitor and ensure compliance with existing legislation,
    especially in terms of environmental and social impact assessments and management plans; and
 strengthening mechanisms to promote accountability in decision making that affects land relations, such as
    strengthening and mirroring the espace d’interpellation démocratique—a forum that enables civil society and
    citizens to bring concerns to the government and hold decision makers to account.

In terms of large-scale land acquisitions, the study recommends the following actions:
 Subject land allocations to the free, prior, and informed consent of local landholders, beyond current
     consultation requirements.
 Establish a coherent and comprehensive policy regarding agricultural investment, which among other
     provisions should set limits to the amount of land area that can be acquired; and that the duration of leases
     are tailored according to the economics of investment projects.
 Beyond compensation, consider arrangements to ensure local landholders’ equity participation so as to enable
     them to benefit from the project in the medium and long terms.
 Promote transparency by publishing contracts above a certain size.
 Promote cooperatives and national farmer s’ associations, such as the National Coordination of Farmers’
     Organizations (CNOP), the Association of Professional Farmers’ Organizations (AOPP), and the Union of
 Farmers in the Office du Niger (SEXAGON), which help farmers access leases for new lands.
 Ensure members whose land rights are threatened have access to legal support.

Source: Adapted from Djiré et al., 2012.

Population growth and urbanization. The last thirty years have witnessed rapid population growth and
the expansion of urban centers and migratory flows throughout the region (IIED, 1999). In 2010, the
population of West Africa was 320 million, a ten-fold increase over the previous decades; by 2030, it is
predicted to reach about 500 million (Bossard, 2009).

While half the population is currently urban, it is likely to hit about 60 percent by 2030 (Bossard, 2009).
Migration and urban growth has been (and is likely to continue to be) particularly prominent in Nigeria
and in the coastal countries along the Gulf of Guinea. In contrast, the Sahelian region will remain one of
the least urbanized areas. Nevertheless, the Sahelian national capitals are expected to double in size

                                                                                                               50
within the near future, and it is estimated that by 2020 some 40 percent of the population will live in
towns of 5,000 or more. Their domestic energy needs will likely continue to rely on fuel wood, and thus
depend on increased forest exploitation (Bossard, 2009).

Figure 6. Population growth and urbanization in West Africa




The changes in demographic structures are expected to generate huge labor market imbalances
between emigration and immigration countries (Shimeles, 2010). Migration would compensate for an
estimated 15 percent of the shortage, but with amplified effects on both in- and out-migration countries
(Shimeles, 2010). These could range from increased pressures on public services (and declining public
services in out-migration countries); land scarcity and reduced size of landholdings; disputes over
migrant rights in land and property ownership; increased dependency on remittances for family incomes
and national economies; rising land values, especially in urban and peri-urban areas; to potential
rivalries over resources, housing, and employment and negative targeting of foreigners.

It is estimated that by 2020, some 14 million francophone Sahelians, or 15–20 percent of the countries’
total projected populations, will be outside their countries of origin. This continued outflow of migration
from the Sahel will create complications around its own labor shortages, as those remaining will have
difficulty meeting the rising demand for animal products. While this may entice some migrants to
return, many will no longer have access to their family/lineage lands due to sales and the splintering and
fragmentation of land (as explained in Section 4.2) that went on during their absence.


                                                                                                        51
Furthermore, as cities continue to grow, peri-urban issues will intensify and rural groups are likely to
lose control over land. Urban settings fall under statutory systems, and peri-urban rights are a confused
mix of the two. As land values rise, the short-term benefits of selling plots of customary land for housing
and other urban developments may be tempting, but will negatively impact the family and descendants
who do not share in the earnings. Alternatively, governments will expropriate rural land for urban
development, and as experience has shown, developers and governments have often failed to
adequately compensate the land owners. Villagers (and their descendants) will thus find themselves
without the land they farmed under customary arrangements.

Overall, West Africa’s population growth and urbanization will significantly increase demand for
livestock products, and the demand is expected to grow by more than 250 percent by 2025 (OECD,
2008). This points to an extreme gap, given the fact that the expected animal product growth rates are
only estimated to be 4 percent a year. The Gulf of Guinea is projected to reflect the higher demand and
ready market for foodstuffs from the near and further agricultural hinterland. Land issues, access to and
competition over resources, and conflicts over tenure rights will take center stage with the dramatic
increase in food demand.

Another relevant aspect to this trend is reverse urban-to-rural migration, which rises during economic
crises and in areas of high unemployment, especially among youth. With increasing fragmentation and
splintering of land, loss of access, and land scarcity, returning youth (who are often well-educated but
landless) could severely strain land tenure systems. Indeed, in Côte d’Ivoire, when the economy suffered
a severe recession in the 1990s, a high number of youth returned to their communities in plantation
areas, hoping to begin or rebuild a land-based livelihood. However, many found they no longer held
rights or access to family holdings. This was a significant variable in the outbreak of the war (see Box 4).

Cultural and sociogenerational issues. Youth marginalization from land was a serious grievance that
fueled conflicts, particularly in Sierra Leone, Liberia, and Côte d’Ivoire. Furthermore, youth
unemployment is a grave concern across West Africa, where the average age of 17.8 (in 2005) creates a
significant youth bulge (Bossard, 2009). As noted, migration has traditionally been a widely practiced
initiation to adulthood, or an exercise in adventure among youthful populations. However, traditional
mobility patterns are changing given the added pull factors associated with rising urbanization, higher
education, and opportunities in the informal sector, and compounded by push factors such as land
scarcity, environmental changes and degradation, and family rifts over land splintering and
fragmentation.

Moreover, as noted, relationships to land are also changing. The younger generations have questioned
the land arrangements agreed between their elders and the tenants who have occupied the land for
generations. Likewise, the descendants of migrants dispute the terms of their access rights. Reports also
proliferate of youth selling land, often without authority, for individual material gain (motorcycles are a
notable motivating purchase) (Human Rights Watch, 2013; Hilhorst et al., 2011).




                                                                                                         52
While few empirical studies exist of the cultural and generational impact on migration and land in West
Africa, broader globalization trends suggest the effects will be intensified. Certainly, youth are a
formidable force, and their role in migration offers many positive returns to families and communities in
the form of remittances, establishing potential market networks, and transferring skills, experience, and
education obtained abroad. In contrast, this paper has noted the high rates of “brain-drain? emigration
and its effects on the northern, inland, and poorer areas; and the decreasing sense of family or
community obligation among the migrants’ descendants, which will hurt the families and communities
that depend on their remittances. Disputes over family rights and the running of landholdings are also
likely to increase insecurity and intensify the clashes between tenure systems.

Under customary systems, women are marginalized from owning land. However, in the face of
increasing land values and scarcity, and as gender equality discourse continues to shape development
and policy reforms, a growing number of women are pushing to strengthen their land claims.

Advantageous not only for gender equality and female empowerment, the literature continues to show
that women’s active engagement in the market force yields valuable dividends for economic
development. As documented in Ghana and Côte d’Ivoire, women engage in sharecropping
arrangements or turn to collective appropriation, often promoted under development type projects, to
facilitate individual access later (Koné, 2011). In many areas, women have formed Women Land Access
Trusts to more effectively advocate for their land rights and pool their resources. Recently, a new trend
in which fathers donate land to their daughters has been observed in many West African countries
(Koné, 2011). A complicating repercussion, however, is that it essentially doubles entitlements and the
subdivision of land, generating scarcity, especially smallholders.

Box 9. Women and land

Even though land legislation often prohibits sex discrimination, the law is rarely implemented and customary
systems govern the rural areas. Women’s rights to land under customary systems vary from one area to the next,
and also depend on patrilineal or matrilineal societies but also between matrilineal systems. For the most part,
however, women’s land rights are derived from those of their husbands or male relatives and she may lose those
rights in the event of a breakdown in family relations, divorce, or widowhood. Her rights may also change if the
husband remarries within a polygamous arrangement; a woman will often see her rights weaken in the face of
rising land value or investments. When access to a plot is granted, it may be on land that other male relatives find
unsuitable.

Discrimination is also evidenced by their exclusion from decision making, and community decisions are made
without explicit reference to women’s priorities, even on the management of common property resources, which
                                         16
is where most women engage in the land.

Source: Cotula et al., 2004, p. 14.




16
  Women and children are often in charge of harvesting resources from common lands, such as grasses, fuel
wood, certain medicines, fruits, nuts, and berries.
                                                                                                                 53
Around the world, youth are highly responsive to the technological innovation that connects them with
urban and global youth cultures. In West Africa, cultural shifts as a result of education, urban
experiences, and technological globalization will increasingly alter how youth respond and interact with
the traditional frameworks and shape how they perceive or (dis)trust formal systems. Increasingly
educated and with greater access to innovative Internet-based opportunities and learning, youth will
inject new land management approaches and uses, and may be more prone to reject or resist systems—
traditional and statutory—that they may see as unjust or corrupt. Youth-based perception surveys could
provide important insight into their beliefs or frustrations in the ability of customary or formal systems
to address the mobility and land issues that directly affect them.

Although many advances in communication technologies are still slow to reach pastoral areas, the
expansion of mobile phone networks and ownership will provide highly beneficial dividends for
pastoralists, particularly with respect to better access to market information and competitive pricing,
enacting remittances, and engaging other financial transactions; and facilitated communication and
engagement with traders within broader regional, even international, networks. Investment in the
communication sector is thus a highly relevant development component of the pastoral area (African
Union, 2013).

Climate change. Climate change predictions warn that global warming will be felt more intensely in
Africa than most elsewhere in the world, with temperatures rising between 3 and 4°C. In fact, West
Africa and particularly the Sahel have been experiencing global warming at a faster pace than was
predicted (Bossard, 2009). The Western Sahara will experience the greatest impact and the coastal and
equatorial areas less so (Bossard, 2009).

In the Sahel, droughts occur with varying degrees of severity on average about two out of every five
years. Climate variability thus already affects food security and poverty reduction (Kandji et al., 2006).
Indeed, rainfall deficits leading to droughts in 1972–1973, 1982–1984, and 1997 had particularly
devastating humanitarian consequences. However, long before climate change was recognized as a
global phenomenon, pastoralists adapted their herd composition and migration according to drier and
wetter periods, livestock disease risks, and so on. Remittance incomes were always part of the risk
diversification and resilience mechanisms to overcome climate variability. The challenges in the face of
climate change are less about rainfall and more about the accompanying variables that hinder their
coping mechanisms, such as population growth; cultural shifts due to urban pull factors; degradation
(and low regeneration) in rangelands in the face of increasingly constricted options for grazing by
agricultural and commercial encroachment; and tenure insecurity.

West Africa’s extreme ecological diversity means that the effects of climate change will also differ. With
growing desertification on the one hand, climate change and increased rainfall along the Sahelian-humid
zone lines will make agricultural space more available. Indeed, by 2080, the African continent as a whole
will have the largest potential agricultural land area, and much of this will be expanding into Sahelian
areas (Bossard, 2009). In relation to population growth, urbanization, and economic investments, this
will be a somewhat welcomed development, as it responds to increasing market demand and urban
food security. However, for pastoralists, it also means more agricultural settlements encroaching upon

                                                                                                       54
land as well as the broader infiltration of livestock diseases such as tsetse (the avoidance of which is a
leading factor for pastoralists’ seasonal northern returns) and new areas of insect pest distribution
(Bossard, 2009). The frontlines of locust invasions that cause severe damage to crops and vegetation
and that regularly sweep West Africa may become more unpredictable and widespread (Bossard, 2009).
The practice of transhumance has been proven to be more efficient than agro-pastoralism in protecting
livestock from external and seasonal risks; however, if pastoral land rights are not secured and high
levels of out-migration or spontaneous sedentarization continue, its ability to meet domestic demand
will be increasingly hindered.

Water, irrigation projects, and dams add further complexity. Countries in the region share their surface
water resources, which are concentrated primarily in Niger, Lake Chad, Senegal, the Gambia, and the
Volta (Bossard, 2009). Since the 1970s, these watershed areas have seen a drop in their stream flows.17
Along with climatic issues, wider population distribution and growth further factor into the resource’s
depletion. In response, dams, irrigation, and hydroelectric projects have led to rising tensions and
potential conflicts over shared river basins and questions over access to and ownership of the resources.
Rainfall-related climate projections and scenarios for West Africa are largely uncertain. However, taking
the region as a whole, climate experts predict that “it does not face a mid-term renewable water
shortage threat, although some challenges may emerge locally? (Bossard, 2009, p. 260), particularly for
the pastoral and agro-pastoral region. It is thus essential to better use and integrate regional
management of available renewable water supplies.

All of these factors will alter the quantity and quality of natural pastures and cultivatable land.
Regardless of the more and less favorable consequences resulting from climate change, the pressing
issues related to land and resource access and ownership will only grow in intensity, as will the push-pull
factors related to migration.

4.3 Common recommendations to address the land and migration nexus

Despite the wealth of literature on land conflict and/or migration in West Africa, all point to a relatively
standard set of policy options and recommendations. While varying somewhat in the modalities and
technical detail put forward, the literature centers largely around resolving the challenges associated
with legal pluralism; promoting decentralized land management to democratize land policy and law;
supporting actions, legal reforms, and framework development aimed at protecting marginalized groups
(including pastoralists, women, and migrants); encouraging local, national, and regional-level capacity-
building in land management; and supporting livelihood programs both within and outside the
agricultural sectors, tailored especially to youth as well as to returning displaced populations (which
includes incentives for the return of educated youth). Other recurrent themes include a strong call for
climate change adaption planning, which integrates land issues and enhanced transparency in the
business sector. Box 10 summarizes the most common recommendations found in the literature.



17
  The OECD notes, “The Niger River’s (Onitsha) stream flow fell by 30% between 1971 and 1989; those of the
Senegal and Gambia Rivers fell by almost 60%?.
                                                                                                         55
Box 10. Example of general recommendations put forward in the literature on addressing the land
conflict/migration nexus

Establishing or reviewing legislation, regulations, and policy frameworks and mechanisms

   Clarify the lines between customary and statutory tenure systems and the need to resolve legal pluralism
    and resulting “forum shopping? is perhaps the most frequent policy recommendation. Government (short -
    term) recognition of customary land tenure systems is almost universally encouraged. Alternative dispute
    resolution (ADR) mechanisms are also necessary at the local level to address the backlog of claims and to
    make resolutions more accessible (see Cotula et al., 2004; OECD, 2005; Dyer et al., 2007; Pantuliano, 2009;
    Elhawary, 2009).

   Increase and protect land tenure security by supporting local authorities to undertake intermediate forms of
    land registration. Such recommendations emphasize written documentation of land transactions for
    customary land transfers, especially in areas that experience intense competition over land (such as emerging
    urban centers). However, there must be caution to not provoke land grabbing that favors elites and exploits
    the poor (see Cotula et al. 2004; Ubink et al., 2009).

   Improve transparency in land administration via increased capacity-building among land government
    institutions. This should be done in tandem with an increased effort to decentralize and devolve decision-
    making power to local levels. This also applies to agri-business and large-scale land acquisitions in which
    there is a need for public tenders and a transparent, consultative process prior to large-scale land sales. There
    is also a need to facilitate public scrutiny to hold governments accountable for monitoring and enforcing
    environmental protection. This includes specific policies and strategies for urban and peri-urban areas (Le
    Meur et al., 2006; USAID, 2007; Pantuliano, 2009).

   Undertake legal reforms to eliminate political and social exclusion in citizenship and immigration laws
    (Manby, 2009; Lund, 2011; Human Rights Watch, 2013) and recognize and protect pastoralists’ rights to
    access adequate land, water points, and corridors (DFID and ECOWAS, 2006; Dyer et al., 2007; Dong et al.,
    2011; African Union, 2013).

Supporting and promoting sociocultural/economic and environmental dimensions

   Support networking, research, and raise awareness among researchers, government officials, and civil
    society, such as the LandNet West Africa (Cotula et al., 2004; Cotula, 2007; Le Meur et al., 2006).

   Focus on youth integration, employment, and livelihood both within and outside the agricultural sector to
    preempt land conflict and the challenges associated with land scarcity (Ubink et al., 2009; AUC, ECA, and
    AfDB, 2010; Human Rights Watch, 2013).

   Enhance commitments to gender equity in land law and management through gender-sensitive project
    design, and by providing women with additional resources (such as agricultural loans) to increase tenure
    security (USAID, 2007; NRC, 2012).

   Reintegrate refugees and returnees in postconflict situations, which requires the establishment of land

                                                                                                                 56
     access and restitution programs and alternative livelihood options for affected populations (Rincon, 2010;
     AUC, ECA, and AfDB, 2010).

    Integrate land and migration issues into climate change adaption, which calls for regional vulnerability
     screenings, identifying mitigation schemes, and instituting resettlement programs for those threatened with
     displacement due to climate change (Freudenberger and Miller, 2010; FAO, 2011).

    Invest in appropriate land-surveying technology, especially GPS, GIS, and spatial planning software, coupled
     with technological capacity-building among implementing state and civil society institutions (IFAD, 2009).

    Protect smallholder development and market access, as smallholder farming has proven to be resilient and
     flexible in food production, arguably more so than large-scale initiatives (Le Meur et al., 2006; Lund, 2011).


Very few research reports advocate for promoting either the statutory or customary land tenure system;
instead researchers point to the contradictions and tensions arising from their lack of clarity, competing
jurisdictional authorities, and lack of conviction in decision outcomes. Nevertheless, international and
state actors tend to continuously define justice and rule of law within the narrow parameters of
Westernized structures. As Isser (2011) states, “These [customary] systems are the primary, if not sole,
means of dispute resolution for the majority of the population, but post-conflict practitioners and
policymakers often focus primarily on constructing formal justice institutions in the Western image, as
opposed to engaging existing traditional mechanisms.? Several authors thus suggest that West African
states should, at least in the short term, clearly recognize and protect customary tenure systems by also
ensuring that discriminatory principles within the traditional land management structures are
addressed.

The literature often raises concerns that implementing such recommendations without understanding
the bigger implications can produce unintended negative consequences, especially given the weak
governance and pervasive corruption (in both statutory and customary systems) found throughout the
region. For instance, titling and tenure clarification regimes can spur land grabbing that has a tendency
to favor elites and induce landlessness among secondary rights holders. Another example is how
supporting one tenure system over the other fails to consider the multiple uses and users within mixed
arrangements, or where there is a lack of enforcement of appropriate compensation.

In reviewing the recommendations, however, it becomes evident that they have not significantly
changed over the past 20 years. As such, this illustrates that there has been an enduring lack of
progress, if not stagnation, in resolving the region’s long-standing land management issues.

Nevertheless, it is important to take note of several positive developments. The decentralization and
localization of land management to local authorities is a growing trend in several francophone countries,
which has brought desirable development outcomes, especially in pastoralist areas (African Union,
2013). A community radio initiative in Mali has launched a highly successful program during which
customary tenure rules and harvesting times are broadcast to prevent clashes between farmers and
herders in the area (Hilhorst et al., 2011). Guinea, Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso, and Niger have all
passed legislation that specifically supports pastoralism (see Boxes 11 and 12). Furthermore, the
                                                                                                               57
government of Mali created a ministerial-level post aimed at assisting the return of Malians abroad and
promoting remittance sending, and has expanded consular positions in major receiving countries to
address issues related to Malian immigrants (Adepoju, 2005). Senegal has also taken steps to facilitate
the emigration and return of thousands of its nationals abroad, and also promoted remittance sending.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Senegalese Abroad was restructured in 1993 to enhance the welfare
of nationals abroad, and articulated programs for their repatriation and rehabilitation. The new
orientation encourages emigrants to be actively involved in Senegal’s socioeconomic development
(Adepoju, 2005). Furthermore, as noted, the AU has laid the groundwork for a pan-African pastoralist
policy, and ECOWAS has implemented the Transhumance Certificate aimed at facilitating pastoral
migration.

Among its activities are a region-wide exercise to document existing land laws and policies (and
currently incorporating them into an online database); disseminating land policy briefs through their
website; executing trainings in land policy and law for implementing officials; organizing national and
subregional dialogue forums and thematic workshops; and successfully lobbying governments to
integrate land issues in key strategic development documents such as Poverty Reduction Strategy
Papers (PRSPs). Indeed, LandNet West Africa is increasingly recognized as one of the most powerful civil
society resource groups on regional land issues. Consultations with the Burkina Faso chapter, for
example, decisively shaped the government’s proposed changes to a major World Bank proposal on land
tenure security, which were fully incorporated into the final document (LandNet West Africa, 2001).

Box 11. Mali’s Pastoral Code

In Mali, the 2001 Pastoral Code recognizes and explicitly protects the mobility of pastoralists in the country.
Coordinated through Mali’s Regional Office for Rural Development and Amenities (DNAER) and realized with
technical and financial support from FAO, the Pastoral Code further grants pastoralists the right to manage their
own lands (African Union, 2013) and includes a decree that protects designated pastures from farmland clearance
(Konaté, 2003). In this regard, the Code clearly spells out the local authorities’ responsibility to work with
pastoralists, traditional authorities, and farmers to maintain pastoral tracks, paths, and transhumance corridors. It
also foresees the publication of calendars of natural resource use to coordinate farmer and herder activities and
minimize intercommunal tensions (LANDac, 2012). However, its implementation remains hampered by top-down
technocratic planning, a general lack of information dissemination, and a fragmented, poorly organized pastoral
constituency. Nonetheless, Mali’s Pastoral Code is a promising step toward an explicit protection of pastoralist
livelihoods.


Box 12. Introducing community-embedded land commissions (commissions foncières): Niger’s
Rural Code

In the 1980s, the government of Niger launched a consultation process to develop rules for sustainable land
management, which led to the establishment of the 1993 Rural Code. At the core of the Rural Code is a focus on
participatory consultation and land management by devolving decision-making powers to villages, communes, and
regions. Local land commissions (commissions foncières (CoFos)) are comprised of state and local government
officials, customary chiefs, and user groups’ representatives. The Rural Code equips CoFos with the mandate to


                                                                                                                 58
allocate and register land claims, control regional land use, and offer land dispute mediation. By clearly
demarcating shared resources through community involvement, CoFos have been credited with considerably
reducing farmer/herder conflicts in the country (AGTER, n.d.).

From 1993 to 2004 more than 2,500 CoFos were created nationwide and coordinated by regional CoFO secretaries
(Hilhorst et al., 2011). However, the process is greatly hampered by insufficient administrative capacity and weak
governance structures. Most villages are still without a CoFo, and the majority of existing CoFos are constrained by
a lack of resources. Further, CoFos are essentially powerless if land transactions are agreed at the national level or
with regional state authorities, although “consent? of CoFo is required on paper to legalize these transactions
(Hilhorst et al., 2011).


5. Conclusion
This paper has examined the overall picture of land conflict and migration issues, including their murky
intersection with discriminatory practices as result of formal citizenship, cultural notions of foreigners
and outsiders, and traditional customary systems. However, each element of the paper is part of a much
bigger and more technical reality that cannot be adequately addressed here. Each element also requires
its own set of operational considerations that are equally tailored to the different migrant groups,
landholders and users, political cultures, levels of development, infrastructural capacity, and climatic
areas found within the region.

The local, national, and regional challenges facing West Africa within the land, migration, and citizenship
nexus are significant. The experiences of past conflicts and increasing frequency and intensity of pastoral
conflicts provide unfortunate proof of the realities, risks, and vulnerabilities that can arise from this
nexus. Moreover, the lack of progress in addressing several facets of the known structural challenges
paints a worrisome picture, especially when viewed against the inevitable surmounting pressures of
regional and global trends. The oft-heard Liberian sentiment, “the next war will be about land,? is a stark
reminder of how urgent it is to prioritize this nexus across government, regional, development, and
assistance community agendas.

That being said, the symbiotic relationship between land and migrants has also proven to be historically
economically fruitful. On the one hand, it has helped develop several areas and sectors within West
Africa; on the other, it has enabled the exploitation of an otherwise impossible land area in the Sahel.
While climate change, youth bulges, generational differences, population growth, urbanization, and
rising agri-business can pose challenges, managed well, they each in turn provide tangible and
substantial opportunities for the region. Climate change may expand agricultural potential; youth
coupled with secondary education and access to technological innovation can bridge the knowledge and
positive practices of their elders with the demands of a globally connected world; population growth can
stimulate market demands; and agri-business (if it is sustainable and community-development centric,
focuses on domestic priorities, and aims to keep a significant share of the gains in West Africa) can help
engage communities and stimulate employment. Creating the conditions necessary to exploit these
opportunities, however, requires concerted, long-term, and cross-sectoral approaches that are



                                                                                                                  59
cognizant of the sensitivities and structural challenges related to land, migration, and citizenship, which
is no easy task.

Legal pluralism is another area that presents simultaneous challenges and opportunities. While legal
pluralism can provide a form of checks and balances on each of the systems and facilitate locally tailored
and often appropriate (as well as accessible) dispute settlement mechanisms, confusion and tension are
inevitable when too many competing authorities claim legitimacy and when rulings can be easily
overturned by the other authorities. Further, corruption and self-interest exist within both systems,
fueling a lack of conviction therein. However, customary systems have often proven to be the best and
only governing alternative in the face of low formal institutional presence across the region; as this is
deeply socially, culturally, and politically embedded in society, it cannot be dismissed. Nevertheless, land
scarcity, rising land values, population growth, urbanization, and rising agri-business will call for
increased tenure security and clarification of land tenure. This is bound to bring new and old competing
claims to the fore. Simply formalizing customary ownership or authority in response, however, raises its
own set of complications, especially for women, migrants, and other vulnerable groups.

Even before ECOWAS’s approach to regional integration, its member states have had a long history of
being highly mobile and distinctively remaining within the region. Its vision of community citizenship
aims to foster a common identity that in principle provides the same rights and protections to all West
Africans. However, the practical realities of implementing this vision reveal challenges not only in terms
of regional and national capacity but also, in many ways, national political will. Certain articles allow for
exceptions and interpretations that renege on what the Protocol aims to achieve. Furthermore, there is
little means to hold member states accountable for disregarding it. Weak governance, corruption, and
limited capacity are unfortunately endemic across the region. This not only undermines effective
governance and management of land, migration, and citizenship issues, but also carries significant
ramifications for those who can be easily exploited by gaps and inconsistencies invoked by the legal
pluralism, including the poor, migrants, women, and other vulnerable groups.

Given their significance to wealth, power, livelihoods, social status, and community belonging, disputes
over land and resources are inevitable. However, such disputes occur in even the most peaceful
societies (Van der Auweraert, 2013), and even in postconflict contexts can be (and often are) resolved
peacefully. The key consideration is thus to determine how and when the specific fragilities,
vulnerabilities, and risks for such disputes could escalate into violence; derail or undermine
peacebuilding and recovery efforts; or ignite or re-ignite conflict (adapted from Van der Auweraert,
2013).

5.1 Ways forward

Despite the plethora of literature and recommendations that have emerged over the past decades, the
primacy of these issues not only remains equally pressing and unresolved, but they also risk escalating in
the face of growing demographic, economic, environmental, social, and climatic pressures. The systems
in place to address the land and migration issues have largely been inadequate, and when good policies
exist, they remain for the most part unenforced. West Africa is riddled with development projects gone

                                                                                                          60
awry that have inadvertently caused environmental degradation or created false hope through aid-
dependent short-term pilot projects, as evidenced by various pilot projects associated with the gestion
terroirs.

For this reason, in order to overcome the seeming gridlock, new approaches are needed. These should
be locally grounded but also formally compatible with governing systems and should not rely upon
unrealistic variables such as decapitating under-resourced mechanisms and weak governance (see
Section 3.3). Both land and migration are at the core of economic potential and growth, but badly
managed, are highly volatile. For this reason, this paper asserts that while operational approaches can
continue to try and fulfill the persisting general recommendations, real progress can only stem from
additional work in the following areas:

      Updated assessment of country-level land policies; this should be done in relation to migration
       and citizenship policies, given that the most comprehensive analyses of land policies in West
       Africa were conducted between 1999–2006.
      Assessment that focuses in-depth on the land and migration nexus in relation to fragility
       indicators and meta-trends. This would be an invaluable contribution to better incorporating
       these issues in early warning and conflict prevention strategies. Starting with a comparative
       analysis of the impact of the 2007 food crisis on migration and land issues, a range of scenario
       models could be useful in relation to the economic changes that could be foreseen as a result of
       climate change.
      Impact assessment and best practice analysis of projects that have been attempted, in order to
       develop specific and targeted operational recommendations. This should include a thorough
       mapping of donor funding and assistance that has taken place in the past decade. Such an
       exercise will help shed light on which projects addressed particular elements of the land and
       migration nexus and inform the assistance community of which geographical and substantive
       areas are most in need and where they should focus their attention.
      Analytical literature has very recently focused on large-scale land acquisitions, mostly from a
       risks perspective. However, given rising urban market and food demands, it is also important to
       understand if and how agri-business and smallholding farms can mutually benefit and even
       complement each other. It is also important to encourage the development of a framework for
       ensuring land rights access and protection; mitigating environmental impacts on pastoralists and
       smallholders; seizing (and insisting upon) opportunities for community economic development
       and livelihood support; and monitoring transparency and compliance.
      Promote the development of a high-level multistakeholder task force aimed at addressing
       specific key issues at a regional level to overcome many of the obstacles that have yet to be
       resolved despite the long-standing recognition of the issues.
      It would be useful to conduct a comparative legal assessment of legal pluralism, including case
       studies where the systems worked compatibly together in land conflict resolution; take stock of
       case results where there was a discernible bias toward specific groups; and review complicated
       cases where mixed arrangements and multiple users with different rights worked and/or lived
       on the same land. Such a study would be helpful in rethinking typical Western rule of law

                                                                                                    61
    approaches and put forward a harmonized approach that offers the region’s changing contexts
    legitimacy and tenure security.
   Customary systems are fluid—cultural shifts that stem from education, urban experiences, and
    technological globalization will increasingly alter how youth respond to and interact with the
    traditional frameworks, and in turn significantly impact land issues and dispute resolution
    mechanisms. Youth have already been frequently implicated in selling land for short-term
    material gain, while the alienation of their land rights contributed to the conflicts in the Gulf of
    Guinea. However, increasingly more educated, youth will also inject new opportunities and
    approaches for land management and use. An increasingly prominent issue for study would be
    to focus specifically on youth, cultural changes, and tenure systems. This would also help shape
    policies and programs to promote sustainable non-land based return migration to support
    return brain-gain and transference of knowledge and skill.




                                                                                                     62
References

Abdalla, M. A. 2009. “Understanding of the Natural Resource Conflict Dynamics: The Case of Tuareg in
        North Africa and the Sahel.? ISS Paper 194, Institute for Security Studies, Pretoria.

Abdoul, M. 2011. “Policy Frameworks for Cross-Border Transhumance.? Concordis Briefing 5, Concordis
       International, Cambridge, UK.

Aboa, A. 2013, August 23. “Ivory Coast Lawmakers Pass Critical Land, Nationality Laws.? Reuters.
       http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/08/23/us-ivorycoast-laws-idUSBRE97M0Y120130823.

Addy, D. N. 2005. “Labour Migration and Regional Integration in West Africa.? ECOWAS Conference of
       Labour Ministers, Abuja, September 19–21. Referenced in Adepoju, 2006.

Adepoju, A. 2005. “Migration in West Africa.? Paper prepared for the Policy Analysis Research
       Programme of the Global Commission on International Migration, Human Resources
       Development Centre, Lagos, September.

Adepoju, A. 2006. “The Challenge of Labour Migration Between West Africa and the Maghreb.?
       International Migration Papers 84E, International Labour Organization, Geneva.

Adepoju, A., A. Boulton, and M. Levin. n.d. “Promoting Integration Through Mobility: Free Movement
       Under ECOWAS.? Paper, UNHCR, Geneva.

AfDB. 2013b. “AfDB Supports the Development of ECOWAS Common Migration Policy.?
       http://www.afdb.org/en/news-and-events/article/afdb-supports-the-development-of-ecowas-
       common-migration-policy-12045.

Africa Files. n.d. “Côte d'Ivoire: The ‘Ivoirite’ Crisis: Xenophobia as Patriotism.?
         http://www.africafiles.org/article.asp?ID=7157.

African Union. 2013. “Policy Framework for Pastoralism in Africa: Security, Protecting and Improving the
        Lives, Livelihoods and Rights of Pastoralist Communities.? AU Department of Rural Economy and
        Agriculture, Addis Ababa.

African Union, AfDB, and ECA (Economic Commission for Africa). 2011. “Land Policy in Africa: A
        Framework to Strengthen Land Rights, Enhance Productivity and Secure Livelihoods.?
        Background document, African Union, African Development Bank, and United Nations Economic
        Commission for Africa, Addis Ababa.

AGTER (Association pour contribuer à l’amélioration de la gouvernance de la terre, de l’eau et des
       ressources naturelles). n.d. “Lessons Learned from Niger’s Rural Code: Paper #5—Progress Made
       by Niger’s Rural Code.? http://www.agter.org/bdf/_docs/niger_-_paper_5_-
       _progress_of_the_rural_code.pdf.

                                                                                                       63
ALC (African Leadership Centre). 2008. “‘State Fragility’ and the Challenges of Development in West
        Africa: Moving from Reaction to Prevention.? Research Report 3, ALC, Nairobi.

Alden Wily, L. 2012. “Customary Land Tenure in the Modern World: Rights to Resources in Crisis;
       Reviewing the Fate of Customary Tenure in Africa.? Brief #1, Rights and Resources Initiative,
       Washington, DC.

Al Jazeera. 2014, May 14. “Mali ‘at War’ with Tuareg Rebels.?
        http://www.aljazeera.com/news/africa/2014/05/mali-at-war-with-tuareg-rebels-
        201451815152681548.html.

Annan, N. 2014. “Violent Conflicts and Civil Strife in West Africa: Causes, Challenges and Prospects.?
       International Journal of Security & Development 3 (1): 1–16.

AUC (African Union Consortium), ECA, and AfDB. 2010. Framework and Guidelines on Land Policy in
       Africa: Land Policy in Africa; A Framework to Strengthen Land Rights, Enhance Productivity and
       Secure Livelihoods. Addis Ababa: AUC.

Bello Tukur, M. 2005. “Conflicts Between Transhumant Pastoralist and Farmers in Nigeria—the
        Way Out.? Mohammedbello. http://pastoralist2.wordpress.com/2013/06/11/conflicts-between-
        transhumant-pastoralist-and-farmers-in-nigeria-the-way-out.

Benjaminsen, T. 2008. “Does Supply-Induced Scarcity Drive Violent Conflicts in the African Sahel? The
       Case of the Rebellion in Northern Mali.? Journal of Peace Research 45 (6): 831–48.

Berry, S. 2009. “Property, Authority and Citizenship: Land Claims, Politics and the Dynamics of Social
         Division in West Africa.? Development and Change 40 (1): 23–45.

Bossard, L., ed. 2009. Regional Atlas on West Africa. Paris: OECD and Sahel and West Africa Club.

Bovcon, M. 2009. “France's Conflict Resolution Strategy in Côte d'Ivoire and Its Ethical Implications.?
       African Studies Quarterly 11 (1): 1–24.

Charrière, F., and M. Frésia. 2009. West Africa as a Migration and Protection Area. Geneva: UNHCR.

Cilliers, J., and T. D. Sisk. 2013. “Prospects for Africa’s 26 Fragile Countries.? African Futures Paper No. 8,
          African Futures Project, Institute for Security Studies, and the Frederick S. Pardee Center for
          International Futures, University of Denver.

Cotula, L., ed. 2007. Changes in “Customary? Land Tenure Systems in Africa. London: International
        Institute for the Environment and Development and FAO.

Cotula, L., and C. Toulmin. 2004. “Till to Tiller: Linkages Between International Remittances and Access
        to Land in West Africa.? LSP Working Paper 14, International Institute for Environment and
        Development and FAO Livelihood Support Programme, Rome.



                                                                                                             64
Cotula, L., C. Toulmin, and C. Hesse. 2004. Land Tenure and Administration in Africa: Lessons of
        Experience and Emerging Issues. London and Rome: International Institute for the Environment
        and Development and FAO.

Delville, P. L. 1998. Harmonising Formal Law and Customary Land Rights in French-Speaking West Africa.
         Paris: GRET.

DFID (Department for International Development) and ECOWAS (Economic Community of West African
       States). 2006. International Conference on the Future of Transhumance Pastoralism in West and
       Central Africa. Abuja, November 20–24.

Djeukam, R., P. R. Oyono, and B. Diarra. 2013. “Land and Forest Tenure Reforms in West and Central
       Africa: Preliminary Assessment of Progress Made Since Yaoundé 2009.? Report, Rights and
       Resources Initiative, Washington, DC.

Djiré, M. 2004. Referenced in Cotula and Toulmin, 2004.

Djiré, M. 2006. “Land Registration in Mali—No Land Ownership for Farmers?? Issue Paper No. 144,
        International Institute for Environment and Development, London.

Djiré, M., with A. Keita and A. Diawara. 2012. Agricultural Investments and Land Acquisitions in Mali:
        Context, Trends and Case Studies. London and Bamako: IIED and GERSDA.

Dong, S. L., et al. 2011. “Vulnerability of Worldwide Pastoralism to Global Changes and Interdisciplinary
        Strategies for Sustainable Pastoralism.? Ecology and Society 16 (2): 10.
        http://www.ecologyandsociety.org/vol16/iss2/art10.

Dorman, S., D. Hammett, and P. Nugent, eds. 2007. Making Nations, Creating Strangers: States and
      Citizenship in Africa. Leiden: Brill.

Dyer, N., S. Omondi, and M. Wantsusi. 2007. Securing Pastoralism in East and West Africa: Protecting
        and Promoting Livestock Mobility. London: IIED and SOS Sahel.

ECOWAS Protocol A/P.1/5/79. Relating to Free Movement of Persons, Residence and Establishment,
     Chapter IV, Article 4.

Elhawary, S. 2009. “Between War and Peace: Land and Humanitarian Action in Colombia.? In Uncharted
       Territory: Land, Conflict and Humanitarian Action, ed. S. Pantuliano. Rugby: Practical Action.

FAO. 2001. Pastoralism in the New Millenium. Rome: FAO.

FAO. 2011. Disaster Risk Management Strategy in West Africa and the Sahel (2011–2013). Rome: FAO.

Faye, J. 2008. “Land and Decentralization in Senegal.? Issue Paper 149, IIED, London.
         http://pubs.iied.org/pdfs/12550IIED.pdf.



                                                                                                         65
Freudenberger, M., and D. Miller. 2010. “Climate Change, Property Rights and Resource Governance.?
       Property Rights and Resource Governance Briefing Paper #2, US Agency for International
       Development, Washington, DC.

Geschiere, P. 2009. The Perils of Belonging. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Global Land Tool Network. n.d. “Liberia's First Land Rights Policy Presented to the Government.?
        http://www.gltn.net/index.php/our-news/gltn-news/243-liberia-s-first-land-rights-policy-
        presented-to-the-government.

GRAF (Groupe de Recherche et d’Action sur le Foncier). 2011. “Agribusiness in Burkina Faso: Effects on
       Land Tenure and Agricultural Modernization.? Report, GRAF, Ouagadougou and Amsterdam.

Hilhorst, T., J. Nelen, and N. Traoré. 2011. “Agrarian Change Below the Radar Screen: Rising Farmland
        Acquisitions by Domestic Investors in West Africa.? Results from a survey in Benin, Burkina Faso,
        and Niger, Royal Tropical Institute and SNV Netherlands Development Organisation,
        Amsterdam.

Human Rights Watch. 2013. “‘That Land Is My Family’s Wealth’: Addressing Land Dispossession After
      Côte d’Ivoire’s Post-Election Conflict.? Report, Human Rights Watch, New York.

IDMC (Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre). 2014. “Mali: Ongoing Pursuit of Durable Solutions.?
       Report, IDMC, Oslo.

IFAD (International Fund for Agricultural Development). 2009. “Good Practices in Participatory
        Mapping.? Review prepared for the International Fund for Agricultural Development, Rome.

IFAD. 2011. “Responding to ‘Land Grabbing’ and Promoting Responsible Investment in Agriculture.?
        Occasional Paper 2, IFAD, Rome.

IIED (International Institute for Environment and Development). 1999. “Land Tenure and Resource
         Access in West Africa: Issues and Opportunities for the Next Twenty-Five Years.? Working paper,
         IIED, London.

IIED. 2001, May. “Land Rights Under Negotiation.? Haramata: Bulletin of the Drylands: People, Policies,
        Programmes 39: 12–15.

IOM (International Organization for Migration). 2011. “Key Migration Terms.? International Migration
        Law No. 25, Glossary on Migration, IOM, Geneva.

IOM, UN-Habitat, and NRC (Norwegian Refugee Council). 2014. “Land, Peacemaking and Post-Conflict
       Peacebuiding.? Course presented by IOM, UN-Habitat, and NRC, New York, May 1–2.

IRIN. 2012. “Sierra Leone: Fighting for Women’s Right to Land.?
        http://www.irinnews.org/report/95705/sierra-leone-fighting-for-women-s-right-to-land.



                                                                                                       66
IRIN. 2013a. “Can Niger Offer Mali Lessons on the Tuareg??
        http://www.irinnews.org/fr/report/97823/can-niger-offer-mali-lessons-on-the-tuareg.

IRIN. 2013b. “Is Land Reform in Burkina Faso Working?? http://www.irinnews.org/report/98781/is-land-
        reform-working-in-burkina-faso.

Isser, D. H., S. C. Lubkemann, and S. N’Tow. 2009. “Looking for Justice: Liberian Experiences with and
         Perceptions of Local Justice Options.? Peaceworks Report No. 63, US Institute of Peace,
         Washington, DC.

Isser, D. 2011. Customary Justice and the Rule of Law in War-Torn Societies. Washington, DC: USIP Press.

Isser, D. 2014, April 29. Senior Counsel Program Manager, Justice for the Poor Justice Reform Practice
         Group. Written correspondence, World Bank Group, Washington, DC.

IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature). 2008. Global Review of the Economics of
        Pastoralism, by R. Hatfield and J. Davies. Research paper prepared for the World Initiative for
        Sustainable Pastoralism. Nairobi.

Jalali, M. 2013. “Tuareg Migration: A Critical Component of Crisis in the Sahel.? Migration Policy
         Institute. http://www.migrationpolicy.org/article/tuareg-migration-critical-component-crisis-
         sahel.

Kaba, A. n.d. “Talking Land: Protecting Women's Rights in Liberia.? Focus on Land in Africa.
        http://www.focusonland.com/for-comment/protecting-womens-rights-in-liberia-.

Kandji, S. T., L. Verchot, and J. Mackensen. 2006. “Climate Variability and Climate Change in the Sahel
         Region: Impacts and Adaptation Strategies in the Agricultural Sector.? Report, United Nations
         Environment Programme and World Agroforestry Centre, Geneva.
         http://www.unep.org/Themes/Freshwater/Documents/pdf/ClimateChangeSahelCombine.pdf.

Konaté, A. B. 2003. “Local Networks as a Tool for Influencing Policy: Experiences of the GDRN5 Network
        in Mali.? Securing the Commons No. 6, GDRN, Sévaré.
        http://www.sahel.org.uk/pdf/Securing%20the%20Commons%20No.6%20(English).pdf.

Koné, M. 2011. “Women and Land.? Briefing paper, Land Tenure and Development Technical
       Committee, Agence Française de Développement, Paris.
       http://www.agter.asso.fr/IMG/pdf/2011_ctf_fiche-pedag_kone_femmes-et-foncier_en.pdf.

Konseiga, A.2005. “New Patterns in the Human Migration in West Africa.? In Regional Integration
       Beyond the Traditional Trade Benefits: Labor Mobility Contribution, ed. P. Lang. Development
       Economics and Policy Series 46, Frankfurt am Main.

LANDac (IS Academy on Land Governance for Equitable and Sustainable Development). 2012. “Mali:
      Food Security and Land Governance Factsheet.?
      http://www.landgovernance.org/system/files/Mali%20Factsheet%20-%202012.pdf.

                                                                                                          67
LandNet West Africa. 2001. “LandNet West Africa: Progress, Achievements and Visions for the Future.?
       Presentation to DFID Land Tenure Advisory Group, May 2.
       http://www.mokoro.co.uk/files/13/file/lria/landnetwestafricaprogress2001.pdf.

Le Meur, P. Y., P. Hochet, M. Shem, and O. Touré. 2006. “Conflict over Access to Land and Water
       Resources Within Sub-Saharan Dry Lands: Underlying Factors, Conflict Dynamics and Settlement
       Processes.? Final report, GRET, Paris.

Lund, C. 2011. “Land Rights and Citizenship in Africa.? Discussion Paper 65, Nordic Africa Institute,
        Uppsala.

Manby, B. 2009. Struggles for Citizenship in Africa. London: Zed.

MCC (Millennium Challenge Cooperation). 2013a. “Property Rights and Land Policy.?
      http://www.mcc.gov/pages/sectors/sector/property-rights-and-land-policy.

MCC. 2013b. “Success Story: Early Success in Reforming Land Management in Cape Verde.?
       http://www.mcc.gov/documents/press/success-2012002136801-reforming-land-management-
       in-cape-verde.pdf.

M’Cormack, F. 2011. “Helpdesk Research Report: Conflict Dynamics in West Africa.? Desk study
      prepared for DFID Nigeria, Abuja. http://www.gsdrc.org/docs/open/hdq752.pdf.

Mitchell. M. I. 2012. “The Political Economy of Migration and Conflict in Ghana’s Cocoa Regions:
        Enduring Peace or Deepening Cleavages?? Paper Presented at the Canadian Political Science
        Association Annual Meeting, Edmonton, June 12–15.

Nelen, J., A. Idrissou, B. W. Sanou, and N. Traoré. 2013. “Responses to Rising Farmland Acquisitions in
        West Africa: Fostering Accountability in Land Governance at the Local Level. ? SNV Netherlands
        Development Organisation, West-Africa, Royal Tropical Institute, Netherlands. Paper presented
        at the Annual World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty, Washington, DC, April 8–11.

NRC (Norwegian Refugee Council). 2012. “Land Conflict and Food Security in the Liberian-Ivorian Border
       Region.? Report, Norwegian Refugee Council, Oslo.
       http://www.ivorycoast.nrc.no/data/doc_res/NRC_report_e_LR.pdf.pdf.

Nyce, S. 2003. “Government Must Curb Ivory Coast's Xenophobia.? Reliefweb.
        http://reliefweb.int/report/c%C3%B4te-divoire/government-must-curb-ivory-coasts-
        xenophobia.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2005. “Land and Violent Conflict.?
       Issues Brief, OECD-Development Assistance Committee, Paris.

OECD. 2007a. “Promoting and Supporting Change in Transhumant Pastoralism in the Sahel and West
       Africa.? Livestock in the Sahel and West Africa Policy Note No. 3, SWAC, ECOWAS, UEMOA,
       CILSS, and ROPPA, Paris.

                                                                                                        68
OECD-SWAC. 2007. “Strengthening the Role of Actors and Livestock Professionals: A Necessity to
      Stimulate Regional Trade.? Livestock in the Sahel and West Africa Policy Note 4, OECD-SWAC,
      Paris.

OECD. 2008. “Valorising Regional Livestock Complementarities: A Lever to Better Meet Growing Demand
       for Animal Products in the Sahel and West Africa.? Policy Note No. 1, OECD-SWAC, Paris.

Osayande, A. 2014, May 15. “West Africa: ECOWAS Reviews Free Movement Protocol.? CAJ News Africa.

Ouedraogo, H., D. Gnisci, and L. Hitimana. 2006. Land Reform Processes in West Africa: A Review. Paris:
      Sahel and West Africa Club Secretariat and OECD.

Page, J., and S. Plaza. 2005. Referenced in Shimeles, 2010.

Pantuliano, S., ed. 2009. Uncharted Territory: Land, Conflict and Humanitarian Action. Rugby: Practical
        Action.

Provost, C. 2012, February 2. “Global Land Grab Could Trigger Conflict, Report Says.? Guardian (London).
        http://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/feb/02/global-land-grab-trigger-
        conflict-report.

Robert, N. 2004. “The Social Dimension of Regional Integration in ECOWAS.? Working Paper No. 49,
        International Labour Organization, Geneva. Referenced in Adepoju, 2006.

Reuters. 2013, July 1. “Ivory Coast Forest Clearances Threaten Cocoa Exports, Human Rights.?
       http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/07/01/us-ivorycoast-clearances-
       idUSBRE9600C720130701.

Rincon, J. M. 2010. “Ex-combatants, Returnees, Land and Conflict in Liberia.? DIIS Working Paper, Danish
        Institute for International Studies, Copenhagen.

Sawyer, A. 2009. “Land Governance Challenges: The Case of Liberia.? Prepared for ARD Week 2009,
       World Bank, Washington, DC, March 2.
       http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTARD/Resources/sawyer.pdf.

Shaw, W. 2007. “Migration in Africa: A Review of the Economic Literature on International Migration in
       10 Countries.? Report, Development Prospects Group, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Shen, X., and X. Sun. 2012. Untying the Land Knot: Making Equitable, Efficient, and Sustainable Use of
        Commercial and Industrial Land. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Shimeles, A. 2010. “Migration Patterns, Trends and Policy Issues in Africa.? Working Papers Series No.
       119, African Development Bank Group, Tunis.

Ubink, J., A. Hoekema, and W. J. Assies. 2009. Legalising Land Rights: Local Practices, State Responses
        and Tenure Security in Africa, Asia and Latin America. Leiden: Leiden University Press.


                                                                                                          69
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2003. “Conflict-Related Development Analysis (CDA).?
      Paper, Bureau for Crisis Prevention and Recovery, UNDP, New York.

UNDP. 2013. Human Development Report 2013: The Rise of the South: Human Progress in a Diverse
       World. New York: UNDP.

UNDP and IOM. 2013. “Les conflits liés au foncier rural dans la région de l’Ouest de la Côte d’Ivoire. ?
      Mission, May–June, IOM, Geneva.

UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa). 2012. Fragile States and Development in West
       Africa. Addis Ababa: United Nations Economic Commission for Africa, Sub-Regional Office for
       West Africa.

UNHCR (United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees). 2013. UNHCR Global Appeal 2013: Mali
      Situation. Geneva: UNHCR. http://www.unhcr.org/50a9f82316.pdf.

Unruh, J. 2008b. “Land Policy Reform, Customary Rule of Law and the Peace Process in Sierra Leone.?
        African Journal of Legal Studies 1 (2): 94–117.

Unruh, J. 2009. “Humanitarian Approaches to Conflict and Post-Conflict Legal Pluralism in Land Tenure.?
        In Uncharted Territory: Land, Conflict and Humanitarian Action, ed. S. Pantuliano. Rugby:
        Practical Action.

Unruh, J., and H. Turray. 2006. “Land Tenure, Food Security and Investment in Postwar Sierra Leone.?
        FAO Livelihood Support Programme Working Paper 22, Access to Natural Resources Sub-
        Programme, FAO, Rome.

USAID (US Agency for International Development). 2007. Land Tenure and Property Rights. Vol. 1.
       Washington DC: USAID.

USAID. 2008. “Integrating Customary Land Tenure into Statutory Land Tenure Law.? Paper, USAID,
       Washington, DC.
       http://usaidlandtenure.net/sites/default/files/USAID_Land_Tenure_PRRG_Integrating_Customa
       ry_Land_Tenure_Into_Statutory_Land_Law.pdf.

USAID. 2010a. Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Burkina Faso. Washington, DC:
       USAID.

USAID. 2010b. Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Guinea. Washington, DC:
       USAID.

USAID. 2010c. Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Mali. Washington, DC: USAID.

USAID. 2010d. Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Niger. Washington, DC:
       USAID.



                                                                                                           70
USAID. 2010e. Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Nigeria. Washington, DC:
       USAID.

USAID. 2010f. Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Liberia. Washington, DC:
       USAID.

USAID. 2010g. Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Senegal. Washington, DC:
       USAID.

USAID. 2013a. Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Côte d’Ivoire. Washington, DC:
       USAID.

USAID. 2013b. Country Profile: Property Rights and Resource Governance: Ghana. Washington, DC:
       USAID.

USAID. 2013d. Land Tenure and Property Rights Matrix: Land Tenure and Property Rights Overlay.
       Washington, DC: USAID.

USAID. 2013e. Land Tenure and Property Rights Matrix: Trees and Forests Overlay. Washington, DC:
       USAID.

Van der Auweraert, P. 2013. “Institutional Aspects of Resolving Land Disputes in Post-Conflict Societies.?
       In Land and Post-Conflict Peacebuilding, ed. J. Unruh and R. C. Williams. London: Earthscan.

Van Driel, A. 2001. Sharing a Valley. The Changing Relations Between Agriculturalists and Pastoralists in
        the Niger Valley of Benin. Leiden: African Studies Centre.

Voice of America. 2013, July 1. “Ivory Coast Moves Cocoa Farmers from Protected Forests.?
        http://www.voanews.com/content/ivory-coast-farmers-cleared-from-protected-
        forests/1692954.html.

World Bank. 2011. World Bank Migration and Remittances Factbook 2011. 2nd ed. Washington, DC:
       World Bank. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTLAC/Resources/Factbook2011-Ebook.pdf.

World Bank. 2013a. “The Sahel: New Push to Transform Agriculture with More Support for Pastoralism
       and Irrigation.? Press release. http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-
       release/2013/10/27/the-sahel-new-push-to-transform-agriculture-with-more-support-for-
       pastoralism-and-irrigation.

World Bank. 2014. “Forum de Haut Niveau sur le Pastoralisme au Sahel.? Note de cadrage, Nouakchott,
       January 17.

World Bank and UNHCR. 2013. “Forced Displacement of and Potential Solutions for IDPs and Refugees in
       the Sahel—Burkina Faso, Chad, Mali, Mauritania & Niger, Global Program on Forced
       Displacement.? Report, World Bank, Washington, DC.



                                                                                                       71
Zongo, M. 2010. “Land Tenure and Migration in West Africa.? Briefing paper, Land Tenure and
       Development Technical Committee, Agence Française de Développement, Paris.




                                                                                              72
