                                                      98906




The World Bank



Demand for skills
Main results of the Azerbaijan STEP Employer Survey




Jan J. Rutkowski
1/12/2015
Azerbaijan
Demand for skills
This note summarizes the main findings of the STEP Employer Skills Survey carried out in Azerbaijan in
2013.1 The note argues that there is a skills shortage in Azerbaijan. Azeri employers claim that it is
difficult to find workers with required skills. The shortage is particularly pronounced in the case of
modern, innovative firms, which tend to required more advanced skills. The education system does not
meet the needs of the majority of employers. In particular, it does not equip young workers with the
practical skills that are required in the workplace, and with knowledge that is up-to-date. The note finds
that employers seek not only technical, job-specific skills but also cognitive skills (such as literacy,
numeracy and problem solving) and adequate socio-behavioral skills (such as communication,
teamwork, leadership and ability to work independently). Conscientiousness stands out as a personality
trait that is critical for employability. Unfortunately, many young job applicants lack the skills demanded
by employers. The key employability skills that young workers are most frequently lacking include job-
specific technical skills, problem solving skills, communication, teamwork and leadership skills. Hence,
the skills gap refers not only to technical skills but also to higher-order cognitive skills and socio-
behavioral skills. By their nature, these results show subjective perceptions of employers. And these
perceptions reflect not only the objective conditions, but also employers’ expectations regarding worker
skills that may be excessive. Nonetheless the results signal a skill problem in Azerbaijan, and employers’
criticism of the quality and relevance of education should not be too easily disregarded. The survey’s
results strongly suggest that the quality of education needs to be improved, and the education system
needs to be more responsive to labor market needs in order to support growth and modernization of
the Azerbaijan’s economy.

Box 1 summarizes the main results of the analysis. It shows the core employability skills that college and
high school graduates lack most often. The development of these skills among students represents the
main challenge for the education system in Azerbaijan and is critical for addressing the skills gap.




1
 The sample size was 316 firms. The sample was stratified by firm size and economic activity, with a booster
sample of large firms. Most firms were from the trade sector (42%), manufacturing and ICT (16% each), and
construction (9%). The results presented in this note are weighted so as to be representative of the Azerbaijani
economy.


                                                       1
Box 1. Core employability skills that are most often missing among young Armenian workers
The table below shows the core employability skills that young workers lack most often. It lists the skills that are
reported as frequently missing among young workers by at least 20 percent of firms. These are the skills that need
to be developed among students in order to address the skills gap.

                  College graduates                                                              High school graduates
                      Leadership
                                                                                                         Teamwork
                Openness to experience
                                                       Problem solving
                                                  Job-specific technical skills
Source: World Bank Employer STEP survey, 2013; Bank staff analysis.




The rest of the note examines the skill problem in Azerbaijan in more detail and presents evidence of a
skills gap.

Survey results
This section attempts to answer four questions: (a) Is there a skill shortage in Azerbaijan?, (b) Does the
education system respond to labor market demands?, (c) What are the core employability skills?, (d)
What are the skills that young workers most often lack?, and (e) Do firms provide training to enhance
skills of their workforce?

employers find it difficult to hire skilled workers

Many Azeri employers encounter problems when trying to hire new workers. The particularly refers
to hiring skilled blue-collar workers, such as machine operators and assemblers, and highly skilled
professional workers, including technicians (associate professionals). Hiring workers with these skills
turned difficult for one firm in two (figure 1). This is a high proportion, pointing to a pervasive shortage
of some specialized skills.

Figure 1. Many firms encountered problems when trying to hire workers
                                                  Percentage of firms that had problems hiring

                                 Operators

                              Professionals

                               Technicians

                             Sales workers

                                 Managers

                                 Craftsmen

                                     Clerks

                            Service workers

                                Elementary

                                              0       10          20          30         40         50       60
                                                                            percent


Source: World Bank Azerbaijan Employer STEP Survey 2013; Bank staff calculations.


                                                                       2
because job applicants often lack required skills

Hiring workers can be difficult for a variety of reasons. However, it is the lack of required skills that is
usually cited as the main reason. In the case of professionals and technicians the lack of required skills
was cited by 70-80 percent of firms, in the case of machine operators and assemblers, by over 60
percent. Other reasons, such as excessive wage expectations, unsatisfactory working conditions or lack
of applicants, were reported much less frequently. This is a clear evidence of a skills shortage in
Azerbaijan.

The skills shortage hits innovative firms more than traditional ones .2 For example, nearly 60 percent of
innovative firms encountered problems when trying to hire professional workers, compared with only
34 percent of traditional firms. Innovative firms also find it more difficult than traditional ones to hire
skilled blue-collar workers, although in this case the difference is less pronounced although still
significant (10 percentage points). The most likely reason why innovative firms are more disposed to
experience skill shortages is that they require more advanced skills than traditional firms. The fact that
innovative firms are particularly vulnerable to a shortage of skills implies that the supply of skills needs
to be improved so as to match the demand in order not to impede the modernization and restructuring
of the Azerbaijan’s economy.

employers are dissatisfied with the quality of education

Many employers are critical of the quality of education in Azerbaijan. This does not come as a surprise
given that that they find it difficult to recruit workers with the right skills. As many as 40 percent of
employers claim that general education does not meet their skill needs, and the proportion is still higher
in the case of vocational and technical education (figure 2). The main problem, from the employers’
perspective, is that the education system (both general and technical/vocational) does not equip young
workers with practical skills. This is a complaint voiced by 60 percent of Azeri employers (a related
complaint is that the education system does not produce the kinds of skills needed).3 The second most
frequently voiced concern is that the education system does not equip young workers with knowledge
that is up-to-date. One employer in two considers knowledge produced by the education system as
obsolete. It is noteworthy that employers are critical not only about “hard” but also “soft” skills: every
second employer says that the education system does not produce good attitudes. This implies that in
order to improve the quality of education in Azerbaijan and make it more relevant to labor market



2
  Firms are categorized as “innovative” if they introduced new technologies in the past three years; otherwise they
are categorized as “traditional”. Obviously, an introduction of new technologies is only a proxy for the firm’s
innovation status.
3
  It should be noticed that this complaint is not specific to Azerbaijan; in most countries employers would like the
education system to be more focused on the production of practical skills, as opposed to theoretical knowledge.
The employers’ view is partial, however, and as such needs to be treated with some caution. A high quality
education system needs to balance different needs and considerations so as to equip students with broad and
flexible skill that they will be able to apply at different jobs, not just one specific job. This is particularly important
in a globalizing economy characterized by an incising job turnover, which implies that rather than being prepared
for one life-time job students need to be prepared for taking different jobs during their work career.

                                                             3
demands investments needs to be made not only in cognitive and technical skills, but also in social and
behavioral skills.

Figure 2. Education does not meet the needs of a large percentage of firms
                                                 Percentage of employers who claim that education :

                                                  Meets skill needs


                                    Doesn't produce practical skills


                              Doesn't produce updated knowledge


                            Doesn't produce KINDS of skills needed


                                    Doesn't produce good attitude


                            Doesn't produce LEVEL of skills needed


                                                                       0    10        20      30       40      50   60   70
                                                                                                percent

                                                     Technical/vocational education        General education

Source: World Bank Azerbaijan Employer STEP Survey 2013; Bank staff calculations.

Innovative firms are more critical about the quality of education than traditional firms. This is
consistent with the earlier results whereby innovative firms more often suffer from a skill shortage. The
explanation is the same: innovative firms tend to use more advanced technologies and therefore
demand higher skills. This reinforces the point that the improvement in the quality of education is
critical for the modernization of the Azeri economy.

job-specific technical skills are critical for employability but cognitive and socio-
behavioral skills matter, too

What are the most important skills that Azeri employers seek? Occupation-specific technical skills are
critical for both highly skilled professionals and middle-skilled white-and blue-collar workers (Figure 3).
But there are some differences in skills sought from Type A and Type B workers (see box 2 for the
definition of both groups). In addition to technical skills, employers require Type A workers to have
adequate numeracy and literacy as well as problem solving skills. As to Type B workers, employers
expect them to be able to work independently, and to have communication and teamwork skills.

Box 2. Type A and Type B workers
The STEP employer survey distinguished between two types of workers: Type A and Type B.
Type A workers are highly skilled white collar workers, usually with tertiary education. The group comprises three
occupational categories: managers, professionals and technicians (lower grade professionals).
Type B workers are middle- and low skilled workers, both blue and white collar, usually with secondary education,
or less. The group comprises the following occupational categories: clerks, service and sales workers, craftsmen,
machine operators and assemblers, and elementary occupations.




                                                                             4
Figure 3. The relative importance of different job-related skills
                                              Importance of job-related skills
                                                        (Index 0 - 5)
                            3.5

                             3

                            2.5

                             2

                            1.5

                                                                                 Type A
                             1
                                                                                 Type B
                            0.5

                             0




Type A workers = Managers, professional and technicians (associate professionals)
Type B workers = clerks, sales and service workers, craft workers, machine operators and assemblers.
Source: World Bank Azerbaijan Employer STEP Survey 2013; Bank staff calculations.

Employers also attach a high value to some personality traits. Among them conscientiousness is by far
the most important (for both Type A and Type B workers). This means that employers expect workers to
work hard, do a thorough job, and be efficient. Other desirable personality traits include emotional
stability, openness to new experience (among Type A workers) and agreeableness (among Tybe B
workers).

young workers often lack some important skills, not only technical but also socio -
behavioral and cognitive

Many young job applicants lack the skills demanded by employers. English, leadership, and critical and
creative thinking are the skills that are the most often lacking among university graduates, as claimed by
30 to 40 percent of Azerbaijani firm (figure 40, panel A). The list of skills that are frequently lacking
among secondary school graduates is longer. At least 30 percent of firms say that they often lack
teamwork skills, problem solving, creative thinking, technical and time-management skills (figure 4,
panel B).

Openness to new experience is the personality trait that young workers lack most often. College
graduates are not open to new experience according to 35 percent of firms, and high-school graduates
according to as many as 45 percent of firms. These high proportions are worrisome, as it is young
workers who are supposed to be most open to new experience and be a source of innovation and
progress in the economy.




                                                            5
Figure 4. Young workers often lack some job-related skills
Panel A                                            Panel B
                              Skills that university graduates often lack                                           Skills that secondary education graduates often lack

               English                                                                                         English

          Leadership                                                                                      Leadership

      Problem solving                                                                                Creative thinking

     Creative thinking                                                                                     Teamwork

       Technical skills                                                                               Problem solving

Working independently                                                                                  Technical skills

        Comunication                                                                                       Numeracy

           Teamwork                                                                                 Time management

           Numeracy                                                                             Working independently

    Time management                                                                                     Comunication

              Literacy                                                                                        Literacy

                          0          5        10        15           20      25   30   35                                 0   10       20      30        40        50      60   70   80
                                                      % of firms reporting                                                                      % of firms reporting


Source: World Bank Azerbaijan Employer STEP Survey 2013; Bank staff calculations.



occupation-specific technical skills, problem solving skills, leadership and
teamwork skills are core competencies that young workers most often lack.

Some skills, although frequently lacking among young workers, are not critical for employability.
English is an example. It is the skill that is most frequently missing among college graduates; however it
is not particularly important for the bulk of Azerbaijani employers. What are then the critical skill gaps?
What are the skills to which employers attach a high value and simultaneously often lacking among
young workers? Occupation-specific technical skills and problem solving skills fall into this category for
both Type A and Type B young workers. They are highly important but around 10 percent of firms claim
that young workers often lack them. In addition, among key employability skills Type A workers often
lack leadership skills, whereas Type B workers lack team working skills. The lack of teamworking skills is
particularly worrisome since it is reported by 20 percent of firms, meaning that the concern is
widespread. The lack of leadership skills among college graduates is reported by some 10 percent of
firms. Finally, openness to experience is an important skill often missing among college graduates, as
claimed by over one-third of firms.

One should not become complacent because of the sometimes small number of firms complaining
about a skill gap. As shown earlier, firms that suffer from a skill gap tend to be the most dynamic and
innovative. If the skill gap is an obstacle to the expansion of these firms, this has negative implications
for the modernization and growth of the whole Azerbaijan’s economy.

firms, especially large, respond to a skill gap by providing training

Roughly, every second Azerbaijani firm provides training to its workers to enhance their skills. Firms
are somewhat more likely to provide training to highly skilled Type A workers (50 percent of firms) than
to less skilled Type B workers (43 percent). As in other countries, the incidence of firm-provided training
increases with firm size. Larger firms provide training more often than smaller ones (figure 5).



                                                                                            6
Training is largely internal and of short duration, provided either by the firm manager or co-workers.
An average (median) workers receives around five days of training per year. Little is known about the
content of the training. But given its short duration and the fact that it is delivered on the premises of
the workplace, it is most likely orientation or on-the-job training meant to equip workers with some
basic firm-specific skills. Given available data, it is impossible to assess the impact of the firm-provided
training on worker productivity, and to ascertain to what extent it succeeds in addressing the skill gap.

Some firms provide external training, mainly to highly skilled Type A workers. About 20 percent of
firms provide external training (delivered by specialized training institutions) to Type A workers, and
only 8 percent to Type B workers. External training is also of short duration; both the median Type A
and Type B workers received five days of external training per year. Again, little is known about the
nature of training delivered by external institutions.

Figure 5. Firms provide training to enhance workers’ skills
                                                   Incidence of internal training by firm size
                                      80


                                      70


                                      60


                                      50
                            percent




                                      40                                                             Type A
                                                                                                     Type B
                                      30


                                      20


                                      10


                                       0
                                           Micro                    Small                    Large

Micro = 1 – 10 employees
Small = 11 – 50
Large = 51+
Source: World Bank Azerbaijan Employer STEP Survey 2013; Bank staff calculations.

Few Azerbaijani firms have regular contacts with training institutions. And it is predominantly large
firms that have such contact. Only 7 percent of firms have contacts with institutions that train Type A
workers, and the percentage of firms that have contacts with institutions that train Type B workers is
still lower (4 percent). The absence of such contacts matters because research has shown that they can
be instrumental in addressing a skills mismatch. Once training institutions know the skill demands of
employers, they can respond by adjusting their training curricula so as to effectively respond to these
demands. Consequently, firms get trained workers whose skills match the skill requirements of the jobs.
There is room to reduce a skills mismatch in Azerbaijan by strengthening the systematic partnership
between firms and training institutions. This entails a more active approach to workforce skill
development on the part of employers.




                                                                       7
addressing the skill gap: investing in the development of higher -order cognitive
and socio-behavioral skills in addition to technical skills

According to employers, young workers in Azerbaijan often lack three groups of skills: adequate
technical skills, higher-order cognitive skills (especially problem solving), and socio-behavioral skills
(teamwork, leadership, openness to experience). The policy implications of these findings are
straightforward. In order to address the skill gap and to support the modernization and growth of the
Azerbaijani economy the government needs to improve the quality of education and enhance its
relevance to labor market needs. Different parts of the education system are responsible for enhancing
each group of skills. The development of socio-behavioral skills starts with early childhood education
and continues through all education levels, but is most intensive at the early stages of education. The
development of higher-order cognitive skills requires investments primarily in secondary education.
The development of technical skills requires investments in technical/vocational education, and in
tertiary education.

The above analysis is quite general and represents only a first step in the identification of a skill gap in
Azerbaijan and its exact nature and sources. More thorough research is necessary to identify specific
skills that are in short supply, and to determine the areas where reforms are needed in order to better
respond to the needs of the labor market and bridge the skill gap.

Conclusions and policy implications
There is evidence of a skills shortage in Azerbaijan. It is often difficult for employers to hire workers
with the right skills, including both highly skilled professionals and middle-skilled workers. This is largely
due to inadequate education. The education system does not meet skill needs of many firms, especially
innovative ones. According to Azeri employers, it does not produce necessary practical skills, it does not
equip students with up-to-date knowledge, and it does not produce the kinds of skills needed. As a
result, young workers often lack some key employability skills, including job-specific technical skills,
higher order cognitive skills (problem solving), and socio-behavioral skills (leadership, communication,
teamwork).

The consequences of the skill shortage can be severe. They potentially include a slower rate of
economic growth and of the modernization of the economy. These are due to employers creating fewer
jobs since they cannot find workers with the required skills, and due to smaller investment flows to skill
intensive sectors (including FDI). They also include higher unemployment, as many workers are
unemployed because they lack the skills demanded by the market, especially in the newly created and
more skill intensive jobs. But as the above analysis indicates, some people are unemployed not
necessarily because they lack the necessary technical skills, but because they lack adequate socio-
behavioral or cognitive skills.

Some degree of a skills mismatch is inevitable and is present in every growing and restructuring
economy. It reflects the process of creative destruction and the fact that the skill content of newly
created jobs is different from that of jobs that are being destroyed. The policy challenge is to minimize
the extent of a skills mismatch so that it does not impede job creation and economic growth. A two

                                                      8
pronged strategy is necessary to achieve this objective. First, Azerbaijan needs to improve the quality
and labor market relevance of education. Second, it needs to develop a labor market information
system to help labor market actors (education and training institutions, students, jobseekers, employers
and public employment services) make informed choices.

Making the education system more responsive to labor market needs involves, among other things,
strengthening systematic partnership between education institutions and employers so that they can
influence curricula design. It also involves the development of professionally-oriented higher education
in addition to the academic stream. This responds to the employers’ demand for worker s with better
practical and job-specific technical skills.

The development of a labor market information system involves collecting, publishing and analyzing
information on the supply of and demand for skills. Information on the demand for occupations and
skills helps students and jobseekers to choose fields of study and invest in skills that will enhance their
employment and wage prospects. Information on the supply of occupations and skills helps employers
to decide where to invest and which jobs to create. As such, the labor market information system
contributes to limiting the extent of a skills mismatch. Creating a labor market observatory, which core
mandate is to collect and disseminate information on the supply for and the demand for skills, is one
way to build a labor market information system in order to address a skills mismatch.




                                                    9
