                                                   98903

Trafficking and Fragility in West Africa




           Côme Dechery and Laura Ralston


         Fragility, Conflict, and Violence Group
                      World Bank
                         2015

                                                           1   1
Table of Contents
Abbreviations ........................................................................................................................ 3
1. Introduction ....................................................................................................................... 4
   1.1 What is Trafficking? .................................................................................................................. 4
   1.2 Regional criminal markets and trafficking in West Africa ............................................................ 5
   1.3 The region’s evolving criminal economy .................................................................................... 5
   1.4 Internal factors: Crime and governance in West Africa ............................................................... 6
   1.5 External factors: Market trends in worldwide trafficking............................................................ 7
   1.6 The routes and hubs of West African trafficking......................................................................... 9
   1.7 The prevalence and nature of trafficking flows in the region .................................................... 12
2. Five channels between trafficking and fragility: Trafficking and its impact on West Africa .. 13
   2.1 Channel 1—A source of financing and weapons for criminals and rebel groups ......................... 13
   2.2 Channel 2—Rewarding and promoting skills related to violence............................................... 14
   2.3 Channel 3—Leading to alternate governance systems .............................................................. 15
   2.4 Channel 4—Shifting the incentives of policy makers and military leaders ................................. 16
   2.5 Channel 5—Causing conflict between competing groups.......................................................... 17
3. Possible policy and programmatic response ...................................................................... 17
   3.1 Including crime-sensitivity in our analysis ................................................................................ 18
   3.2 Possible targeted interventions ............................................................................................... 20
References............................................................................................................................ 26
Appendix .............................................................................................................................. 31




                                                                                                                                              2    2
Abbreviations
AML/CFT    Anti-Money Laundering and Combatting the Financing of Terrorism

AQIM       al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb

CICIG      International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala

CPTED      crime prevention through environmental design

CRP        Cocaine Route Programme

DDR        disarmament, demobilization, and reintegration

DEA        Drug Enforcement Administration

DFID       Department for International Development

DTDP       Doi Tung Development Project

ECOWAS     Economic Community of West African States

EU         European Union

GIABA      Inter-Governmental Group against Money Laundering in West Africa

IDS        investigational drug seizures

LMA        Landmine Action

MAA        Arab Movement of Azawad

MINUSTAH   UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti

MUJWA      Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa

UNDP       United Nations Development Programme

UNODC      United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime

USAID      United States Agency for International Development

WAPIS      West African Police Information System

WCO        World Customs Organization




                                                                              3   3
1. Introduction
Trafficking is an emerging concern in West Africa that is gaining increasing attention from the
international community. This paper examines the relationship between trafficking and fragility in the
region through a meta-analysis of existing knowledge and data on the subject. Given the scope of this
paper, we will not attempt to provide any primary empirical or qualitative analysis, but instead focus on
offering a comprehensive, unbiased overview of the recent policy and academic literature on the
subject, which we hope will assist development practitioners working in the region and help the World
Bank identify possible programmatic responses.

We start this paper by defining trafficking to frame our analysis, and then provide an overview of the
trafficking economy across the region. Next, we outline the potential channels between trafficking and
fragility, discussing the actors involved (organized criminal groups, rebels, local or national level
politicians, the military, and civilians) and their relevance to specific countries. Finally, we present our
suggestions on possible policy and programmatic responses, based on identifying both regional and
external dimensions to the problems.

1.1 What is Trafficking?
Over the last decade trafficking has drawn a lot of attention, both in the media and the development
world; drug, arms, and human trafficking have been the subjects of specific UN conventions. While there
are definitions for specific forms of trafficking (such as human trafficking), there is no widely accepted
definition of trafficking at a general level, and it is not always clear how trafficking differs from other
illegal activities, such as smuggling.

To frame our analysis, we define trafficking as the international movement of goods or persons that
originate from either the illegal sector of the exporting country and/or move to the illegal sector of the
importing country (see Figure 1).
Trafficking therefore combines the illicit character of smuggling—it is conducted in a secretive manner to
avoid law enforcement—with the illegal nature of crime—it deals with items produced or acquired by
breaching the law. Thus we include in our analysis narcotics, human trafficking, and illegally acquired
firearms, oil, timber, and diamonds. However, we leave aside smuggling, which is illicit but not illegal
(see Table 1).

Table 1. International trade, smuggling, and trafficking

                                                   Is the good commercialized/traded in a lawful
                                                                   manner?
                                                          Yes                       No
                                      Yes        International trade              Smuggling
              Is the good legal?
                                      No                                          Trafficking




                                                                                                          4    4
Figure 1. What is Trafficking?




Certain flows—such as the trade of counterfeit cigarettes or the export of stolen vehicles from Libya into
Niger (Shaw and Mangan, 2014)—could also be considered as trafficked goods. However, given their
more limited impact on local governance and development and the scope of this paper, we chose to
leave them aside.

1.2 Regional criminal markets and trafficking in West Africa
In this section, we provide an overview of the factors that have shaped the evolution of trafficking across
the region. Over the past decade, cross-country smuggling networks have been used for trafficking, while
powerful criminal networks have taken advantage of institutional weaknesses and the integration of the
region into the world economy to develop a global trafficking industry. This industry revolves around
three hubs: the Gulf of Guinea, the Atlantic coastline, and the Sahel-Sahara region.

1.3 The region’s evolving criminal economy
Illicit trade and crime are not new to West Africa; both have been a longstanding part of the region’s
economy. Research suggests that the region began to serve as a heroin and cocaine transshipment point
as early as the 1950s, albeit on a small scale. Well-organized diasporas in the region (first the Lebanese,
then the Nigerians) were instrumental in the establishment and development of these early networks
(Lacher, 2012). A second phase started in the 1980s when trafficking and smuggling bloomed on a much
larger scale following a slowdown of economic activity and a series of intrastate conflicts throughout
West Africa. In the Gulf of Guinea, traffickers consolidated their operations by resorting more
systematically to corruption and turning their supply chain global. Between 1984 and 1989, 55 percent of
the couriers caught carrying heroin at New York’s John F. Kennedy airport were Nigerian (Shaw and
Reitano, 2013). In the Sahel, the smuggling economy connected countries and communities across
borders. Cigarettes imported from Mauritania, Benin, or Togo found their way to Mali and Niger. Local


                                                                                                         5    5
smugglers would then trade them northward to Algeria, Morocco, and Libya while importing subsidized
goods (fuel, staple food) from these same markets (Lacher, 2012). On the Atlantic coast, the rise of
organized crime was enabled by a combination of weak governance and protracted conflicts (Shaw and
Reitano, 2013). The Liberian civil war and conflict in Sierra Leone created a demand for weapons and
armed combatants that was at least in part funded by the extraction and trafficking of high-value
commodities such as diamonds and timber (Patrick, 2004; Phillipe, 2008). Even in more resilient states
such as Nigeria or Senegal, smaller-scale internal conflicts have created opportunities for arms traffickers
to sell their goods (O’Regan, 2013; Alemika, 2013). Gradually trafficking infiltrated public structures and
local politics in the region. In Burkina Faso, a heroin trafficking ring was enabled by a local diplomat who
provided diplomatic passports to its associates. In Nigeria, a former senator was arrested in New York for
trafficking heroin, and some heads of state, such a Liberia’s former president Charles Taylor, were
repeatedly suspected of associating with traffickers (Lacher, 2012). By the end of the 1990s however,
West Africa’s criminal landscape was still mainly composed of fragmented networks and actors who
interacted with one another on an ad hoc basis. The primary forms of trafficking involved exporting
natural resources for cash and weapons, with drugs representing a negligible amount of the criminal
proceeds in the region. Corruption was present, but focused on low/medium-level officials.

This trajectory laid the foundation for the current criminal landscape. At the turn of the millennium,
underlying drivers of fragility made certain states of the region prime targets for criminal networks. This
coincided with increased external pressure from international criminal entrepreneurs—notably
narcotraffickers—looking for a transshipment hub to better serve neighboring end markets (Europe, the
Middle East, Asia) and ushered in a new era for West Africa’s criminal economy.

1.4 Internal factors: Crime and governance in West Africa
West Africa offers many advantages for organized criminals. For South American cocaine traffickers, it
stands midway between the Andean producing countries and the European consumer market. For
Moroccan producers of cannabis resin, it can be used as a back door to circumvent customs control
along the Maghreb coastline. But more than its geography, it is the region’s weak governance that makes
it attractive to criminal networks. Criminal networks are not political organizations; they are profit-
maximizing entities. However, to run their operations undetected, suppress competition, or escape
conviction, they often take advantage of fragile political institutions. They rely on coercion, corruption,
and patronage to build their own political capital or tap into the local elite’s (Cockayne, 2013). In that
regard, West Africa’s weak rule of law, endemic corruption, and political instability create many
opportunities for traffickers. Trafficking can thus penetrate all levels of government. As such, it is
important to distinguish the three configurations between crime and governance that emerged in the
region:

1. State capture. In certain extreme cases, crime can exist as a state-sponsored industry. In this
configuration, high-level elites seek to capture the state to issue exception from law enforcement and
enable certain criminal activities from which they can profit. Trafficking is no exception, as the case of
Guinea-Bissau clearly illustrates. One of the poorest states in the world, Guinea-Bissau has a long history
of fragility characterized by a highly politicized military, weak institutions, and a set of elites bent on



                                                                                                          6    6
controlling the state to extract revenues (O’Regan, 2013). Evidence suggests that the government was
already sponsoring weapons trafficking to the Casamance rebels in Senegal in the 1990s (O’Regan, 2013),
making it a well-placed entry point for cocaine trafficking in the early 2000s. As the local economy
contracted and political competition increased, Colombian traffickers found ready business partners in
politicians, businessmen, and military leaders (Kemp et al., 2013). All saw cocaine trafficking as yet
another potential source of wealth to tap. This configuration creates an enclave where traffickers are
free to conduct their operations. It highlights how even a small state can have a large impact on the
region’s criminal economy.

2. Decentralized control and state patronage. Paradoxically, trafficking can be used as a tool for state
building. States lacking the ability to deliver development and services to marginalized areas may
strategically turn a blind eye to criminal activities, particularly when such activities provide security and
economic benefits. By coopting and forging pacts with local criminal entrepreneurs, the state can even
reinforce its hold over remote areas and end conflicts. In Mauritania, former president Ould Sid’Ahmed
Taya remained in power in his later years through a coalition of tribes (Smacid, Ouled Bou Sba, Rgyebat)
built around the control of smuggling (Lacher, 2012). In Mali, former president Amadou Toumani Touré
sought to leverage trafficking to support his northern allies (Lamhar and Berabiche Arabs) in their
struggle against secessionist rebels (Ifoghas and Idnan Tuaregs) (Global Initiative against Transnational
Organized Crime, 2014). This configuration is not limited to West Africa and has been observed in other
parts of the world (Patrick, 2011). While it can lead to stability in the short run, it saps the state’s political
will to fight traffickers and creates a culture of impunity, eventually increasing fragility by having peace
rest on elite pacts rather than on inclusive settlements.

3. State resilience. Trafficking and organized crime happens all over the world but does not always
translate into fragility, instability, and conflict. Certain states display greater resilience than others in the
face of crime. In West Africa, countries such as Senegal, Cape Verde, or Ghana have managed to keep
their political processes relatively insulated from trafficking. Though little research has been conducted
on the sources of this resilience, some parallels between the three states can provide some leads. First,
all have judicial systems that have allowed them to prosecute and convict high-profile targets rather
than just petty criminals. In Cape Verde this facilitated the dismantlement of a cocaine trafficking
network through “Operation Speedboat,? where an in-depth investigation resulted in the conviction of
the former president’s stock exchange for money laundering (A Semana, 2011; A Semana, 2013).
Similarly, Senegal’s police chief was recently dismissed as he came under investigation for trafficking and
retailing drugs (Ba, 2013). Second, the governments have shown more political will in tackling organized
crime. For example, in Senegal and Ghana, the respective governments have been working with the
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) to create joint task forces and training programs to
bolster national plans against organized crime (US Department of State, 2013).

1.5 External factors: Market trends in worldwide trafficking
The evolution of West Africa’s criminal economy has in part been prompted by its integration into the
global economy. Better communications, improved transportation, and access to new markets not only




                                                                                                                7    7
opened the region to globalization but also exposed it to changes and turnarounds in illegal markets,
including:

1. Cocaine—shifting demand. Cocaine is by far the most serious traffic in West Africa. It commands the
highest markup (see Table 2) and has swept across the region in little more than a decade. The reason
lies in the fact that cocaine consumption in the United States has been declining since the early 1980s. In
addition, the current Mexican drug war has made trafficking cocaine to the United States riskier.1 In
contrast, the number of cocaine users in Europe has doubled over the last decade, prompting traffickers
to redirect part of their flows there (UNODC, 2010). In the early 2000s, traffickers realized that West
Africa was a viable and less monitored route to reach this market. Consequently, the region served as a
transit point for about 17 percent of the cocaine consumed in Europe in 2009—or 21 tons of cocaine for
a retail value of US$1.7 billion.

2. Methamphetamines—demand in emerging markets. While the amphetamine trade is not new in
West Africa, it has expanded as the consumption in East and Southeast Asia has picked up throughout
the 2000s (UNODC, 2013a; British Petroleum, 2013). Using established crime syndicates with networks
and contacts in the region from the early days of West African trafficking (Lacher, 2012), Nigerians have
been able to transport, process, and distribute these drugs, importing raw materials (such as ephedrine)
from Asia to turn it into methamphetamine in West Africa and re-export it to the end market (UNODC,
2008a). However, while amphetamine trafficking in the West Africa exists, it only accounts for a marginal
amount of the total drugs produced throughout the world, due to the extremely long distances to the
end market and competition in supply at the end market from China (British Petroleum, 2013).

3. Cannabis resin—circumvention. Cannabis resin from Morocco started to appear in the late 1990s, as
traffickers sought to circumvent the presence of law enforcement along the Maghreb’s coastline.
Mauritanian intelligence estimates that about one-third of Morocco’s production—around 300 tons—
passes through the Sahel on its way to Egypt and the Arab Peninsula (Lacher, 2012).

4. Weapons—new suppliers. West Africa lacks the capacity to produce military-grade weapons, but
recent and ongoing conflicts in the region have sustained a demand for them. The collapse of Libya and
the end of conflict in Chad have created sources for weapons right at the region’s doorstep. Nigerien
President Mahamadou Issoufou recently declared that “arms were stolen in Libya and are being
disseminated all over the region? (Maylie, 2011), while the UNODC estimates that up to 12,000 arms—
including 9,000 assault rifles—could have been trafficked from Qaddafi’s former arsenals (UNODC,
2013a).

5. Natural resources—rising prices. Driven by a rising demand from emerging economies, the spot price
of a barrel of Nigerian oil increased fourfold between 2000 and 2012 (British Petroleum, 2013). Similarly,
the demand for diamonds and timber has remained high over the period. This has created the
opportunity for theft, illegal extraction, and trafficking throughout the region.

1
 In 2006, Mexico implemented a new national strategy to crack down on trafficking networks. The cocaine flow
passing through the country then declined over the period 2006–2011 (UNODC, 2013b) and the increased number
of armed clashes between the Mexican cartels and security forces increased the cost of shipping drugs through the
country (UNODC, 2012).


                                                                                                               8    8
1.6 The routes and hubs of West African trafficking
As described, both weak governance and strong demand for illegal commodities has spurred the recent
growth in trafficking across West Africa. Within the region, traffickers optimize their activities by taking
advantage of each state’s comparative advantage. States where trafficking is entrenched with elite
capture are used as hubs for the entry and exit of trafficked commodities. Countries with good air
connections to Europe are used to ship drugs through air couriers. Countries with more developed
economies have become a place for investment for criminal proceeds (UNODC, 2008a). Consequently,
West Africa’s trafficking economy has become increasingly complex and structured itself around three
specialized hubs.

The Atlantic coast hub—composed of Guinea-Bissau, Guinea, and to a lesser extent, Senegal—appears
to be the main beachhead for cocaine trafficking into the region. The cocaine is shipped to Guinea-Bissau
from South America by sea or air. Part of the flow is then redirected to the surrounding international
airports to be shipped to Europe through air couriers. With 434 kg of cocaine seized from passengers in
2008, Senegal stood out as the busiest air exit point in the region (UNODC, 2008a). However, this is to be
expected, as Dakar’s airport is one of the busiest in the region. Other airports—notably in Conakry and
Bamako—stand out in the area for the large amount of cocaine seized compared to the volume of
passengers. The rest of the cocaine is trafficked by land to northern Mali, where it integrates into the
Sahelian hub.

The Sahelian hub stretches along the borders between Mauritania, Mali, Algeria, Niger, and Libya. It
encompasses vast swathes of desert and arid lands that local law enforcement cannot effectively
monitor and where local communities (Arabs, Tuaregs) have long thrived on illicit trade (Judith, 2012).
The Sahelian hub is the main corridor between West Africa and the Maghreb. As such it is at the center
of several trafficking routes. Cannabis resin passes from Morocco to Mauritania and arrives in Mali. From
there, it follows the same routes as cocaine: the “short trajectory? and “long trajectory? (Global Initiative
against Transnational Organized Crime, 2014). The first trajectory passes through the Malian regions of
Timbuktu and Kidal to Algeria, where local crime syndicates operate. This trajectory requires good
connections with local security forces and criminal networks, making it a more difficult route for small-
scale traffickers to operate. The second trajectory provides an easier but longer route and goes from
northern Mali into Niger, Chad, Sudan, and then Egypt. Recently, this trajectory has diverted into Libya
(Shaw and Mangan, 2014). As Libya is also a major source of weapons, arms as well as cannabis are
trafficked along this route. The flow starts from the remote towns of Sebha, Ubari, and Murzuqh in the
south of Libya and enters Mali and Niger through areas respectively controlled by Tuareg and Tubur
groups. From there, they get to the traditional weapons trading centers that are Agadez (Niger) and Gao
(Mali) (UNODC, 2013a).

The Gulf of Guinea hub goes from Ghana to the Niger Delta. It is a highly interconnected region where
criminal networks—overwhelmingly Nigerian—are extremely mobile and well integrated. Though not as
important as in the Atlantic hub, some maritime shipments of cocaine have been detected (notably in
Ghana) and the hub is also a popular destination for the region’s air couriers—58 percent of which are
Nigerians. The remaining cocaine that is not moved by air couriers is transported by land through Benin



                                                                                                           9    9
or Burkina Faso to Niger, where it follows the “long trajectory? route described above. Other trafficking
in the Gulf of Guinea revolves around Nigeria, with the neighboring states generally providing an exit
point. For instance, most of the women trafficked for sexual exploitation to Europe come from the
vicinity of Benin City, in the Nigerian state of Edo. However, the victims travel under the surveillance of
their “handler? to Europe by plane and depart from a variety of airports in the region—notably Ghana’s
(UNODC, 2008b). Similarly, part of the oil stolen and trafficked from Nigeria’s Delta region is suspected
to feed into Ghana’s refineries (Katsouris and Sayne, 2013). Once again, traffickers are quick to take
advantage of the complementarities and synergies offered by neighboring states and regional
integration.




                                                                                                       10     10
Figure 2. Trafficking flows in West Africa




                                             11   11
1.7 The prevalence and nature of trafficking flows in the region
How prevalent are these trafficking flows? It is difficult to answer this question. First, there is a lack of
reliable data on drug flow at the national level; not all states consistently report their drug seizures
(UNODC, 2011b). Second, estimates on the value and size of the flows can only be obtained at a regional
level. This is due to the fact that they are generally extrapolated or obtained through the input-output
regional model developed by UNODC (UNODC, 2005; UNODC, 2011a). Finally, the value of the flows can
be misleading. Should a ton of cocaine seized in Mali be valued at its European retail price or the African
import price? In Table 2, “value? refers to the size of the flow times the price at which the trafficked
good will sell in its end market. However, this measure only indicates the proceeds of trafficking on a
global level and does not reveal how much money it generates in West Africa per se. Where possible, an
estimate of the markup by West African traffickers is reported. This is computed as the difference
between the import or local trade price and the export wholesale price multiplied by the size of flows.

Table 2. Estimated value of some of the flows going through the region (US$ million)

                             Value        Markup                                   Source
                                                       Katsouris and Sayne, 2013; UNODC, 2008b;
    Oil                     $4,1682       $1,1463
                                                       British Petroleum, 2013.
    Cocaine                 $1,7644       $1,1765      UNODC, 2011a.
    Cannabis                 $5956                     UNODC, 2008a.

    Human trafficking        $2267                     UNODC, 2008b.




2
  Estimated by multiplying the estimated numbers of barrels stolen in 2012 (according to Chatham House) by the
average spot price of a barrel of Nigerian crude oil for the year, as reported in the BP Statistical Review.
3
  Estimated by applying the best estimate of the discount rate at which local traffickers sell their oil (72.5 percent).
4
  Estimated by multiplying the size of the flow (21 tons) by the wholesale value of a kg of cocaine in Europe
(US$84,000). Using the retail value would yield an even greater figure but would be inconsistent with the
methodology generally used by UNODC.
5
  Estimated by taking the difference between the wholesale price in Europe (US$84,000 per kg) and West Africa
(US$28,000 per kg), times the size of the flow (21 tons). According to UNODC, only a third of the traffic is conducted
by African groups, which would put their gross profits at US$392 million. We chose to include the mark-up of all
traffickers, as their proceeds impact West Africa regardless of nationality (through corruption, violent competition
for control, and so on).
6
  Estimated by multiplying the regional production (3,500 tons) by the average regional retail price (US$0.17 per
gram). It should be noted the retail price is the West African retail price, as West Africa virtually exports none of its
cannabis abroad and grows it mainly for local consumption.
7
  Estimated by taking the midpoint of UNODC’s estimates for the annual flow of humans trafficked for sexual
exploitation out of West Africa (4,750) times the midpoint UNODC estimate of the price on one individual
(US$47,500). Estimates for the flow were originally obtained by looking at the numbers of victims detected in
Europe and assuming that 1 out of 30 trafficked humans was detected on average.


                                                                                                                     12     12
    Methamphetamine        $2258                    UNODC, 2013a.

    Firearms               $1679                    UNODC, 2008b.

    Total                  $7,145

2. Five channels between trafficking and fragility: Trafficking and its
impact on West Africa
In this section, we lay out five major channels through which trafficking can feed into fragility and
provide examples from country case studies. While this framework is conceptually valid for all the forms
of trafficking, drug trafficking remains the most relevant flow given its high financial value.

2.1 Channel 1—A source of financing and weapons for criminals and rebel groups
As an economic activity, trafficking can generate substantial revenues because illegal goods have no
substitutes in legal markets. This enables traffickers to command a premium at the resale point. In
addition, trafficking may not require additional investments for many criminals or militants. For example,
they may already have access to the illicit networks needed to move the goods. As they already operate
illegally, the marginal risk of undertaking new criminal activities is also lower for them.
Trafficking is therefore an attractive source of income for actors who do not fear law enforcement or
already operate outside the limits of the formal sector. Having criminals and rebels involved in trafficking
creates two problems. First, it makes them more resilient and entrenched. With the profits from
trafficking (which can rival military budgets, see Table A3), criminals and rebels can buy new assets that
can help them resist the state’s backlash (for example, official favor, new recruits, off-road vehicles,
communication equipment). Arms trafficking will even give them direct access—at a lower cost—to
weapons. This explains why conflicts involving trafficking can last on average more than five times as
long as those that do not (Fearon, 2002). The northern Mali rebellion of 2012 is an interesting example.
Before the conflict, some reports linked the rebel group al-Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb (AQIM) to drug
traffickers (Savage and Shanker, 2012), prompting officials to speak of the dangers of “narco-terrorism?
in the Sahel (Barluet, 2012). It later turned out that most of the evidence was unsubstantiated. However,
other local armed groups such as the Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa (MUJWA) or the Arab
Movement of Azawad (MAA) have repeatedly surfaced in accounts of drug deals across the subregion
(Lacher, 2013). This underlines the complexity of the links between traffickers and militants in the Sahel.
Some rebel groups remain distinct from traffickers and rely only lightly on their money through a
contracting model where traffickers pay either a fee in exchange for protection (in contested areas) or a
tax for safe passage (Shaw and Mangan, 2014). Others make deliberate alliances with local prominent

8
  Estimated by taking the mean of the estimated values of the flow according to UNODC, which took the possible
sizes of the flow (750–3000 kg)—extrapolated from the number of seizures in 2010—times the midpoint estimate
for the wholesale price in the end markets (US$120,000 per kg).
9
  Estimated by extrapolating the legal imports of ammunitions and firearms in West Africa and assuming that rebel
and criminal groups at least match the government’s purchases.


                                                                                                             13     13
traffickers to hold key cities and facilitate the transit of drug convoys (Global Initiative against
Transnational Organized Crime, 2014). However in both cases, trafficking is a large source of funding and
power for the militants and can promote their access to firearms.
Second, trafficking can steer criminals’ and rebels’ preferences toward material gains. Rebel groups that
start as political movements, rather than profit-maximizing entities, but experience large increases in
revenues through trafficking, incur greater opportunity costs for laying down their weapons. While this
can be addressed in certain cases by creating a revenue-sharing scheme for the trafficked good (such as
what happened with trafficked timber in Indonesia—see Hailu et al., 2011), illegal commodities such as
narcotics will prove harder to compensate. Thus, rebel groups involved in trafficking can get caught in a
“crime-rebellion? nexus, which makes conflicts harder to end (Cornell, 2005). Mali is a case in point, as
militant groups have been described as “narco-traffickers first, ideologues second, if at all? (Global
Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime, 2014, p. 15).

2.2 Channel 2—Rewarding and promoting skills related to violence
The presence of trafficking in a country creates a demand for nonproductive skills associated with
violence. The process of trafficking may involve enforcement, extortion, assault on the competition—all
activities requiring “violent? skills, which the organizers of these operations have the means to pay for at
a premium rate. In fragile states and postconflict societies, which have an excess of labor with these
nonproductive skills, the persistence of trafficking can thus make it harder to demobilize and reintegrate
ex-combatants (Collier, 1994; Cunningham et al., 2008). Joining trafficking operations has detrimental
long-term impacts on an individual’s economic trajectory. For example, youth involvement in criminal
groups can discourage the long-term investments needed to perform well in the formal sector (for
example, education, learning-by-doing on the job, and so on) and can subsequently lead to higher rates
of unemployment and lower incomes (Levitt and Venkatesh, 2001). In addition, by encouraging
individuals to develop skills adapted to the illegal economy rather than the formal sector, trafficking may
lock them into the former, limiting their future economic prospects.
At a social level, having individuals work in a violent and lucrative industry has destructive effects across
several dimensions. It disrupts social relations by making them less financially reliant on and emotionally
responsive to the traditional sources of authority (family, elders, law enforcement) and lowers social
support for democracy and the law both among traffickers and non-traffickers (Adams, 2012; Levitt and
Rubio, 2000). However, it should be noted that all these effects are a function of the number of jobs
created by trafficking, which is in turn determined by how labor intensive the industry is (Felbab-Brown,
2009).
Drug and arms trafficking currently do not require large amounts of labor given that there are relatively
small local markets to be serviced, and the process of transporting these goods does not require large
amounts of labor. Natural resource extraction and trafficking, however, do depend on larger amounts of
labor. The theft of crude oil in Nigeria (also known as “bunkering?) during the heydays of the Niger Delta
rebellion (2004–2009) demonstrated to the local youth the risks and benefits of oil trafficking. In a region
with 6 to 7 million unemployed youth (Sayne, 2010), anti-oil violence pays (Katsouris and Sayne, 2013).
This violence has predominantly been associated with the extraction and protection process, but has


                                                                                                         14     14
evolved to also include kidnapping of foreign oil workers and sabotage of oil companies facilities —the
multinational oil company Eni reported 108 accidents between August and February 2012 alone
(Katsouris and Sayne, 2013).
Finally, trafficking can lead to the development of a local drug market and gang criminality. Currently,
most of the drugs trafficked through West Africa are intended for markets located abroad. However, as
the UNODC noted in 2008, certain criminals in trafficking networks are paid “in kind, rather than cash?
and this can generate “local cocaine markets, which pose hazards of their own? (UNODC, 2008a, p. 5).
This secondhand criminality has yet to develop on a large scale, but West Africa is at a particular risk. In
many countries in the region, the youth display many of the risk factors for gang membership—social
disorganization, lack of social and economic opportunities, troubled families, academic failure, street
socialization, prior exposure to traumatic experience, and, of course, availability of drugs in the
neighborhood (Martinez et al., 2013).

2.3 Channel 3—Leading to alternate governance systems
As noted above, criminal networks and traffickers can have complex relations with the state. Rather than
challenging it directly, they may infiltrate gaps in its ability to reach marginalized or isolated locations.
Through their increased presence in these communities, they may effectively provide an alternate
system of governance. However, these alternate systems may rely on different governance mechanisms,
such as coercion and corruption (Cockayne, 2013). Over time these alternate governance systems can
become entrenched, and even legitimized by local populations, who benefit from the provision of goods
and social services that the state has not provided. For example, Haitian gangs have been known to
provide medical services to the communities in which they operate. This enables criminals to build up
the political capital they need to resist any attempt at rolling them back (Felbab-Brown, 2009).
In West Africa, Mali and Niger offer examples of this channel at play. In the north of Niger, smugglers and
traffickers have become part of the local governance and security architecture. For instance, in June
2011, the Nigerien army arrested a local Arab leader, Abta Hamidine, and a former Tuareg leader for
trafficking weapons and explosives from Libya. Both were released eight months later without being
prosecuted, following concerns that their associates were mobilizing forces against the government
(Lacher, 2012). In Mali, the decentralization following the Algiers Accords of 2006 paved the way for
traffickers to play a major role in local politics.10 With the informal support of the state—which sent
senior military officers such as Colonel Mohamed Ould Meydou and Lieutenant Colonel Ould Bou to train
and occasionally head these irregular forces—local businessmen set up their own security forces and
policed the area. This de facto handover of security benefited trafficking in the region, as several
businessmen were directly involved in this trade (Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime,
2014). In addition, local traffickers laundered money through development projects, building roads,
wells, property, and infrastructure. Buying local herders’ livestock also became a new way of turning
trafficking money into legitimate assets (Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime, 2014).
This bought the traffickers unparalleled local influence and legitimacy. When newly elected President
Touré toured the north to promote his new Special Programme for Peace, Security and Development in

10
     This was signed between the government and the Tuaregs.


                                                                                                         15     15
Northern Mali, he met with the local youth. He explained how the program would target them and
provide them with training and employment opportunities as mechanics, masons, tailors, and so on. His
speech was met with derision. The audience responded by saying these were not “real jobs? and that
they were happy with the ones they had held for the past decade—guides and drivers for traffickers
(Reitano and Shaw, 2014).

2.4 Channel 4—Shifting the incentives of policy makers and military leaders
Trafficking poses a similar problem to that of natural resource extraction in that both command
significant economic rents from which local officials may be in an advantageous position to tap. In
particular, trafficking may alter the behavior of local officials on two levels. First, it makes turning to
illegal activities more attractive, as the benefit of becoming patrons of traffickers relative to enforcing
laws and limiting trafficking rises. Second, it may shift the attention of policy makers away from
important state-building and development investment decisions, either because they are partaking in
trafficking activities themselves or because they are having to spend greater efforts on confronting those
involved in the trade. If political elites rely less on taxation and economic growth as their main source of
income and more on rents from trafficking, the problem becomes self-perpetuating. This effectively
insulates them from their constituencies’ long-term needs and desires (Batmanglich and Hoyer, 2013).
Many instances of collusion between trafficking and politics have been observed across the region. In
Guinea, the son of former President Lansana Conté was linked to the shipping of drugs from South
America by plane, and seized cocaine has routinely disappeared from custody (New York Times, 2008). In
Sierra Leone, the minister of transportation was forced to resign after his cousin was found to have used
an aircraft to ship 700 kg of cocaine (UNODC, 2013a). In Nigeria, a dozen officers—including two
admirals—were convicted to three years for their role in oil trafficking (Katsouris and Sayne, 2013).
Similar anecdotal evidence has been reported all over the region (Brown, 2013) but nowhere are the
effects of this channel more visible than in Guinea-Bissau.
Guinea-Bissau had long been struggling with weak institutions, a politicized military, and endemic
clientelism (O’Regan, 2013), but the onset of cocaine trafficking, which started in the early 2000s, has
magnified these weaknesses. With a sluggish annual growth rate of 0.4 percent over the past three
decades, no other industry in Guinea-Bissau could generate as much liquidity as cocaine. As money
underpins the patronage system upon which local politics is built, certain factions started to actively
channel state resources into expanding trafficking. Troops were used to unload and protect shipments
(Snow, 2008), police officers and judges were prevented from doing their job, and government facilities
were used to store the merchandise (AFP, 2009). Trafficking has further reinforced the weight of the
military in politics. For example, in 2012 the chief of staff, General Antonio Indjai, toppled the
government, as one of his rivals was poised to win the presidential election. The country has since been
governed by a transitional government backed by the military. General elections are scheduled to take
place between April and May 2014 (O’Regan, 2013).




                                                                                                        16     16
2.5 Channel 5—Causing conflict between competing groups
Trafficking can generate conflicts on two levels—among the traffickers themselves and within a country’s
polity. Broadly speaking, all activities in an illegal economy can generate violence, as there are no formal
institutions to assist market failures. Property rights and contracts can only be enforced through peer
pressure, threats, and violence (Levitt and Venkatesh, 2000). In addition, the illegal nature of criminal
industries weakens the use of traditional competition techniques (advertising, marketing, price cutting,
and so on) to win market shares, leading criminals to resort to direct assaults on the competition to
ensure control of the market (Levitt and Rubio, 2000). Finally, criminal organizations do not have access
to an enforcer of labor contracts. To strengthen their command-and-control structure, they thus often
draw upon traditional identities and values (Cockayne, 2013). If these identities overlap with ethnic,
religious, or cultural fault lines, crime can exacerbate rivalry between competing groups.
In all those aspects, trafficking is no exception. Empirical evidence from Latin America and the Caribbean
supports the idea that increased competition between traffickers leads to violence. Moreover,
government attempts to disrupt the drug trade by eliminating cartel leaders can inadvertently lead to
increased violence, as factions compete to gain access to new territories when incumbent cartel leaders
are removed (Keefer and Loayza, 2010; Dell, 2011). In the Sahel, the growth of trafficking has changed
the nature of the old smuggling economy. Attacking smugglers hauling cigarettes might not be very
profitable, but preying upon convoys of hashish or cocaine can be. The risk prompted the growth of the
protection business between traffickers and armed groups. In turn, it led to attacks between competing
groups (Lacher, 2013) and the displacement of the smugglers unable to afford protection.
Stepping back from the underworld, trafficking can also lead to political conflicts. As noted above,
trafficking can be likened to an economic rent appropriated by public officials. If the rent is large enough,
it will significantly raise the stakes of local political competition, effectively turning it into a winner-takes-
all game and entrenching the incumbents (USAID, 2013). With no avenue for peaceful political contest
and so much at stake, political conflicts become more likely (Douglass et al., 2009). It has been widely
argued, for instance, that the collusion of trafficking and politics in Guinea-Bissau paved the way for the
assassination of President João Bernardo Vieira and his chief of staff in 2010 and played a significant role
in the military coup that ensued.

3. Possible policy and programmatic response
Trafficking does not always lead to instability, but it certainly contributes to fragility through the
channels outlined above. As such, it creates a state-building problem that calls for a development
response. However, the channels between trafficking and fragility are seldom present all at once in one
country. Recognizing the most prevalent ones and planning accordingly allows for a more targeted
approach. Likewise, responses must be highly context-specific—the criminal joint venture between
traffickers and the political elite of Guinea-Bissau is different from, say, the mafia-like criminality of
Nigeria. Development practitioners need to recognize this and analyze who is involved in trafficking in
different countries, and how they are involved. This will allow them to identify and leverage sources of




                                                                                                              17     17
resilience while anticipating situations where support for anti-trafficking measures would hold little
traction.

3.1 Including crime-sensitivity in our analysis
Given the prevalence of organized crime and trafficking in West Africa’s fragile states, development
actors should try to include criminal analyses into their strategy. Like conflict-sensitive strategies, crime-
sensitive strategies allow for better informed project designs and better donor coordination. Specifically,
crime-sensitive strategies should focus on two goals:

1. Understanding the relationship between the state and civilians with regards to trafficking. To design
crime-sensitive development responses, development practitioners need to identify the local sources of
support and opposition to trafficking. First, analysts should examine who in the state takes part in the
trade and who opposes it. Particular attention should be paid to the level at which these forces play. In
Ghana for instance, high-level officials have displayed strong opposition to trafficking while corruption
and cooptation efforts from traffickers seem to have largely focused on low-level politicians and law
enforcement agents (Aning et al., 2013). This allows for direct engagement with the central government
on capacity-building programs for anti-trafficking enforcement units or financial forensics to counter
money laundering. On the other hand, such efforts are likely to yield little results in Guinea-Bissau,
where high-level opposition to trafficking is not likely. In such contexts, donors can focus on limiting
damage and containment of the possible ill effects of trafficking, for instance by proactively preventing
the development of a local market for drugs with targeted health programs and providing alternative
economic opportunities for youth who might otherwise be drawn into the trade. Second, analysts should
pay closer attention to the interactions between traffickers and civil society at large. While civilians may
not partake in trafficking, they may have a vested interest in seeing the industry or some of its practices
preserved. In the Sahel, local herders have been said to become increasingly reliant on traffickers buying
their livestock to launder money (Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime, 2014).
Similarly, local tribes depend on smuggling or low-value trafficking (for example, counterfeited
cigarettes) for their livelihood (Lacher, 2012). Cracking down on all flows without first addressing this
dependence could tighten the links between traffickers and locals and lead to a backlash.

Developing this analysis will be challenging given the scarcity of information available, but several
measures could quickly improve that. Many actors have already started separate analyses based on their
own intelligence. This includes local government but also international actors such as foreign crime units
(for example, the UK’s Serious Organized Crime Agency), aid agencies—such as the United States Agency
for International Development (USAID) and the UK’s Department for International Development (DFID)—
intelligence agencies and regional organizations (such as the Economic Community of West African
States, ECOWAS) (Cockayne, 2013). Bringing them together and coordinating their analysis should be a
first step. For example, enabling partnerships between national law enforcement ministries with leading
global criminologists and public health experts can help ensure that the most accurate data on local
crime is systematically analyzed and geographic trends are identified. This approach has allowed policy
makers to identify and target the trafficking and violent “hot spots? in Jamaica and the Dominican
Republic (World Bank and UNODC, 2007). At a regional level, the EU is financing the Cocaine Route



                                                                                                          18     18
Programme (CRP) which mandates the “collection, centralization, management, sharing and analysis? of
police information in the ECOWAS (Baeten, 2014, p. 14). Started in 2012, this component (known as the
West African Police Information System, or WAPIS) currently involves five pilot countries. Eventually, it
aims to provide the knowledge base necessary to fight trafficking at a regional level: relations between
criminal groups across borders, trend analysis, known routes, and so on.
Aside from information sharing, other avenues could be explored, such as including closer cooperation
with the UN peacekeeping and political missions. In 2006–2007, the UN Stabilization Mission in Haiti
(MINUSTAH) successfully neutralized the gangs that were destabilizing the capital of Port-au-Prince by
using intelligence gathered through a network of informants in the slums (Cockayne, 2009).
Finally, the World Bank could learn from the work it conducted in Latin America over the last decade.
There is no shortage of development-oriented research11 and projects12 on trafficking and crime from
which to learn. Also of interest would be the crime-sensitive approaches recently developed by other aid
agencies. For instance, USAID recently started to experiment with its own stakeholder framework to
analyze drug trafficking in Africa. It proposed to map each local stakeholder position and influence vis-à-
vis drug trafficking (see Figure 3). This type of analysis helps identify actors available for engagement
(Quadrants I and IV) and potential “spoilers? (Quadrants II and III)—a necessary step to assess what types
of interventions can realistically take place and which coalitions to build and mobilize.

2. Getting the sequencing right. A crime-sensitive development response should also look at the timing
of development programming in relation to law enforcement efforts. Proper coordination and
sequencing between development and law enforcement can be mutually reinforcing, while ignoring
these aspects can have unintended consequences. In Afghanistan, for instance, aggressive anti-narcotics
efforts achieved some success in disrupting trafficking operations, but they also allowed rebels-cum-
traffickers to gain support locally from opium farmers’ anger against foreigners disrupting their
livelihoods (Felbab-Brown, 2009). The use of “alternative development? in Thailand offers a counter-
example, although it is the sole instance in which a development-focused approach succeeded in
eliminating illicit crop cultivation. Started in Thailand in 1988, the Doi Tung Development Project (DTDP)
aimed at eradicating opium by developing the local agroforestry in high-value products (tea, coffee, fruit
trees) (Ellis et al., 2012). Following the implementation of the program, poppy production steadily
decreased and came to represent only a negligible portion of the total opium output, while neighboring
countries (Myanmar, Lao People’s Democratic Republic) saw their production rise (UNODC, 2011c). The
success of this approach relies in part on the termination of conflict in the region and state regaining
control of the area (Felbab-Brown, 2010). After a series of operations against the Golden Triangle
warlords, Thai authorities reasserted control over their border regions. To truly root out local trafficking,
the state needs not only to enforce the law but also to out-compete traffickers in the provision of public
goods, services, and economic opportunities. That means focusing on the provision of socioeconomic
goods at the same time as—or even before—classic law enforcement operations.

11
   See notably Demombynes (2011) or “Building the Evidence base for Crime and Violence reduction in Brazil?
(Project ID: P116659).
12
   For instance, the “Honduras’s Safer Municipalities? project (Project ID: P130819) focused on building capacity at a
municipal level to prevent the violent spillover effect of trafficking.


                                                                                                                  19     19
Figure 3. USAID’s illustrative map of stakeholders’ influence and interest in counternarcotic s
efforts




3.2 Possible targeted interventions
Once an analysis has been conducted of who is involved in trafficking, and how, the focus should shift to
which of the five channels outlined earlier are the most prevalent. Because raising the cost of trafficking
in one country might simply displace the trade to another, regional coordination is necessary. However,
national responses should remain the building blocks of this effort, as no country is affected by the same
combination of channels. The following points provide some examples of potential interventions to
disrupt the links between trafficking and fragility.

Channel 1—A source of financing and weapons for criminals and rebel groups. Two types of
interventions can help cut the flow of money and weapons going to traffickers. The most straightforward
is to raise the transaction costs by creating systematic obstruction along the trafficking routes. In the
Caribbean, Dutch and Antillean customs officers have a joint program in which each flight leaving the
region to the Netherlands is searched. Rather than focusing on the courier, the program focuses on the



                                                                                                       20     20
merchandise—if the courier carries less than 3 kgs, the drugs are seized but the couriers are not
arrested. Instead they are flown back to their country with a receipt for the drugs taken to explain the
loss to their employers. Four years after the implementation of the program, the number of couriers had
dropped by 96 percent (World Bank and UNODC, 2007). West Africa could benefit from this kind of
intervention to curb the number of air couriers leaving the region. A similar initiative to reduce and deter
trafficking by air began in January 2010, with the UNODC partnering with INTERPOL and the World
Customs Organization (WCO) to create joint task forces in eight airports deemed strategic to drug
traffickers (Kavanagh and Walker, 2013).13 In addition to training and mentoring these task forces, the
project (dubbed “AIRCOP?) also created a real-time communication system between the airports to
report arrests and potential suspects (Bertrand, 2011).
A second type of intervention could focus on providing support for financial forensic and anti-money
laundering activities. This would effectively make it harder for traffickers and rebels to monetize the
proceeds of trafficking. The UNODC and the European Commission are already providing support to such
activities in the region. ECOWAS has also sought to scale up the activities of its Inter-Governmental
Group against Money Laundering in West Africa (GIABA), though they have mostly been limited to
monitoring the implementation of anti-money laundering regimes at a country level. With its financial
expertise, the World Bank could play a key role in helping countries build capacity. In particular, the
Bank’s Anti-Money Laundering and Combatting the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) programs could be
leveraged in a more systematic way. The support they provide to bring financial centers into compliance
with anti-money laundering legislation would prove most useful in West Africa. As evidenced by Cape
Verde’s Operation Speedboat or the Amoateng case in Ghana, the revenues from trafficking can still be
easily laundered by powerful political or economic elites. Over the past decade, the Bank has conducted
a series of training programs for prosecutors and judges who deal with money laundering and the
confiscation of criminal proceeds (notably in Cambodia, Haiti, Malawi, and Tanzania) (World Bank,
n.d.).Taking stock of these efforts to replicate them in focused way in West Africa could be an avenue for
action.
Channel 2—Rewards and promoting skills related to violence. Disarmament, demobilization, and
reintegration (DDR), strengthened livelihoods, and employment and violence prevention programs are all
interventions that can provide an alternate productive demand for labor and deter at-risk youth from
engaging in violence. First, they raise the opportunity cost of starting a criminal career (Becker, 1968;
Fougère et al., 2009), especially if they are conducted alongside renewed law enforcement efforts.
Second, they help remove individuals from risky social networks (Spear, 2006) and reduce preferences
toward risky behaviors (Bertrand and Crépon, 2013). As most trafficking in West Africa is not labor-
intensive, steering people away from the industry has not been a priority for local governments.
However, as was noted earlier, this could change if domestic markets for narcotics grow. Natural
resource trafficking is currently labor-intensive, and several programs have been introduced in the


13
   Namely: Léopold Sédar Senghor International Airport (Dakar, Senegal), Bamako-Sénou International Airport
(Bamako, Mali), Praia International Airport (Praia, Cape Verde), Murtala Muhammed International Airport (Lagos,
Nigeria), Port Bouet International Airport (Abidjan, Côte d’Ivoire), Kotoka International Airport (Accra, Ghana),
Conakry International Airport (Conakry, Guinea), and Guarulhos International Airport (São Paolo, Brazil).


                                                                                                             21     21
region.14 The biggest is the Nigerian amnesty program offered to Niger Delta militants in 2009 which
included job training, stipends, and placement for former rebels and oil bunkerers.
One avenue for intervention would be to execute a more systematic review of these initiatives and
introduce rigorous evaluation methods if no impact assessments are yet in place.15 Another would be to
push—if only experimentally—for violence prevention programs in urban areas. West Africa does not
currently have a gang problem, but its youth display many of the risk factors once associated with gang
formation and criminal involvement in Latin America: exposure to traumatic experience, breadown of
family structure, lack of education, lack of livelihood alternatives, and so on (Stearns Lawson, 2014;
Cunningham et al., 2008). In order to proactively address this risk, it may be a worthy investment.

Channel 3—Leading to alternate governance systems. Traffickers can become an integral part of the
local governance, providing services and goods to the local population. To effectively root out trafficking
and criminal violence from captured communities, development projects must support the state in
outcompeting these actors. This approach has been tried in Latin America and the Caribbean over the
last decade, with satisfactory results. By combining infrastructure projects, social service delivery, and
crime prevention through environmental designs (CPTED), development agencies have effectively
supported national governments in rolling back crime in deprived urban areas. The World Bank’s Inner
City Basic Service for the Poor (Project ID: P091299) project in Jamaica is an excellent example of this
holistic approach (World Bank and UNODC, 2007). At the core of the project was a balance struck
between the provision of infrastructure and services (clean water, sanitation, waste management,
electricity, and roads) and community-based social engagement (microfinance, mediation services, land
tenure regularization). The first component was made crime-sensitive by the application of the CPTED
methodology. Engineers, architects, and planners were trained to integrate community centers, public
lighting, and playing fields into their projects so as to weave resilience into the communities’ fabric. The
second component drew upon local resources by recruiting community liaison officers to enhance
cooperation with local actors (police, community safety councils), provide inputs on the CPTED design,
identify and work with at-risk youth, and mobilize the community around social projects (summer camps,
safety festivals, cleanup campaigns, and so on) (Shaw and Mangan, 2014). The project was
complemented by a very rigorous effort to build data on local violence and crime (notably through the
use of a geographical information system on the police criminal statistics) and evaluating the
intervention’s impact.
Channel 4—Shifting the incentives of policy makers and military leaders. Looking at trafficking from a
political economy perspective is perhaps the most critical area for intervention. In order to prevent state
capture and reinforce sources of opposition against trafficking, actions must be taken to help insulate
political and judicial processes from organized crime (Kavanagh, 2013).
Parliamentary politics and electoral processes are two natural areas for interventions. Donor support to
the establishment of multi-party policy platforms on organized crime can help build the trust necessary


14
   See, for instance, the UNDP’s Niger Delta Youth Empowerment or LMA’s Reinteg rating and Employing High-Risk
Youth in Liberia programs.
15
   For instance, no institution in Nigeria currently tracks the progress and results of the amnesty program.


                                                                                                          22     22
to investigate the use of criminal money into politics. Similarly, supporting the drafting and
implementation of regulation on asset disclosure can help build safeguards against capture at a central
and local level. Mexico recently showed how such approaches can yield results. In 2013, after years of
partisan gridlock, the major Mexican parties agreed on a common platform made up of 95 policy
proposals: the Pact for Mexico. Though the platform did not target crime or trafficking in particular, it
included several provisions to improve transparency, accountability, and the fight against corruption and
crime. Over the month following its adoption, the Pact led to a series of related reforms, such as a
reduction in the regime of immunities enjoyed by public officials when faced with prosecution, or the
creation of a mobile armed force capable of confronting cartels throughout the country (Economist,
2012; Mones, 2013).
Strengthening the criminal justice system is the other component necessary to end the culture of
impunity prevalent among drug traffickers. Trafficking cases tend to be exceedingly complicated for local
courts and law enforcement units, as they often involve transnational investigations, complex financial
inquiries, and interference from the executive. Potential interventions to remedy this would include
support for the establishment of specialized crime units with dedicated safeguards, incentives, and
assets. For instance, since 2010 the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) has cooperated with
Ghanaian authorities to create the Ghana Vetted Unit, which is an elite force of upstanding law enforcers
guided by a DEA counternarcotics advisor (US Department of State, 2013; US Department of Justice,
2012). Another complementary intervention would be to support the creation of independent legal
commissions tasked with devising legal reforms to project judicial integrity. With the support of the UN
Department of Political Affairs, Guatemala has pioneered this approach by creating the International
Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG), which has achieved substantial results (see Box 1).




                                                                                                      23    23
Box 1. The International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala (CICIG)
Guatemala is recognized as a major drug transit country for cocaine and heroin en route to the U.S. (US
Department of State, 2006) and has been plagued by one of the highest violent crime rates in Latin America. This
criminality has long been enabled by the criminal networks and illegal security groups that run alongside the state
(United Nations and State of Guatemala, 2006).

In the mid-2000s, the government decided to take resolute steps to roll back these networks and crack down on
the impunity they enjoyed from their political connections. To do this, Guatemala partnered with the United
Nations to create the CICIG. The CICIG was tasked with identifying illegal networks, investigating them in
collaboration with national authorities, prosecuting those who partake in such networks, and advising the
government on public policies aimed at fighting criminal corruption. Funded externally by donors and headed by a
foreign commissioner named by the UN, the commission enjoyed a unique level of independence. Even more novel
was the idea of combining classic capacity-building and advisory activities with investigation and prosecution
powers. In effect, the CICIG performed three functions:

1. Collect and analyze information to investigate cases of corruption, abuse of power, and criminality. To do so,
the CICIG was given unlimited access to any documents, reports, or testimony from public officials. In addition, it
had its own team of investigators that were chosen by the commissioner. This allowed the commission to crack
down on trafficking, notably by exposing illegal adoption rings or the complicity of national police officers with the
drug trafficking cartel Los Zetas (International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala, 2012). It also made use
of its information to pressure the government to take action. In 2012, it released a report clearly identifying 18
judges who had systematically ruled in the interest of criminal networks. The report prompted Guatemala’s public
prosecutor to open investigations into 13 of them in 2013 (Cawley, 2013).

2. Prosecute criminals in national courts. In order to take legal actions on its own, the CICIG was given capacity to
file complaints with the relevant bodies or to join the proceedings as a private prosecutor. Between 2011 and 2013,
the CICIG took part in 39 cases—including some high-profile ones such as the trial of former dictator José Efraín
Ríos Montt (for genocide and crimes against humanity) and former President Alfonso Portillo (for corruption)
(Bargent, 2013).

3. Provide technical advice and training. To strengthen local capacity, the CICIG cooperated closely with both the
government and the Office of the Public Prosecutor. For instance, it was instrumental in restructuring the PM’s
Directorate of Criminal Analysis into a Financial Analysis Department, which quintupled its staff between 2011 and
2013. At a government level, it supported the creation of a General Directorate of Criminal Investigation by vetting
its senior management and offering operational support.



Channel 5—Causing conflicts between competing groups. The risk of political conflicts fueled by
trafficking can be addressed by adopting an approach similar to the one developed for the fourth
channel, but with a focus on the electoral process instead. If institutions could prevent corrupt officials
from turning ill-acquired liquidities into influence during the run up to elections, trafficking would hold
less sway over local politics. Supporting the drafting of campaign legislation and the establishment and
training of electoral management bodies (for example, electoral commissions, electoral courts, watchdog
networks) would be a first step in that direction.




                                                                                                                  24     24
Dealing with conflict between traffickers requires a response from law enforcement and security forces
rather than development actors. However, targeted support to build up local enforcement units
complemented with community-based approaches could help improve citizen security. Working directly
with the security sector is a daunting task, as local enforcement can be very politicized and sometimes
directly involved in trafficking. But much like reestablishing service delivery in marginalized areas, it is a
first step to rolling back criminal networks, and may help invigorate the rule of law and strengthen citizen
security.




                                                                                                          25     25
References
Adams, T. 2012. “Chronic Violence and Its Reproduction: Perverse Trends in Social Relations, Citizenship
       and Democracy in Latin America.? Woodrow Wilson Center Update on the Americas, Woodrow
       Wilson International Center for Scholars, Washington, DC.
AFP (Agence France-Presse). 2009, March 5. “Murdered GBissau General Found 200 Kilos of Cocaine:
       Officer.?
Alemika, E. O. 2013. “The Impact of Organised Crime on Governance in West Africa.? Report, Friedrich
       Ebert Stiftung, Berlin.
Aning, K., K. Sampson, and P. John. 2013. “Getting Smart and Scaling Up: The Impact of Organized Crime
        on Governance in Developing Countries—a Case Study of Ghana.? Report, New York University
        Center on International Cooperation, New York.
Ba, M. 2013, July 31. “Sénégal: La police liée à un trafic de drogue?? Jeune Afrique.
        http://www.jeuneafrique.com/Article/JA2742p019.xml1.
Baeten, P. 2014. “Creating the West African Police Information System.? Presentation at the conference
        “Improving Responses to Organised Crime and Drug Trafficking Along the Cocaine Route,? Rome,
        May 28–30.
Bargent, J. 2013. “Last Rites for Guatemala’s Anti-impunity Crusaders CICIG?? InSight Crime.
       http://www.insightcrime.org/news-analysis/last-rites-for-guatemalas-anti-impunity-warriors.
Barluet, A. 2012, September 12. “Fabius pointe la ‘menace narcoterroriste.’? Le Figaro.
Batmanglich, S., and K. Hoyer. 2013. “The New Deal’s Peacebuilding and Statebuilding Goals and
      Organized Crime.? Report, International Alert, London.
Becker, G. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach.? Journal of Political Economy 76 (2):
        169–217.
Bertrand, M., and B. Crépon. 2013. “J-PAL Youth Initiative Review Paper.? Paper, Abdul Latif Jameel
       Poverty Action Lab, Cambridge, MA.
Bertrand, P. 2011. “Better Inter-service and Interagency Cooperation Through a Secure and Responsive
       Communication System.? Presentation at the Transatlantic Symposium on Dismantling
       Transnational Illicit Network, Lisbon, May 17–19.
British Petroleum. 2013. British Petroleum Statistical Review of World Energy. London: British Petroleum.
Brown, D. 2013. “The Challenge of Drug Trafficking to Democratic Governance and Human Security in
       West Africa.? Letort Paper, US Army War College Press, Carlisle, PA.
Cawley, M. 2013. “Guatemala Anti-corruption Fight Turns to Judges Themselves.? InSight Crime.
        http://www.insightcrime.org/news-briefs/guatemala-investigate-judges-corruption-cicig.
Cockayne, J. 2009. “Winning Haiti’s Protection Competition: Organized Crime and Peace Operations—
       Past, Present and Future.? International Peacekeeping 16 (1): 77–99.


                                                                                                       26   26
Cockayne, J. 2013. “Chasing Shadows: Strategic Responses to Organised Crime in Conflict-Affected
       Situations.? RUSI Journal 158 (2): 10–24.
Collier, P. 1994. “Demobilization and Insecurity: A Study in the Economics of the Transition from War to
         Peace.? Journal of International Development 6 (3): 343–51.
Cornell, S. 2005. “The Interaction of Narcotics and Conflict.? Journal of Peace Research 42 (6): 751–60.
Cunningham, W., L. McGinnis, R. García Verdú, C. Tesliuc, and D. Verner. 2008. Youth at Risk in Latin
       America and the Caribbean. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Dell, M. 2011. “Trafficking Networks and the Mexican Drug War.? Harvard University.
         http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/dell/files/121113draft_0.pdf.
Demombynes, G. 2011. “Drug Trafficking and Violence in Central America and Beyond.? World
     Development Report background paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Douglass, N., J. Wallis, and B. Weingast. 2009. Violence and Social Orders: A Conceptual Framework for
       Interpreting Recorded Human History. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Economist. 2012, December 8. “With a Little Help from My Friends.?
Ellis, W., A. Ratanawaraha, D. Diskul, and A. Chandrachai. 2012. “Social Entrepreneurship as a
         Mechanism for Agro-innovation: Evidence from Doi Tung Development Project, Thailand.?
         International Journal of Business and Social Science 3 (23): 138–51.
Fearon, J. 2002. “Why Do Some Civil Wars Last So Much Longer than Others?? Journal of Peace Research
        41 (3): 275–301.
Felbab-Brown, V. 2009. Shooting Up: Counterinsurgency and the War on Drugs. Washington DC:
       Brookings Institution Press.
Felbab-Brown, V. 2010. “The Design and Resourcing of Supply-Side Counternarcotics Policies.? Testimony
       before the US House of Representatives Domestic Policy Subcommittee of the Oversight and
       Government Reform Committee, Washington, DC.
Fougère, D., J. Pouget, and K. Francis. 2009. “Youth Unemployment and Crime in France.? Journal of the
       European Economic Association 7 (5): 909–938.
Global Initiative against Transnational Organized Crime. 2014. “Illicit Trafficking and Instability in Mali:
        Past, Present and Future.? Research paper, Global Initiative Against Transnational Organized
        Crime, Geneva.
Hailu, D., S. Rendtorff-Smith, U. Gankhuyag, and C. Ochieng. 2011. “Conflict Prevention in Resource-Rich
        Economics.? Paper, United Nations Development Programme, New York.
International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala. 2012. “Fifth Year of Activities.? CICIG Report.
        http://www.cicig.org/uploads/documents/2012/COM-067-20120911-DOC02-EN.pdf.
Judith, S. 2012. Smugglers and Saints of the Sahara: Regional Connectivity in the Twentieth Century.
         Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.



                                                                                                               27   27
Katsouris, C., and A. Sayne. 2013. Nigeria’s Criminal Crude: International Options to Combat the Export of
        Stolen Oil. London: Chatham House.
Kavanagh, C. 2013. “Getting Smart and Scaling Up: Responding to the Impact of Organized Crime on
       Governance in Developing Countries.? Report, New York University Center on International
       Cooperation, New York.
Kavanagh, C., and S. Walker. 2013. “International and Regional Responses to Drug Trafficking in West
       Africa.? WACD Background Paper No. 6, West Africa Commission on Drugs, Geneva.
Keefer, P., and N. Loayza. 2010. Innocent Bystanders, Developing Countries and the War on Drugs.
        Washington, DC: Palgrave Macmillan and World Bank.
Kemp, W., M. Shaw, and A. Boutellis. 2013. The Elephant in the Room: How Can Peace Operations Deal
       with Organized Crime? New York: International Peace Institute.
Lacher, W. 2012. “Organized Crime and Conflict in the Sahel-Sahara Region.? Paper, Carnegie
        Endowment for International Peace, Washington DC.
Lacher, W. 2013. “Challenging the Myth of the Drug Terror Nexus in the Sahel.? WACD Background Paper
        No. 4, West Africa Commission on Drugs, Geneva.
Levitt, S., and M. Rubio. 2000. “Understanding Crime in Colombia and What Can Be Done About It.?
         Working Paper Series, Fedesarrollo, Bogotá.
Levitt, S., and S. Venkatesh. 2000. “An Economic Analysis of a Drug-Selling Gang’s Finances.? Quarterly
         Journal of Economics 15 (3): 755–89.
Levitt, S., and S. Venkatesh. 2001. “Growing Up in the Projects: The Economic Lives of a Cohort of Men
         Who Came of Age in Chicago Public Housing.? American Economic Review 91 (2): 79–84.
Martinez, J., J. Tost, L. Hilgert, and T. Woodard-Meyers. 2013. “Gang Membership Risk Factors for Eighth-
       Grade Students.? Nonpartisan Education Review 9 (1): 1–31.
Maylie, D. 2011, November 12. “Alarm over Smuggled Libyan Arms.? Wall Street Journal.
        http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052970203537304577031892657376080.
Mones, J. 2013, August 15. “How Mexico Ended Political Gridlock.? Wall Street Journal.
       http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887323664204578607713224531972.
New York Times. 2008, November 28. “A Selection from the Cache of Diplomatic Dispatches: A Well-
       Connected Drug Trafficker in Guinea.?
       http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2010/11/28/world/20101128-cables-
       viewer.html#report/drugs-08CONAKRY163.
O’Regan, D. 2010. “Cocaine and Instability in Africa—Lessons from Latin America and the Caribbean.?
       Africa Security Brief No. 5, Africa Center for Strategic Studies, Washington, DC.
O’Regan, D. 2013. “Advancing Stability and Reconciliation in Guinea-Bissau: Lessons from Africa’s First
       Narco-state.? ACSS Special Report, Africa Center for Strategic Studies, Washington, DC.



                                                                                                          28   28
Patrick, J. 2004. “Timber Booms, State Busts: The Political Economy of Liberian Timber.? Review of
         African Political Economy 31 (101): 441–56.
Patrick, M. 2011. “Drugs, Insurgency and State-Building in Burma: Why the Drugs Trade Is Central to
         Burma’s Changing Political Order.? Journal of Southeast Asian Studies 42 (3): 376–404.
Philippe, L. B. 2008. “Diamond Wars? Conflict Diamonds and Geographies of Resource Wars.? Annals of
        the Association of American Geographers 98 (2): 345–72.
Reitano, T., and M. Shaw. 2014. “People’s Perspective of Organised Crime in West Africa and the Sahel.?
        Paper, Institute for Security Studies, Pretoria.
Savage, C., and T. Shanker. 2012, July 21. “U.S. Drug War Expands to Africa, a Newer Hub for Cartels.?
        New York Times. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/22/world/africa/us-expands-drug-fight-in-
        africa.html.
Sayne, A. 2010. “Something or Nothing: Granting Niger Deltans a ‘Stake’ in Oil to Reduce Conflict.?
        Nigeria Policy Paper, Transnational Crisis Project and US Institute of Peace, Washington, DC.
A Semana. 2011, October 10. “Police Seize 1500 Kilos of Cocaine in Operation Speedboat, Three Praia-
      Based Firms Believed to Be Involved.? http://www.asemana.publ.cv/spip.php?article69119.
A Semana. 2013, June 28. “Operation Speed Boat Verdict: Paulo Pereira Sentenced to 22 Years in Prison.?
      http://www.asemana.publ.cv/spip.php?article89538&var_recherche=Operation%20Speed%20B
      oat%20Verdict%3A%20Paulo%20Pereira%20Sentenced%20to%2022%20Years%20in%20Prison&
      ak=1.
Shaw, M., and F. Mangan. 2014. Illicit Trafficking and Libya’s Transition: Profits and Losses. Washington
       DC: US Institute of Peace.
Shaw, M., and T. Reitano. 2013. “The Evolution of Organised Crime in Africa: Towards a New Response.?
       Report, Institute for Security Studies, Pretoria.
SIPRI Military Expenditure Database. http://www.sipri.org/research/armaments/milex/milex_database
        (accessed December 29, 2014).
Snow, C. 2008, September 4. “Le jet, la coke et les militaires.? Jeune Afrique.
       http://www.jeuneafrique.com/Article/LIN31088lejetseriat0.
Spear, J. 2006. “From Political Economies of War to Political Economies of Peace: The Contribution of
         DDR After War of Predation.? Contemporary Security Policy 27 (1): 168–89.
Stearns Lawson, B. 2014. “Speakers Panel Summary.? Trafficking and Fragility in West Africa, World Bank
        Event, Washington, DC, March 19.
United Nations and State of Guatemala. 2006. Agreement between the United Nations and the State of
       Guatemala on the establishment of an International Commission against Impunity in Guatemala,
       New York.
UNODC (United Nations Office on Drug and Crime). 2005. World Drug Report 2005. Vol. 1. Vienna:
      UNODC.


                                                                                                        29   29
UNODC. 2008a. Drug Trafficking as a Security Threat in West Africa. Vienna: UNODC.
UNODC. 2008b. Transnational Trafficking and the Rule of Law in West Africa: A Threat Assessment.
      Vienna: UNODC.
UNODC. 2010. World Drug Report 2010. Vienna: UNODC.
UNODC. 2011a. Estimating Illicit Financial Flows Resulting from Drug Trafficking and Other Transnational
      Organized Crimes. Vienna: UNODC.
UNODC. 2011b. “Individual Drug Seizures, 2004–2009.? https://www.unodc.org/documents/data-and-
      analysis/WDR2011/Seizures_2011_Final.pdf.
UNODC. 2011c. “Thai Alternative Development Projects Showcased at International Workshop.?
      http://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/alternative-development/news-and-events/thai-alternative-
      development-projects-showcased-at-international-workshop.html.
UNODC. 2012. Transnational Organized Crime in Central America and the Carribean. Vienna: UNODC.
UNODC. 2013a. Transnational Organized Crime in West Africa: A Threat Assessment. Vienna: UNODC.
UNODC. 2013b. World Drug Report 2013. Vienna: UNODC.
USAID (US Agency for International Development). 2013. The Development Response to Drug Trafficking
       in Africa: A Programming Guide. Washington, DC: USAID.
US Department of Justice. 2012. “Statement of the Honorouable Thomas Harrigan, Deputy Administrator
       Drug Enforcement Administration.? Statement before the US Senate Caucus on International
       Narcotics Control, Washington, DC.
US Department of State. 2006. International Narcotics Control Strategy Report. Washington, DC: US
       Department of State.
US Department of State. 2013. International Narcotics Control Strategy Report: Country Reports.
       Washington, DC: US Department of State.
World Bank. n.d. “Financial Market Integrity: Flagship Programs.?
       http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/TOPICS/EXTFINANCIALSECTOR/EXTAML/0,,conten
       tMDK:21996428~pagePK:210058~piPK:210062~theSitePK:396512~isCURL:Y,00.html.
World Bank and UNODC. 2007. “Crime, Violence, and Development: Trends, Costs, and Policy Options in
       the Caribbean.? Report No. 37820, World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                                                                     30    30
Appendix
Table A1. Aggregated reported drug seizures in Ghana (2004 –2011)
Good trafficked          Year                    Detail
                         2004                    0.8 tons
                         2005                    14 tons
                         2006                    n/a
Cannabis
                         2007                    4.2 tons
                         2008                    33.5 tons
                         2009                    n/a
                         2004                    617 kilos
                         2005                    661 kilos
                         2006                    n/a
                         2007                    283 kilos
Cocaine
                         2008                    841 kilos
                         2009                    n/a
                         2010                    125 kilosa
                         2011                    317 kilosa
                         2004                    71 kilos
                         2005                    8.2 kilos
                         2006                    n/a
                         2007                    0.6 kilos
Heroin
                         2008                    0.2 kilos
                         2009                    n/a
                                                 a
                         2010
                         2011                    11 kilos
Source: UNODC drug seizures tables (IDS database), UNODC, 2011b.
a
  Needs to be supplemented with most recent IDS data.



Table A2. Major seizures of firearms to/from Niger (2008 –2011)
Date                                       Close border            Weapons trafficked
                                                                   Assault rifles, light machine guns, heavy
March 20, 2008                             Algeria
                                                                   machine guns, rocket launchers, mines

October 29, 2009                           Algeria, Libya          Assault rifles

June 12, 2011                              Algeria                 Explosives

                                                                   Assault rifles, light machine guns, rocket
September 15, 2011                         n/a
                                                                   launchers



                                                                                                           31   31
October 2, 2011                             Algeria, Libya        Rocket launchers

November 6, 2011                            Libya                 Assault rifles, rocket launchers

                                                                  Assault rifles, light machine guns, heavy
November 6, 2011                            Algeria               machine guns, rocket launchers,
                                                                  grenades
Source: UNODC, 2013a.




Table A3. Cocaine trafficking profits and West African military budgets

 Item                  Year      Value (US$ millions)
                                                                 Size of military budget relative to
 Profits from                                                    West African cocaine markup
 cocaine trafficking   2009      1,176
 in West Africa
 Gambia                2007      4.6                             0%
 Cape Verde            2009      9                               1%
 Liberia               2009      7.9                             1%
 Guinea-Bissau         2005      16.9                            1%
 Sierra Leone          2009      28.8                            2%
 Niger                 2008      55.1                            5%
 Togo                  2008      58.2                            5%
 Benin                 2008      65.9                            6%
 Guinea                2004      103                             9%
 Burkina Faso          2009      112                             10%
 Mauritania            2009      120                             10%
 Ghana                 2009      127                             11%
 Mali                  2009      150                             13%
 Senegal               2009      218                             19%
 Côte d'Ivoire         2009      448                             38%
 Nigeria               2009      1825                            155%
 Regional total        (2005–
                              1524.4                             130%
 without Nigeria       2009)
                       (2005–
                              3349.4                             285%
 Regional total        2009)
Source: UNODC, 2011a; SIPRI Military Expenditure Database, World Bank.




                                                                                                         32   32
Figure A1. UNODC estimates of cocaine transiting through West Africa on its way to Europe
(tons)




        Source: UNODC, 2013a.




                                                                                            33   33
