                   98926




      Managing
  Environmental
and Social Risks
in Development
Policy Financing
Managing Environmental and Social Risks in
Development Policy Financing

IEG Learning Product




July 27, 2015
© 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org




This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World
Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,
denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of
such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its
knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full
attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank
Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-
2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Abbreviations
CEA     Country Environmental Analysis
CPF     Country Partnership Framework
DPF     Development Policy Financing
DPL     Development Policy Loan
DPO     Development Policy Operation
GP      Global Practice
ICR     Implementation Completion Report
IEG     Independent Evaluation Group
IPF     Investment Project Financing
IEGPS   IEG Public Sector Evaluation
PPAR    Project Performance Assessment Report
PPP     Public Private Partnership
PSIA    Poverty and Social Impact Analysis
ROC     Regional Operations Committee
RSA     Regional Safeguards Advisor
SAL     Structural Adjustment Loan
SCD     Systematic Country Diagnostic
SEA     Strategic Environmental Assessment
SECAL   Sectoral Adjustment Loan
SORT    Systematic Operations Risk Rating Tool
TA      Technical Assistance
TTL     Task Team Leader




Director-General, Independent Evaluation         :   Ms. Caroline Heider
Director, IEG Public Sector Evaluation           :   Mr. Nicholas York
Manager, IEG Public Sector Evaluation            :   Ms. Marie Gaarder
Task Manager                                     :   Mr. William R. Sutton
                                                                   iii



Contents
Preface................................................................................................................................. v
Acknowledgments............................................................................................................. vii
Summary ............................................................................................................................ ix
   Why environmental and social risk management in policy lending? ............................ ix
   What did IEG find? ......................................................................................................... x
   What are the reasons behind the findings? ................................................................... xii
   How to strengthen environmental and social risk management in policy lending? .... xiii
Management Response ................................................................................................... xvii
1. Addressing Environmental and Social Risks in Development Policy Financing ........... 1
2. Performance in Identifying and Managing Environmental and Social Risks in DPF .... 5
   Findings on risk identification ........................................................................................ 6
   Findings on other due diligence requirements .............................................................. 12
3. What Explains the Risk Management Performance?.................................................... 19
   Bank policy and key concepts....................................................................................... 19
   Effects of procedures and practices .............................................................................. 20
   Effects of guidance and training ................................................................................... 22
   Effects of incentives and monitoring and evaluation .................................................... 26
4. Strengthening the Bank’s Approach to Environmental and Social Risk Management in
DPF ................................................................................................................................... 29
References ......................................................................................................................... 35
Appendix A. Some Differences between DPF and IPF .................................................... 37
Appendix B. Portfolio Review Methodology ................................................................... 40
Appendix C. Detailed Results of the Portfolio Review .................................................... 47
   Findings on risk identification ...................................................................................... 48
   Findings on other due diligence requirements .............................................................. 55
Appendix D. Cases Where DPF Funds Were Channeled to Specific Investments .......... 60
Appendix E. Limitations and Possibilities for Future Work............................................. 62
Appendix F. Recent Developments .................................................................................. 63


Boxes
Box 1-1: Principal Environmental and Social Requirements of OP 8.60 ........................... 3
Box 1-2: Other Relevant OP 8.60 Requirements ................................................................ 4
Box 2-1: Georgia PRSO Series ......................................................................................... 11
                                                                iv


Box 2-2: Punjab, Pakistan Irrigation DPL series .............................................................. 12
Box 2-3: Colombia Productive and Sustainable Cities ..................................................... 14
Box 2-4: Brazil, Rio de Janeiro Urban and Housing DPL................................................ 15
Box 2-5: Jamaica Fiscal Sustainability DPO .................................................................... 16
Box 2-6: Tonga Energy DPL ............................................................................................ 16
Box 2-7: How do IEG’s Findings Compare to Other Analyses? ...................................... 18

Tables
Table 2-1: Types of Environmental Risks Identified by World Bank Guidance or Task
Teams and Present in IEG Sample...................................................................................... 8
Table 2-2: Types of Environmental Risks Identified only by IEG ..................................... 9
Table 2-3: Types of Social Risks Identified by World Bank Guidance or Task Teams and
Present in IEG sample ....................................................................................................... 10
Table 2-4: Types of Social Risks Identified only by IEG ................................................. 11
Table 3-1: Guidance Available for Environment and Social Aspects of OP 8.60 ............ 24

Figures
Figure 2-1: Implementation Frequency of Due Diligence Requirements for
Environmental Risks Identified by IEG ............................................................................ 13
Figure 2-2: Implementation Frequency of Due Diligence Requirements for Social Risks
Identified by IEG .............................................................................................................. 13
Figure 3-1: Environmental and Social Analytic Work Produced by the Bank Over Time
(number of reports) ........................................................................................................... 25
                                               v


Preface
This is one of a series of learning products on Development Policy Financing (DPF)
being undertaken by the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG), covering a range of issues
such as results frameworks, macrofiscal frameworks, public expenditure reviews, and in
this case environmental and social risk management. The series is designed to provide a
timely independent perspective in relation to the World Bank’s 2015 DPF Retrospective,
itself one of a series of such reviews. In the past IEG has also conducted broader reviews
of DPF, including a 2010 major evaluation of one type of operations—Poverty Reduction
Support Credits (IEG 2010).

This learning product is intended to provide lessons that will help to strengthen the DPF
instrument in a key area, by identifying opportunities to improve how environmental and
social risks are handled. This is the first time that IEG has covered this subject. It is not a
general assessment of DPF as an instrument, or of the efficacy of Development Policy
Operations (DPOs) in achieving positive development impacts.

The focus of the Learning Product is on Bank actions, policies, procedures, and guidance.
While IEG recognizes that DPF operations are designed to have positive development
effects, this Learning Product focuses on the management of potentially adverse
environmental and social effects of DPOs. The review does not attempt to assess the
actual environmental or social effects of policy actions or mitigation measures on the
ground; nor does it assess the performance of borrowers. As part of the series of Learning
Products on DPF, IEG will conduct a separate review of DPOs that explicitly aimed to
support environmental goals. It also does not assess whether the requirements of the
Bank’s Operational Policy 8.60 on DPF are adequate for managing environmental and
social risks; instead it aims to learn from the experience of implementing these
requirements.

As a Learning Product, this report does not contain formal recommendations. However, it
is categorized as an IEG Category 2 learning product because it includes both
accountability and learning elements, and therefore is subject to the same review and
processing steps used for IEG major evaluations.
                                         vii


Acknowledgments
This report was prepared by a team led by William Sutton (Lead Economist, IEG), under
the supervision of Nicholas York (Director, IEG) and Marie Gaarder (Manager, IEG).
The core team members were Stephen Hutton, Richard Carroll, Gurkan Kuntasal, Daniel
Gibson, Cyprian Fisiy, John Redwood, and William Mayville. Zeljko Bogetic provided
helpful input. Data analysis was provided by Jesse Torrence. Program support was
provided by Marie Charles.

Peer reviewers were Kirk Hamilton, Reidar Kvam, and Erwin Tiongson.

The team gratefully acknowledges the contributions of present and former World Bank
Group managers and staff who cooperated with the Learning Product, including those
who provided comments on the Concept Note.
                                             ix


Summary
Why environmental and social risk management in policy lending?
World Bank Development Policy Financing (DPF) differs markedly from Investment
Project Financing (IPF). Whereas IPF typically finances specific, physical investments,
DPF operations are designed to achieve development goals through policy reforms,
including specific policies referred to as “prior actions.” Though the main effects of
policy reforms will likely be positive, there is also the possibility of unintended negative
effects, or “risks”: a policy aimed at increasing investment in mining by adjusting royalty
rates could lead to expanded mining with associated damage to landscapes and pollution
of waterways; reduction of energy subsidies might place a financial burden on the poor.
The significant environmental and social effects of policies can be indirect and long-term,
as well as direct and short term.

Effective environmental and social risk management in DPF is central to achieving the
World Bank’s goals of ending extreme poverty and promoting shared prosperity in a
sustainable manner (World Bank 2013a). If the World Bank is supporting far-reaching
member country reforms that are intended to contribute to the twin goals, then it should
seek to understand the impact of those reforms on the poor. It should also ensure that the
country’s natural capital and long-term growth prospects will not be undermined.

The objective of this learning product is therefore to assess the application of the
elements of the World Bank Operational Policy (OP) governing DPF (OP 8.60) related to
the implementation of the environmental and social risk management requirements of the
policy, and identify lessons learned and good practices. The focus of the study is on Bank
actions, policies, procedures, and guidance for environmental and social risk
management, based largely on a desk-based portfolio review of a large, random sample
of Development Policy Operations (DPOs), complemented by assessment of other
relevant documents, and interviews with key stakeholders. This review does not assess
the adequacy of the OP 8.60 requirements in regards to environmental and social risk
management; such an assessment would require a more in-depth review based on field
evidence.

The World Bank manages environmental and social risks in DPF not through the system
of environmental and social safeguards applied to IPF, but rather through a separate
approach outlined in OP 8.60. This approach requires the Bank to determine whether
specific policies supported by a DPO are likely to have significant poverty and social or
environmental effects. If potential negative effects are identified, the Bank is required to
summarize the following in the Program Document: relevant analytical knowledge; the
borrower’s capacity for managing such effects; and, if gaps are identified, how they will
be addressed.

The environmental and social requirements of OP 8.60 are quite general and stated very
succinctly. There are other relevant OP 8.60 requirements for the Bank to assess the
client country’s environmental and social policy and institutional framework, make
environmental and social analytical work available to the public, and advise the client to
                                            x


carry out stakeholder consultations. The policy is complemented by a set of Bank
Procedures (BPs), guidance, and practices.

The Bank emphasized the potential of OP 8.60 to promote positive environmental and
social development from the time the policy was approved in 2004. It stated that “The
new OP/BP introduces a framework that for the first time sets out clear and unambiguous
standards for environmental and social safeguards…in policy-based lending” by focusing
on “a developmental approach to capacity building in the country’s policies, institutions,
and systems, rather than a ring-fenced focus on specific expenditures or physical
investments” (World Bank 2004a).

What did the Independent Evaluation Group find?
The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) carried out a portfolio review of a sample of
DPOs approved over 2005-14. For this sample, IEG assessed whether specific policies
had the potential for likely significant negative environmental or social effects, along
with the other requirements of OP 8.60 that are relevant for environmental and social risk
management. In carrying out the assessment, IEG endeavored to faithfully apply the
Bank’s existing policy, guidance, and advice to task teams. Multiple experts reviewed
each policy to increase consistency.

IEG found multiple examples of good practice in managing environmental and social
risks. For example, an electricity DPO in Georgia used a poverty and social impact
analysis (PSIA) on the distributional impact of tariff reforms, and established a block
tariff as a mitigation measure for the poor. An irrigation DPO series in Pakistan and an
urban Development Policy Loan (DPL) in Colombia presented detailed matrices
assessing the environmental and social consequences of each policy area, and noting
mitigation measures where risks were present. An urban and environmental DPL in
Brazil outlined a number of risks but determined that existing government systems were
sufficient to manage them, so no further action was required. An electricity DPL in
Tonga supporting an action plan built in a range of environmental mitigation measures.
Such examples demonstrate that the risk management requirements of OP 8.60 are
feasible to implement without creating an undue burden, and without discouraging Bank
support for potentially risky policy areas.

Most prior actions in DPOs do not pose environmental or social risks. Even in the
remaining cases where risks exist, this does not mean that a negative effect will
necessarily occur—it means only that there is some potential for which additional due
diligence is required. It also does not mean that risky actions or operations should be
avoided—it is possible for reforms to be high-risk as well as high-reward. Rather, under
OP 8.60 the risk of significant negative effects means that additional due diligence is
required to reduce potential adverse effects and enhance positive effects.

Overall, however, IEG found significantly more actions to have the risk of negative
environmental or social effects than were identified by World Bank task teams, indicative
of underreporting of potential risks on the part of Bank teams. For the sample of prior
actions reviewed, IEG found that Bank task teams identified environmental and social
risks just over half as often as IEG’s experts. There were also a number of cases where
                                             xi


prior actions might have had risks, but the World Bank Program Document did not
provide sufficient information on the content of the reforms to draw a conclusion.

As noted in World Bank guidance, some degree of expert judgment is required when
identifying risks. Whether a particular policy action poses a risk can depend on the
specific context of the policy action and country. However, the Bank’s identification of
risks was inconsistent. Policies that were identified as having risks in some operations
were not identified as risky in other operations that supported similar policies—and
without a clear justification based on context. In other cases, policies identified as having
risk potential in the Bank’s guidance were often not identified as risky in the Bank’s
operations, even when there were no clear factors in the policy or country context that
would suggest that risks were unlikely.

Risks were not confined to DPOs mapped to sectors like energy, agriculture, and
environment: the majority of both environmental and social risks were identified in
poverty reduction and macro-economic management operations, which also feature the
largest overall number of DPOs. While a relatively small minority of prior actions were
identified as risky by IEG, they were spread across many of the operations in the sample.

When Bank teams identified prior actions as environmentally or socially risky, they
typically discuss the client’s capacity to manage these risks, and describe mitigation
measures. However, capacity assessments are often perfunctory. The quality of
mitigation measures was not assessed in this review. Analytic work (whether formal or
informal) on environmental and social risks is usually not undertaken even when task
teams identify the possibility of a risk. The Bank often does not describe in Program
Documents the member country’s arrangements for consultations and participation on
relevant analytical work conducted by the Bank on poverty and social impact and on
environmental aspects, as required by OP 8.60.

OP 8.60 focuses on the ex ante identification and mitigation of environmental and social
risks, and does not explicitly address their ex post monitoring or evaluation. However,
when OP 8.60 was approved, the Bank stated that monitoring of DPO progress and
effectiveness “will be expected to give explicit attention to poverty/social, environmental,
and fiduciary aspects,” and this was also emphasized in the specific environmental and
social guidance (World Bank 2004b; World Bank 2008; World Bank 2013). IEG finds
that after a policy action is implemented, there is at present no formal system in place in
the Bank to monitor and evaluate environmental and social risks and their mitigation in
DPF. The Bank’s monitoring documents seldom contain information on actual
environmental or social effects or the efficacy of mitigation measures, except for positive
environmental and social outcomes that were part of the program’s objectives. In
particular, Implementation Completion and Results Reports (ICRs) rarely discuss
negative environmental or social issues for DPF. IEG’s system of desk validation of these
reports (the ICR Review), therefore, also does not provide an effective review of
environmental or social issues for DPF.
                                             xii


What are the reasons behind the findings?
Bank policy and guidance are vague, and do not clearly define key concepts. A central
question in OP 8.60 is whether a policy action will have “likely significant effects.” But
there is no formal definition of this concept in the policy or in the Bank Procedure 8.60
(BP 8.60). Interviews with Bank staff reveal that the meaning of “likely significant
effects” is not well-understood by task teams, and in practice is frequently interpreted to
mean only those policy actions with “direct, short-term effects.” This is not stated in the
policy, and sometimes causes task teams to leave out consideration of important indirect
or longer-term effects—which the Bank recognized as important at the time OP 8.60 was
approved. The sequencing of the requirements can also lead to confusion, requiring that
the determination of “likely significant effects” be made before analytical work is carried
out.

A range of guidance and training materials is available, but they vary in quality, usability,
and relevance. The 2004 Environment Good Practice Note provides a good overview of
the issues, and the 2008 Environment Toolkit provides detailed, practical instructions for
task teams, but they would both benefit from updating with greater examples from actual
experience and more widespread use by task teams. Guidance on the social side is
focused on the PSIA tool and is dispersed, with a large number of guidance notes and
toolkits produced by different Bank departments. Many documents are not very user-
friendly, and the guidance on what types of policies present social risks is less
comprehensive than on the environment side. The use of recommended analytical tools
such as PSIA, country environmental analysis (CEA), and strategic environmental
assessment (SEA) has been uneven, and trust fund resources for CEAs and SEAs were
exhausted in 2012.

The lack of formal procedures and inconsistent practices in review of environmental and
social aspects appears to have reduced incentives to fully comply with the policy. BP
8.60 does not mention environmental or social effects or their management. DPF
operations generally have a high level of review within the Bank, but on the specific issue
of environmental and social risk management there is no explicit requirement for input
from qualified experts in the official processing instructions. Practices within the Bank to
ensure that environmental and social risks are adequately managed have varied over time.
This has led to inconsistent treatment across Regions and operations. Good practice
examples often reflect initiatives on the part of individual Task Team Leaders (TTLs).

The pressure to deliver operations quickly, combined with the lack of a formal role for
environmental or social specialists, provide incentives for task teams to deprioritize
management of environmental and social risks in DPOs. Not all DPO TTLs are familiar
with the environmental and social requirements of OP 8.60, and some others view the
requirements as a burden rather than as a means of enhancing the value of the instrument
and its overall development effectiveness.

The World Bank approach to environmental and social risk management in DPF focuses
exclusively on the effects of policies rather than on the impacts of financing. This
approach can be undermined if DPF funds are used in a manner other than general budget
support. In a much smaller sample of recent DPL project evaluations and desk reviews,
                                             xiii


IEG has identified four cases—in Brazil, Cameroon, Ghana, and Vietnam—where World
Bank funds were earmarked by the Borrower for specific investments. Although some
Bank guidance discourages such practices, there is nothing in OP 8.60 that explicitly
prohibits it. This could lead to environmental and social risks that are not fully addressed,
and to associated reputational risks for the Bank.

Neither the Operations Policy and Country Services (OPCS) Vice Presidency’s ICR
Guidelines nor IEG’s Handbook for ICR Reviews requires reporting on environmental
and social risks or their mitigation in DPF. As a result, there is little incentive for task
teams to monitor or evaluate them. The Bank’s current grievance redress mechanism—
the Inspection Panel—may not provide adequate opportunity for affected parties to
register complaints with respect to DPF due to the shorter window between approval and
closure in which complaints may be filed.

How to strengthen environmental and social risk management in policy
lending?
Our review finds that there is scope for the Bank to strengthen its approach to
environmental and social risk management in DPF in all aspects of the system: guidance,
procedures, incentives, and accountability mechanisms. This would require bringing
together the different elements that currently govern environmental and social risk
management into a robust, well-coordinated system while preserving an adequate level of
flexibility for the instrument, and without placing an undue burden on client
governments.

Strengthening the system can be done in a way that supports the twin goals of the Bank
Group without creating bottlenecks or discouraging Bank support for policy actions in
sensitive areas. One of the benefits of having a strong system would be that potentially
significant risks could be identified early and accurately so that they can be managed
more effectively. This does not mean that the lending should not proceed. Rather, it
means that the benefits of the lending for the client population are more likely to be
maximized.

The review suggests that the following aspects of policy, procedures, and guidance could
be strengthened to help the Bank achieve this goal:

   •   BP 8.60 could be revised to specify procedures to ensure that the provisions of OP
       8.60 with respect to environmental and social risks are adequately applied.
   •   Environmental and social screening could be brought into DPOs from the concept
       note stage, and this and other roles for ensuring environmental and social due
       diligence could be included more explicitly as a requirement in the Development
       Policy Financing Processing Instructions.
   •   The template required for all DPO Program Documents could be adjusted to
       clearly indicate the potential environmental and social effects that have been
       identified, whether or how they have been assessed, and decisions reached as a
       result.
                                        xiv


•   Guidance provided to task teams and social and environmental specialists could
    be updated to reflect experience gained over the past decade. On the social side,
    the voluminous current guidance materials could be consolidated and made more
    user-friendly. Clear operational definitions of key concepts such as “likely
    significant effects” could be provided. Guidance on identifying and managing
    indirect, medium-, and long-term effects could be improved to assist in
    determining reasonable boundaries for responsibilities. This would ensure that
    important indirect effects are managed, while acknowledging that not all indirect
    effects of a reform will be “likely significant,” and that some effects will be too
    remote to be reasonably attributable. Efforts could be made to ensure that
    interpretations are consistent with the intent of the policy. Some expert judgment
    will be required under any scenario.
•   Clearer guidance could be provided to task teams on the appropriate course of
    action once an environmentally or socially risky policy action is identified,
    including how to conduct a meaningful capacity assessment and gap analysis of
    country risk management systems, how the Bank could help client countries
    address gaps identified in country capacity, and how consultations with civil
    society could be used to enhance program design.
•   The Bank could strengthen requirements to avoid the possible undermining of the
    OP 8.60 approach to environmental and social risk management through the
    actual or apparent earmarking of DPF proceeds by Borrowers.
•   The quality of Program Documents could be improved to make clearer the details
    of policies being supported and when those policies are identified by task teams
    as posing environmental or social risks according to the OP 8.60 definition.

The review also suggests that incentives and capacity could be enhanced to promote
good practice in environmental and social risk management in DPF:
•   Incentives could be improved to encourage Bank staff to better balance
    management of environment and social risks in DPF with the demands of
    responsive and rapid delivery. This could include establishing a more formal role
    for input from environmental and social experts to ensure the appropriate level of
    independent and timely challenge during the preparation and review process.
•   Bank Management could reduce the costs to task teams by providing adequate
    resources for involving specialists in DPF task teams from an early stage through
    “off the top” budget, and by increasing support for analytical work on the
    environmental and social impacts of policies through increased trust fund
    resources.
•   Managers could send clear signals that environmental and social aspects are a
    priority in the design and preparation of DPF.
•   An assessment of training needs could be conducted for different key target
    groups—team leaders, environmental and social specialists, management—to
    ensure adequate and appropriate coverage of policies, procedures, and the updated
    guidance.
                                           xv


   •   Greater provision could be made for monitoring and evaluation of environmental
       and social risks in DPFs, including adding sections to ICR and ICR Review
       templates and guidance.
   •   The window for potentially affected parties to be informed of the contents of a
       DPO and have their concerns addressed could be widened by extending the
       timeline between public disclosure of DPO documentation and disbursement, and
       by extending the deadline for Inspection Panel requests beyond the closing date of
       the operation in the case of DPF.

Going forward, the inclusion of environmental and social themes and risks in new World
Bank tools like the Systematic Operations Risk Rating Tool (SORT), Systematic Country
Diagnostics (SCD), and Country Partnership Frameworks (CPFs) is a positive step, and
could be used to focus attention on operations with significant risks and to carry out or
encourage upstream analytical work on a country’s environment and social capacity;
policy opportunities and challenges; and risks. In so doing, it would be helpful for the
Bank to be cognizant of its risk appetite, and find a proper balance to allow for
supporting policy reforms that may entail risks, but that also have the potential for
important poverty reduction, equity, or sustainability benefits—as long as the risks are
adequately understood and mitigated.
                                            xvii


Management Response
Management welcomes the IEG learning product on Managing Environmental and Social
Risks in Development Policy Financing. Management appreciates the active engagement
with IEG during the preparation of the learning product, which provides important inputs
for the 2015 Development Policy Finance (DPF) Retrospective. In response to the final
learning product, management has the following comments.

It is unfortunate that this learning product only provides a partial assessment of the
environmental and social effects of DPF-supported reforms. It looks at environmental and
social “risks,” that is, the potential for adverse effects, and does not examine the positive
environmental and social contributions that many DPFs make. In addition, it downplays
the fact that by far most prior actions do not pose any significant and likely risks. As a
result, the learning product presents a biased picture of the environmental and social
effects of DPF, which reduces the learning value of the product. Management welcomes
IEG’s plans for a separate learning product on environmental DPF, which will provide a
more balanced perspective and should be considered in conjunction with this learning
product. We expect that this additional learning product will take into consideration DPF-
supported reforms that have had significant positive environmental effects.

At the same time, management agrees with IEG that implementation of the
environmental and social requirements of the operational policy on DPF (OP 8.60)
should be further strengthened. Therefore, in the forthcoming DPF Retrospective,
management will recommend actions to strengthen the screening of prior actions for
likely environmental and social effects in program documents; overhaul the guidance,
toolkits, and training for staff; and enhance the corporate review process to provide
greater clarity and ensure the consistent application of the environmental and social
requirements of OP 8.60.
                                               1


1. Addressing Environmental and Social Risks in
Development Policy Financing
World Bank Development Policy Financing (DPF) operations are designed to achieve
development goals through the positive effects of policy reforms. But policies may also have
risks of negative environmental or social side effects. Effective environmental and social risk
management in DPF is central to the World Bank’s development agenda. The 2013 World
Bank Group Strategy is guided by two goals: to end extreme poverty, and to promote shared
prosperity (World Bank 2013a). The strategy also states that those goals should be achieved
in a sustainable manner, noting that “environmental sustainability is essential to achieve the
goals in a world of finite planetary boundaries and natural resources.” As the World Bank
uses DPF to support far-reaching national reforms that are intended to contribute to the twin
goals, then it is necessary to understand the impact of those reforms on the poor. And if
policy actions taken today to promote economic growth lead to the depletion of a country’s
natural capital, the long-term sustainability of the growth model will be undermined. The
environmental and social requirements of the Operational Policy (OP) governing DPF – OP
8.60 – are therefore essential to achieving poverty reduction and sustainability in World Bank
Member Countries through DPF. (See Appendix A for a summary of differences between
DPF and Investment Project Financing, or IPF.)

The objective of this Learning Product is to assess the application of World Bank policy, and
identify lessons learned and good practices related to the implementation of the
environmental and social risk management requirements of OP 8.60. The focus of the
Learning Product is on Bank actions, policies, procedures, and guidance. It is a rapid
assessment based primarily on a review of existing documents and data, augmented by
interviews with selected staff.

Policy reforms can have significant effects on the environment and on the poor and
vulnerable. The main effects will likely be positive—a policy that increases the profitability
of poor farmers by removing trade barriers that raised the cost of inputs might have positive
social effects, while a policy that removes energy subsidies might help to lower energy
consumption and its associated pollution (in addition to providing better incentives for
energy investments). But there is also a possibility for unintentional negative effects—the
trade liberalization policy might expand agricultural production and use of fertilizers,
pesticides, and herbicides, or land clearance; the energy subsidy reform policy might place a
financial burden on the poor. For conciseness, in this Learning Product we will refer to the
potential unintended adverse environmental and social effects of policy reforms as
environmental and social “risks.”

Concern for the potential for adverse environmental and social effects of policies has a long
history in the development community and in the World Bank. For example, a World Bank
retrospective on adjustment lending in 2001 noted with regard to environmental and social
effects that “during the 1990s, adjustment lending gave increased attention to poverty-
focused objectives and the mitigation of possible adverse impacts of reform measures”
(World Bank 2001). It also noted external criticism of Bank policy lending on the grounds
                                                    2


that it had high social costs. 1 A World Bank Policy Update communicated the concerns of
both shareholders and Member Country stakeholders about the potential for adverse effects
of DPF (World Bank 2004a).

The significant environmental and social effects of policies can be indirect and long-term, as
well as direct and short-term. Many effects will be indirect, operating through changes in
prices or other incentives. An agricultural policy change that increases the profitability of
agriculture might indirectly encourage expansion of agricultural production, with potential
environmental effects on land use, forest clearance, water consumption, or fertilizer and
pesticide use. A trade policy that increases access to imports might indirectly harm workers
in uncompetitive sectors. A policy that encourages hydropower development may indirectly
contribute to the displacement of local people. Although a DPF operation is typically
implemented over a very short period, there can be a substantial time lag before the effects of
reforms it supports become apparent. For example, the approval of a new policy to increase
the collection of electricity payments might take a year or more to implement, and even
longer for the impacts on different segments of society to be measurable. Reforms that have
side effects that increase groundwater consumption or deforestation may be detected only
after a substantial time lag. Thus, considering only the direct or short-term impacts of policy
lending might overlook important longer-term effects.

When the World Bank approved OP 8.60 in 2004, it introduced a new approach for
managing environmental and social risks in budget support operations that was distinct from
that for IPF. (See Appendix A for a summary of other differences between DPF and IPF.)
One of the issues that OP 8.60 was intended to address was the treatment of social and
environmental effects of budget support operations (World Bank 2004a). Before 2004, there
were different World Bank budget support instruments: Structural Adjustment Loans (SALs)
and Sectoral Adjustment Loans (SECALs). Starting in 1999, SECALs were required to apply
the Bank’s Environmental Assessment Policy, while SALs were not, and there were concerns
that this could lead to “instrument arbitrage,” whereby there would be a preference for using
lending instruments with less onerous environmental and social requirements (World Bank
2004a). OP 8.60 consolidated all budget support under one instrument. In adopting OP 8.60,
the Bank also affirmed that the environmental and social policies intended for investment
lending were not appropriate for the fundamentally different nature of policy-based lending.
Because DPF proceeds are not designed to finance specific investments, it is understood that
there is no tangible investment footprint associated with DPFs. For an instrument designed to
improve the development of countries through policy-measures, it was decided that the
policies and procedures governing environmental and social risk management in IPF—the
so-called “safeguards”—were not suitable.




1
 The Retrospective noted (citing specific studies) that “many critics of adjustment programs maintain that the
social costs are high, even while they accept that the costs of not adjusting can also be high. Several studies
point to specific country experiences, particularly in Africa, with such adverse effects as increasing
unemployment, real wage reductions, and deteriorating social indicators. They also suggest that adjustment is
often associated with growing inequalities, and that many adjustment programs have neglected the distributional
consequences and non-income aspects of poverty.” (World Bank, 2001)
                                                  3


At the same time, one purpose for adopting OP 8.60 was to reinforce the principle that
significant adverse environmental and social effects of policy support needed to be identified
and addressed. Hence, specific environmental and social requirements for DPFs were spelled
out in OP 8.60. The OP 8.60 paragraphs on “Poverty and Social Impacts” (“social” for short)
and “Environmental, Forests, and other Natural Resource Aspects” (“environment” for short)
are concise statements of what the basic requirements of the policy are. The two paragraphs
that state OP 8.60’s social and environmental requirements (currently paragraphs 9 and 10,
respectively) are reproduced in Box 1-1. They essentially mirror one another, and require the
Bank to determine whether specific country policies supported by the operation are likely to
have significant poverty and social, or environmental, effects. For policies with likely
significant effects, the Bank is required to summarize in the Program Document relevant
analytical knowledge of those effects and assess the borrower’s systems for reducing such
adverse effects and enhancing positive effects. If there are significant gaps in the analysis or
shortcomings in the borrower’s systems, the Bank is required to describe in the Program
Document how such gaps or shortcomings will be addressed before or during program
implementation. OP 8.60 does not address environmental or social effects of the use of the
DPF funds by the borrower.

 Box 1-1: Principal Environmental and Social Requirements of OP 8.60

 9. Poverty and Social Impacts. The Bank determines whether specific policies supported by the
 operation are likely to have significant poverty and social consequences, especially on poor people
 and vulnerable groups. For policies with likely significant effects, the Bank summarizes in the
 Program Document relevant analytic knowledge of these effects and of the Member Country’s
 systems for reducing adverse effects and enhancing positive effects associated with the specific
 policies being supported. If there are significant gaps in the analysis or shortcomings in these
 systems, the Bank describes in the Program Document how such gaps or shortcomings would be
 addressed before or during program implementation, as appropriate.
 10. Environmental, Forests, and other Natural Resource Aspects. The Bank determines whether
 specific country policies supported by the operation are likely to cause significant effects on the
 Member Country’s environment, forests, and other natural resources. For policies with likely
 significant effects, the Bank assesses in the Program Document the Member Country’s systems for
 reducing such adverse effects and enhancing positive effects, drawing on relevant country-level or
 sectoral environmental analysis. If there are significant gaps in the analysis or shortcomings in
 these systems, the Bank describes in the Program Document how such gaps or shortcomings would
 be addressed before or during program implementation, as appropriate.

 Source: OP 8.60, OPCS, revised July 2014.


Other OP 8.60 requirements are also relevant for the management of environmental and
social risks in DPFs. The most important of those passages are provided in Box 1-2. They
include requirements for the Bank to assess the client country’s environmental and social
policy and institutional framework, make environmental and social analytical work available
to the public, and advise the client to carry out stakeholder consultations.
                                                4



 Box 1-2: Other Relevant OP 8.60 Requirements
 Paragraph 3: Financing Criteria and Selectivity, which states: “The Bank’s decision to extend a
 DPF is based on an assessment of the Member Country’s policy and institutional framework—
 including its … environmental/natural resource management, and poverty and social aspects.”

 Paragraph 5: Consultations and Participation, which states: “The Bank’s program document …
 describes the Member Country’s arrangements for consultations and participation relevant to the
 operation, and the outcomes of the participatory process adopted in formulating the Member
 Country’s development strategy. Relevant analytic work conducted by the Bank, particularly on
 poverty and social impacts and on environmental aspects, is made available to the public as part of
 the consultation process.”

 Paragraph 15: Risk Management, which states: “The Bank independently identifies risks associated
 with the program supported and ensures, when possible, that the operation contains appropriate
 mitigation measures.”

 Paragraphs 32 and 33: Countries affected by crisis or conflict may require an unusually quick
 response from the Bank. There may not be sufficient time or country capacity to adequately
 address design considerations (such as possible distributional effects, effects on natural resources
 and the environment, fiduciary arrangements), or to develop a strong policy program with
 stakeholder consultation. In such situations, DPF is justified on an exceptional basis. In such
 operations, the Bank describes in the Program Document when and how such design considerations
 would be addressed.

While OP 8.60 describes what is required with regard to identification of likely significant
environmental and social effects and assessment of the Borrower’s mitigation capacity,
guidance on how to implement the requirements is described elsewhere, in various Good
Practice Notes, Guidance Notes, and Toolkits on the subject, training modules, and the new
“Development Policy Financing Processing Instructions.” The result is a complex system of
policies, procedures, guidance, and practices.

The Bank emphasized the potential of OP 8.60 to promote positive environmental and social
development in client countries. When OP 8.60 was approved in 2004, the Bank argued that
“countries need an overall adequate policy environment that covers poverty and social
dimensions [and] environmental aspects…. A comprehensive diagnosis of development
constraints that includes these aspects is a crucial underpinning of effective program design
and possible Bank support” (World Bank 2004a, para. 29). Specifically, the Bank stated that
“The new OP/BP introduces a framework that for the first time sets out clear and
unambiguous standards for environmental and social safeguards…in policy-based lending.
This approach represents a more systematic requirement…, while applying the principles of
the Bank’s safeguard policies…. Its intent is thus to retain the same principles of promoting
sustainable development…without weakening standards or creating undue burden for
borrowers” (World Bank 2004a, para. 32). This would be achieved through DPF by focusing
on “a developmental approach to capacity building in the country’s policies, institutions, and
systems, rather than a ring-fenced focus on specific expenditures or physical investments”
(World Bank 2004a, para. 33).
                                                     5


2. Performance in Identifying and Managing
Environmental and Social Risks in DPF
One of the main activities under this Learning Product was an extensive portfolio review of
DPF operations. The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) conducted a desk-based portfolio
review of a large sample of randomly selected DPF operations approved under OP 8.60. The
sample covers the full period of the Bank’s experience with DPF, from the effectiveness of
OP 8.60 in 2004 until the end of calendar year 2014 (fiscal year 05-15). Appendix B
contains details on the selection of the sample and the portfolio review process, and
Appendix C contains the detailed results of the portfolio review. For the prior actions in
operations in the sample, IEG assessed the application of the requirements of OP 8.60,
including the identification of environmental and social risks, the extent to which analytic
work on risks was carried out, the extent to which country capacity for managing risks was
assessed, the extent to which gaps in capacity were addressed or risks were mitigated, and the
extent to which risks were monitored over time. Results are reported primarily at the prior
action level, because the number of prior actions with environmental or social risk
implications can vary by operation. 2 For some questions where information at the operation
level is of interest, that information is also presented.

Although DPOs support broad programs of policy and institutional reforms, the portfolio
review focused on the “specific policies supported by the operation,” as required by OP 8.60.
The portfolio review was complemented by information gathered through meetings,
interviews, and focus groups with several dozen people and Bank units, including
environmental specialists, social specialists, safeguards specialists, macro-economists, the
Operations Policy and Country Services (OPCS) Vice Presidency, and DPF task team
leaders. It is important to note that without field missions, IEG was not able to verify whether
risks actually materialized or whether mitigation measures were implemented.

IEG screened prior actions based on the Bank’s policy and guidance. The core of the
portfolio review was an assessment of whether prior actions in the operations were likely to
pose significant environmental or social risks. This assessment was made using the existing
requirements of OP 8.60 (as reported in Section 1) and the specific guidance provided by the
Bank for environmental and social effects, supplemented by expert judgment as needed. The
assessment did not entail the application of any new or additional requirements by IEG. As
detailed below (Table 2-1, 2-3), in most cases the types of risks identified by the IEG team
were also indicated by the Bank’s guidance materials or were identified by Bank task teams
in other operations in our sample. But as discussed in detail in Section 3, the policy is
imprecise, there is a problem of sequencing in the requirement for analytical work, the
boundaries of downstream effects to consider are not clear, and the guidance is not
comprehensive. There are also inherent difficulties in predicting whether a policy action will
have “significant” environmental or social effects, especially in cases where analytical work
on the magnitude of potential effects has not been undertaken. As a result, it is sometimes

2
 The unit of analysis of environmental and social effects in the World Bank Development Policy Lending
Retrospectives is at the prior action level.
                                                    6


difficult to ascertain whether a prior action will have the potential for significant adverse
environmental or social effects, and ultimately a judgment call is required. 3 IEG minimized
the potential for errors by having at least two environmental specialists and at least two social
specialists review every prior action in the sample.

Acknowledging the potential for risks does not mean that the policies are undesirable or
should not be implemented. Indeed, a policy or operation may have net positive
environmental or social effects, but still have the possibility for some significant negative
effects which could be mitigated or managed. Identifying the potential for adverse effects
requires that some additional due diligence be conducted, but does not mean that negative
effects will necessarily occur. It also does not necessarily mean that additional mitigation
measures are necessary.

Findings on risk identification
The general finding of the portfolio review is that IEG’s experts identified significantly more
environmental and social risks than Bank task teams, indicating that there is an underreporting
of environmental and social risks by the Bank in DPO Program Documents. IEG also identified
significantly more risks than the Bank has been identifying in its Development Policy
Financing Retrospectives, some of the reasons for which are explained in Box 2.9. Boxes C.1
and C.2 in Appendix C provide examples of the types of environmental and social risks,
respectively, not identified by the Bank. At the same time, IEG identified examples of good
practice in risk appraisal and identification by the Bank (see Boxes 2-3, 2-4, 2-5, 2-6, 2-7, 2-8).
The majority of prior actions do not pose environmental or social risks. However, at least one
risky action is present in a significant proportion of operations.

Policy actions and program logic are sometimes not clearly described in Program Documents,
making it difficult to determine what exactly a DPF operation is supporting. This in turn makes
it more challenging to predict environmental and social effects. For example, there are cases
where a prior action required that an investment law be passed, or an energy action plan be
implemented, or a trade reform be adopted, but the Program Document did not describe the
contents of these in sufficient detail to understand the implications of the policy. These are most
common in large, multi-sectoral DPLs with many policy actions. In these cases, IEG took a
conservative (lower bound) approach and did not identify such prior actions as risky.

More than twice as many policy actions were identified as having social risks than
environmental risks. This should not be interpreted as evidence that social risks are not
addressed as well as environmental risks. Rather, it is due to the fact that the economic policy
reforms of the type most often supported by DPF are more likely to have both winners and
losers, whereas environmental risks tend to arise in the less common policy reforms related
to sectors such as infrastructure, energy, mining, agriculture, or natural resources (see Tables
2.5 and 2.6). It does mean that due diligence on social risks is needed more frequently than
on environmental risks. But our assessment found that staff working on environmental risks

3
  The Bank’s guidance acknowledges this, stating for example that “The selection of policies for which PSIA is
appropriate is inevitably a matter of judgment…” (World Bank 2004a), and “The degree of transmission of
negative impacts will thus be a matter of judgment…” (World Bank 2008a).
                                                        7


tend to consider both direct and indirect effects while their colleagues working on social risks
limit their coverage to direct and short-term effects. IEG did not find evidence that the
identification of risks had improved over time.

The Bank’s identification of potential environmental and social risks does not always follow
its own guidance and is not always consistent across operations, without justification based
on policy or country context.4 Tables 2-1, 2-2, 2-3 and 2-4 provide detailed typologies of the
types of prior actions identified by the Bank and/or IEG as entailing risks from
environmental and social perspectives. The tables show the distribution of policy actions
identified in IEG’s portfolio review as posing environmental or social risks, grouped under
broad typologies. In nearly all cases, IEG is not the sole source identifying that this type of
action could pose risks; most policy types were also identified explicitly in Bank guidance, or
were sometimes identified by Bank task teams in the Program Document. These categories
are a useful way of seeing that most types of policy risks identified by IEG were also
identified by other sources in some cases. But these typologies are used only as a way of
organizing and presenting the results; they were not used as part of the methodology for
identifying risks (described in Appendix B). Columns show, for those actions identified by
IEG, how many of these were also identified by Bank task teams.

While all types of environmental risks in the sample bar one were identified by Bank task
teams in at least one instance (see Table 2-1), often there were other instances of the same
risk types which were not identified. For example, in a Poverty Reduction Support Credit
(PRSC) in Tanzania that supported reforms for encouraging Public Private Partnerships
(PPP) in infrastructure, the Program Document noted, "The promotion of PPPs could also
have significant effects if compliance with national laws and regulation is not ensured.” Yet
other operations supporting similar reforms did not mention environmental risks (in Brazil,
Niger, Tajikistan, Guinea-Bissau, Mexico, and Sierra Leone) despite indications that the goal
was to increase private sector investment in infrastructure. More detailed examples of
environmental risks not identified by the Bank in the sample are provided in Box 2-1.

On the social side, the Bank identified social risks in a high percentage of some policy types
listed in this note, as summarized in Table 2-3. For example, a Morocco housing DPO did
not identify risks associated with establishing an urban code that would affect where people
could live, while a Brazil Housing DPO did identify the risk of people being excluded by
similar reforms. More detailed examples of environmental risks not identified by the Bank in
the sample are provided in Box 2-2.

IEG identified some policy types not specifically identified by guidance or Bank task teams
as posing risks, but where IEG concluded that a risk exists based on expert judgment. It
would not be surprising for this to occur in some cases, as no guidance system can identify

4
  It is not necessarily inconsistent for a policy reform to be identified as posing a risk in one operation but not
another. The specific details of the policy reform, and the detailed country context can mean that a risk that
exists in one case does not in another. The actions listed in the tables are only those that IEG identified as
posing risks after considering these details. For example, one energy sector tariff reform might pose a risk of
encouraging some energy users to switch to a dirtier fuel, but another in a different operation may not because
of different patterns in energy use. But in most cases, differences in country context are in the ability to manage
risks, rather than the determination of whether negative effects could occur.
                                                   8


all possible risky actions. However, as discussed in Section 3, the social guidance is less
comprehensive than the environmental guidance. Indeed, on the environment side, there were
four policy types not covered by guidance in IEG’s sample (see Table 2-1, 2-2), while on the
social side there were eight (see Table 2-3, 2-4).

Table 2-1: Types of Environmental Risks Identified by World Bank Guidance or Task
Teams and Present in IEG Sample
                                                       Number of Times   Number of Times
                                                         Identified by   Not Identified by
          Type of Risk Identified by IEG                    Bank              Bank           Total
                                  Identified by World Bank guidance
Support for agricultural trade liberalization                1                  0             1
Support for Irrigation or water investments or               3                  1             4
expansion
Support for agricultural market development                  1                  0             1
Support for increasing industry or manufacturing in          3                  1             4
special economic zones
Support for PPP or PSD/concessions                           3                  9             12
legal/regulatory reforms to encourage investment in
infrastructure sectors*
Support for privatization in environmentally                 1                  1             2
sensitive sector
Support for encouraging FDI in infrastructure                1                  0             1
Support for policies that encourage agricultural             1                  2             3
investment expansion
Support for electricity market development                   3                  2             5
Support for agriculture sector (e.g. cotton)                 2                  1             3
restructuring
Support for road expansion or expenditure increase           1                  1             2
Support for improving mining legal framework                 1                  3             4
Energy tariff reforms that could lead to fuel                2                  3             5
switching**
Sub-Totals                                                   23                 24            47
         Not specifically identified by World Bank guidance, but identified by task teams
Support for electricity sector action plans or other         6                  2             8
investments
Support for urban redevelopment, housing, or urban           5                  4             9
densification
Support for climate change adaptation measures               1                  0             1
including infrastructure
Sub-Totals                                                   12                 6             18
                                                      9


Totals                                                              35                     30                 65
 Note: This table summarizes the types of prior actions with likely significant environmental effects, or
“environmental risks,” identified by IEG in its sample of 100 DPF operations which were also covered by
World Bank guidance or were sometimes identified by Bank task teams. The numbers indicate how many times
they were also identified by Bank teams in the Program Documents for the relevant operations out of the total
number of times where they were identified by IEG. Risks were deemed to be identified by World Bank
guidance if they were assigned a moderate or high possibility of negative environmental effects in the Toolkit
on Assessing the Environmental, Forest, and Natural Resource Aspects in DPLs (World Bank 2008).
* Note that other cases of PPP reforms that did not support infrastructure investment were not identified as
posing an environmental risk.
** Note also that there were roughly a dozen other cases of energy tariff reform where the Program Document
discussed the possibility of a risk but made a plausible argument that the specific context of the policy and
country meant that no risk of negative environmental effects through fuel switching existed, hence were not
identified by IEG as posing an environmental risk.


Table 2-2: Types of Environmental Risks Identified only by IEG
                                                                                                    Number of
                                                                                                      Times
                                                                                                   Identified by
         Type of Risk Identified by IEG                        Reason for Identifying                  IEG
Support for groundwater well ownership and                 Groundwater is a common pool                  1
governance reform                                          resource; decentralizing control
                                                                may lead to resource
                                                                  overexploitation.
Total                                                                      —                             1
Note: This table summarizes the types of prior actions with likely significant environmental effects, or
“environmental risks” identified by IEG in its sample of 100 DPF operations but which were not specifically
identified by World Bank guidance and were not identified by Bank task teams.
                                                     10


Table 2-3: Types of Social Risks Identified by World Bank Guidance or Task Teams
and Present in IEG sample
                                                               Number of
                                                                 Times           Number of Times
                                                              Identified by      Not Identified by
            Type of Risk Identified by IEG                       Bank                 Bank               Total
                                   Identified by World Bank guidance
Electricity tariff reforms including price increases                10                    2               12
Liberalization of cotton prices/Establishment of a                  1                     2                3
Regulatory authority
Downsizing of civil service/Salary cuts                             7                     4               11
State-Owned Enterprise privatization/Public sector                  6                     2                8
restructuring
Policies that affect Social Spending including
Rationalizing health and education sectors                          5                     2                7
Tax policy/Changing or simplifying rate structure                   3                     0                3
Trade including import liberalization                               0                     1                1
Sub-total                                                           32                    13              45
         Not specifically identified by World Bank guidance, but identified by task teams
Land use change/displacement of people such as
might result as part of Power Sector Study/Energy                   13                    9               22
sector plan, or Irrigation Sector/Agriculture sector
plan or Environmental/Housing policies
Contracting private operators/Social orgs. to
deliver social services or Decentralization of                      4                     11              15
services-quality of service issues, access
Streamlining business environment, including
registration that could mean reducing social/labor                  1                     1                2
requirements
Housing Policy and Standards affecting housing
quality, availability and affordability                             1                     2                3
PPP’s, Investment Code, Mining Code affecting
labor conditions                                                    3                     4                7
Sub-total                                                           22                    27              49
Totals                                                              54                    40              94
Note: This table summarizes the types of prior actions with likely significant social effects, or “social risks,”
identified by IEG in its sample of 70 DPF operations which were also covered by World Bank guidance or were
sometimes identified by Bank task teams. The numbers indicate how many times they were also identified by
Bank teams in the Program Documents for the relevant operations out of the total number of times where they
were identified by IEG. Risks were deemed to be identified by World Bank guidance if they were mentioned in
the Good Practice Note on Guidance Note on using PSIA in DPLs (World Bank 2013).
                                                       11



Table 2-4: Types of Social Risks Identified only by IEG
                                                                                                      Number of
                                                                                                        Times
                                                                                                     Identified by
              Type of Risk Identified by IEG                       Reason for Identifying                IEG
    Privatization policy                                    Privatization policy will likely
                                                            affect lay-offs related to SOE                  1
                                                            privatization
    Labor law/Labor code passage                            Labor legislation, particularly that
                                                            increasing labor market flexibility             1
                                                            will affect working hours, hiring
                                                            and firing, contract arrangements,
                                                            etc.
    Compulsory Secondary Education                          Compulsory secondary education
                                                            may impose burdens on families to               1
                                                            transport children long distances
                                                            and sacrifice household labor
    Total                                                                    —                              3
Note: This table summarizes the types of prior actions with likely significant social effects, or “social risks”
identified by IEG in its sample of 70 DPF operations but which were not specifically identified by World Bank
guidance and were not identified by Bank task teams.


    Box 2-1: Georgia PRSO Series
    The Georgia Poverty Reduction Support Operation series does well in dealing with a social risk at
    several levels, especially with respect to role of the PSIA. In this case the prior action was the
    satisfactory implementation of an Energy Sector Medium-term Strategic Action Plan. The Program
    Document succinctly describes the PSIA that was done prior to this series of four operations. As
    with other PSIAs, it addressed a single issue, the distributional impact of electricity tariff reform,
    which was part of the action plan. The PSIA determined that the reform would impact poor people
    outside of the capital. A mitigation measure was proposed and put into place to establish a “block
    tariff”—a separate lower rate for low levels of electricity consumption. Thus, this is a case in
    which the risk was identified early on, a PSIA was commissioned, a social impact confirmed and a
    mitigation measure proposed.

It is not the case that risks are concentrated in sectoral DPOs. While it is sometimes
presumed that the potential for environmental or social risks lies primarily in DPOs in sectors
like energy or environment, 5 rather than in multi-sectoral economic management DPOs,
IEG’s portfolio review suggests that risks exist in a range of operations (see Tables C.1
through C.4 in Appendix C). Most risks are in operations mapped to poverty reduction and
economic management sectors (the former PREM Network), which also has the highest
number of DPO operations. Social risks occur across a range of sectors, while environmental
risks tend to be concentrated in agriculture, water, energy, urban, or environment sectors (the


5
    See for example World Bank 2004a.
                                               12


former Sustainable Development Network (SDN)). SDN sector-mapped operations identify a
larger share of risks identified by IEG than PREM-mapped operations.

 Box 2-2: Punjab, Pakistan Irrigation DPL series
 An irrigation DPL series in Pakistan offers a good example of environmental and social risk
 screening. The Program Document contains detailed annex matrices which assess the
 environmental consequences of each policy area over the course of the series, noting mitigation
 measures where risks were present. For example, the series supported increases in maintenance and
 repair budgets of irrigation works. The Program Document noted both the potential that better asset
 maintenance would increase water efficiency and reduce water-logging and salinization, but also
 that increased construction activities could have local environmental effects, and that there would
 be risks from changes in water flows, particularly to environmentally sensitive wetlands. To
 mitigate this, the operation supported preparation of environmental guidelines to institute
 environmental safeguards for irrigation activities.


Findings on other due diligence requirements
Other requirements of OP 8.60, where there was less room for interpretation than for the
initial identification of risks, were also not fully implemented. There is wide variation in the
degree to which operations assess country capacity or gaps in this capacity (see Figures 2-1
and 2-2). As presented in Section 1, when a policy action is identified as having likely
significant environmental or social effects, additional due diligence is required. IEG found
that when task teams identified a risk, a capacity assessment was usually carried out.
However, the treatment was often perfunctory, such as stating that the country’s legislation
required environmental impact assessments to be carried out, without considering whether
such assessments were adequate or led to implementation of mitigation measures. Detailed
assessments based on evidence were rare.
                                                         13


Figure 2-1: Implementation Frequency of Due Diligence Requirements for
Environmental Risks Identified by IEG

                  Prior actions with environmental risks
                        0          10        20    30        40     50        60    70

    Identified by IEG

   Identified by Bank

       Analytic work

 Capacity assessment

    Mitigation action

       Consultations


Note: A mitigation action is not required in cases where a capacity assessment was carried out and existing
country capacity systems are found to be adequate for risk management. Even when Bank task teams did not
identify an environmental risk, they sometimes included a general assessment of environmental management
systems.


Figure 2-2: Implementation Frequency of Due Diligence Requirements for Social Risks
Identified by IEG

                            Prior actions with social risks
                        0     10        20   30   40    50    60   70    80    90   100

    Identified by IEG

   Identified by Bank

       Analytic work

 Capacity assessment

    Mitigation action

       Consultations




In cases where the Bank has identified gaps in the analysis or shortcomings in the member
country’s systems for environmental risks, Program Documents usually include a mitigation
measure. For those cases when mitigation measures were not described, the main reasons
were because the risk was not identified in the first place, or because the capacity of the
                                                14


country to manage the risks without further mitigation was not assessed. IEG cannot draw
any conclusions on whether the mitigation measures were sufficient within the scope of this
Learning Product (particularly given the gaps in monitoring and evaluation discussed below).
The most substantive cases of mitigation were those where mitigation measures were
deliberately built into the design of the operation or a parallel operation. For example,
negative effects from energy tariff reform would be mitigated by supporting a prior action
establishing a social tariff at a low price for initial levels of consumption; the potential for
negative environmental and social effects from a new mining code would be mitigated by
building improved environmental and labor regulations into the code; implementation
capacity-related risks in a prior action aimed at decentralizing provision of social services
can be mitigated through a separate prior action that aims to attract and retain technical staff
in local agencies; weaknesses in environmental management agencies would be mitigated by
supporting capacity building in those agencies through the operation, related technical
assistance, or by the Borrower.

Weaker examples of mitigation were in cases where Program Documents argued that risks
would be managed through the environmental plans of parallel investment lending projects,
but where those plans do not cover the specific risk posed by the DPO; in cases where it was
unclear whether mitigation actions recommended by the Bank (such as increasing the
capacity of environmental agencies) had been agreed on by the Borrower because they were
not formally part of the operation; or where the Program Document stated that existing
policies and mechanisms of the Borrower would mitigate the policy but without a rigorous
capacity assessment of those systems.

 Box 2-3: Colombia Productive and Sustainable Cities
 A standalone urban development DPL in Colombia offers a good example of environmental and
 social risk appraisal, capacity assessment, and risk mitigation. The operation supported a range of
 urban policy changes, including urban redevelopment, public housing, and infrastructure
 concessions and public private partnerships. These policies posed environmental risks (from
 construction in sensitive areas, or large scale infrastructure) and social risks (from potential for
 displacement of people, or effects on service delivery).The Program Document contained
 substantial sections on environmental and social aspects, highlighting the expected positive
 elements of some policies, but also the risks. The risk assessments were linked directly to the prior
 actions supported by the operation. For each of the three policy areas with environmental risks or
 four areas with social risks, the document explained the risk, the existing systems and capacity for
 managing that risk, and recommended mitigation measures. For example, the operation identified
 the environmental risks from road infrastructure concessions, described the distribution of
 environmental management responsibilities between the infrastructure agency, the concessionaire,
 and the environment agency, and described measures that had been taken to improve the capacity
 of environmental management systems. On the social side, the operation identified that PPPs in
 health and education could have distributional effects and that these had not been addressed in the
 general framework for the PPP process (a prior action). The operation specified as a mitigation
 measure a follow-on regulation providing more detailed guidelines that would require social issues
 to be taken into account. The Program Document also contained a well-organized annex on risks
 and mitigation measures, which included social and environmental risks; this type of annex could
 be beneficial for presenting risks in most operations.
                                                          15


Program Documents sometimes relied on the operation’s overall positive impacts as a substitute
for identifying specific potential negative impacts of the prior action and associated mitigation
measures. The implicit argument is that if the prior action has, on balance, a positive impact, then
mitigation is not necessary.

 Box 2-4: Brazil, Rio de Janeiro Urban and Housing DPL
 An urban and housing DPL in Brazil offers an example where the Bank determined that
 environmental risks existed, but mitigation measures were not necessary as existing environmental
 management capacity was adequate. The program supported a range of policy reforms aimed at
 providing housing for the poor including through titling programs, noting that environmental risks
 existed from the possibility of unplanned occupation and housing construction in environmentally
 sensitive areas. However, the Program Document described the existing legislative and regulations
 designed to prevent this, and then discussed the ability and capacity of the state institutions to
 implement these rules and to supervise environmental aspects of the policy reforms.


When significant environmental and social risks are present, Program Documents are rarely
adequately informed by analytical work. 6 Without this, it is difficult to know the magnitude of a
potential risk and how it might affect different segments of society, or to identify appropriate
mitigation measures. On the social side, although Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) is
available as a standard tool, IEG found that relevant analytical work on the specific social risks
of prior actions was referenced in only a few cases. 7 No equivalent standard analytical tool is
available for assessing environmental risks of reforms. In some cases, IEG found that Program
Documents referred to some environmental analytic work that was not clearly relevant to the
operation, and in other cases it referenced analytic work that was relevant to the operation but
not the specific prior action.




   6
    IEG did not conduct an in-depth assessment of the quality of the analytical work conducted on either the
   environmental or social side.
   7
    IEG’s definition of social analytical work for the portfolio analysis was relatively generous, giving credit for
   any sort of analysis cited of the poverty and social impacts of a prior action, as long as it was relevant.
   However, generic poverty assessments and technical analyses not addressing the prior actions of the operation,
   even though relevant in the broader country context, would not necessarily be considered as addressing the
   poverty and social risks of the instrument on poor and vulnerable groups.
                                                 16



 Box 2-5: Jamaica Fiscal Sustainability DPO
 The Jamaica Fiscal Sustainability DPO represents good performance in assessing, addressing, and
 reporting on social risks. The loan contains several actions posing social risks: i) a restructuring of
 the public sector; ii) shifting authority to approve the annual budget of Public Bodies; iii)
 approving a wage/salary freeze for all public sector employees; and iv) tax reforms that include
 reducing exemptions and increase excise rates. All of the social risks of these actions identified by
 IEG were also identified by the Bank. The social risks range from downsizing the public sector and
 to imposition of consumption and fuel taxes. Mitigation measures were identified and include use
 of the country’s social protection system, including retraining and placement services and
 conditional cash transfers. The ICR refers to a PSIA that assessed impacts of increased taxes as
 well as privatization and provides updates on the effects of mitigation measures.


IEG identified few cases in its portfolio review where a Program Document discussed the
Borrowing government’s consultations with non-government stakeholders on environmental
and social risks or on relevant analytical work. Program Documents often discuss
consultations on the operation more generally with government, the International Monetary
Fund (IMF), and other development partners, and sometimes discuss consultations with other
stakeholders. But it is rare that they record consultations on environmental risks, though
consultations that included social risks were sometimes discussed.

 Box 2-6: Tonga Energy DPL
 A standalone energy sector DPL in Tonga is a case where the Bank did a good job of addressing a
 number of environmental aspects. The main action was to support development of an energy road
 map, which consisted of a set of policy measures and investments intended to address major energy
 sector weaknesses. Environmental sustainability was included as a core design principle of the
 operation, in its support for renewable energy development and energy efficiency. The Program
 Document noted the possibility that infrastructure development could lead to negative
 environmental effects if not well designed, and built a number of mitigation measures into the
 design of the operation. The operation was based on technical reports on grid energy supply
 options and the petroleum sector, each of which included specific analysis on potential
 environmental impacts. Renewable energy investments were all screened for environmental risks,
 and any options with significant environmental risks that could not be mitigated or avoided were
 discarded. The road map built in requirements for environmental impact assessment and mitigation
 plans for new energy investments, with the goal of making these routine requirements for other
 infrastructure sectors in Tonga. The operation also built in significant public consultation including
 on environmental aspects, and described these in the Program Document, noting the government’s
 intention to establish an ongoing program of public communication and consultation with citizens
 and public stakeholders. One reason for the prioritization of environmental aspects was that the
 TTL was an energy economist with prior experience in the environmental aspects of the energy
 sector.


DPF task teams often lack specialists with appropriate environmental and social technical
skills. IEG recorded whether or not a specialist (as defined by whether “Environment” or
“Social” was in their job title) was present for the operations where environmental and social
                                                         17


risks were identified. 8 The lack of appropriate technical skills to assess environmental and
social risks on DPO teams was a common concern cited in interviews with IEG.

Although various Bank documents discuss the importance of monitoring and evaluating of
environmental and social risks in DPF, 9 the Bank’s Implementation Completion and Results
Reports (ICRs) did not report on environmental aspects, and rarely reported on adverse social
effects, in the sample of DPFs reviewed by IEG. Any monitoring of environmental and social
risks that was undertaken by the task team was not formally documented. Implementation
and Supervision Reports (ISRs) focus on tracking achievement of intended goals rather than
assessing unintended side effects. Subsequent Program Documents for programmatic series
rarely report on monitoring of environmental and social effects, and often repeat verbatim the
text from the Program Document for the first operation in the series. In a few cases, risks
that were identified in an original Program Document did not appear in those for subsequent
operations in the series—even though the actions with risks identified in the first operation
had additional similar follow up actions. 10 The sections on social and poverty effects tend to
provide a general treatment of broader impacts that may not even be attributable to the
program. One case in which the ICR considered the social risks of the program was the ICR
for a Vietnam Higher Education DPF. This ICR provides an update on mitigation measures
that were called for in the Program Document and provides results attributable to those
measures. Two other ICRs addressed social risks, in Brazil and Jamaica.

IEG also did not assess environmental and social risks or their management in most of its
validations of ICRs in the sample. As part of its normal operations, IEG conducts a desk
review validation of all ICRs, called an ICR Review, but this system does not provide
meaningful coverage of environmental and social risks in DPOs. This is largely because
IEG’s ICR Review is a validation of the Bank’s ICR self-assessment, and this information
was not available in the ICR.




8
  The use of job title is a weak proxy, as environmental or social specialists may take on jobs with different
titles, and as a range of sectoral specialists may have environmental or social skillsets (e.g., energy specialists,
urban specialists, poverty specialists, social protection specialists, etc.). The team composition could not be
determined for the full sample, as titles and full team lists are usually present only in ICRs not in Program
Documents.
Also, team composition as listed in ICRs may be inaccurate. IEG has also identified two cases (one in this
sample, one external) where environmental specialists listed as team members in task teams reported that they
were unaware of the operation and had not been involved. But in other cases TTLs reported participation of or
consultations with environmental or social specialists who were not listed as team members in the respective
ICRs.
9
    See World Bank 2004a.
10
  For example, in a power sector series in Vietnam that supported electricity market development, the initial
Program Document noted analysis carried out showing that while the overall long term effects would be
positive for the environment, there would be some risk of fuel-switching from gas to coal in the short term.
Subsequent Program Documents did not mention this negative risk, and discussed only positive aspects.
                                                      18


 Box 2-7: How do IEG’s Findings Compare to Other Analyses?
 The World Bank has also carried out its own assessments of the potential for negative environmental and
 social effects from policies in its 2012 DPL Retrospective, and has presented preliminary findings from its
 2015 DPL Retrospective. The 2012 Retrospective identifies 8 percent of prior actions as having direct
 negative poverty and social consequences in the short term or on certain groups, and 0.3 percent of prior
 actions as having possible but not substantial negative environmental effects. The 2015 Retrospective
 preliminary findings identifies 4 percent of prior actions as having negative social effects in the short run,
 and 1 percent of prior actions as having negative environmental effects (along with 6 percent “can’t say” that
 might have positive or negative effects). In this review, IEG conducted an independent assessment of risk
 identification in DPOs over 2004-14 which identified a higher number of prior actions as having potential
 negative environmental and social effects. These results differ for a number of reasons based on the
 methodologies applied and the interpretation of policy requirements and guidance.
     •    The underlying prior actions are not the same. The World Bank Retrospectives cover the full
          portfolio of DPOs approved over FY08-11 and FY12-14, while IEG considers a sample of DPOs
          approved over FY05-14.
     •    According to the published methodology, the World Bank DPL Retrospectives consider indirect
          environmental effects but only direct social effects 11, while IEG considers both direct and indirect
          effects for both environmental and social effects so long as they are attributable to the policy
          change. For IEG this includes the effects from downstream investments, including investments by
          third parties, if those investments were attributable to the policy reform.
     •    According to the published methodology, World Bank DPL Retrospectives consider short-term
          effects 12, which according to interviews with Bank management is interpreted as meaning effects
          that will occur by the time of the closure of the operation (or completion of the Bank’s ICR). IEG
          also considers likely significant effects that may take longer to manifest.
     •    The quantitative analysis in the World Bank Retrospectives (except for environmental effects in the
          2015 preliminary results) concludes that the effects of a policy action are either positive or negative,
          and not both at once. IEG presumes that a policy may have overall positive effects but still have
          significant negative effects on some particular groups that should be identified and mitigated, and
          does not analyze whether or not positive effects may occur.
     •    With regard to social effects, the World Bank Retrospectives focus primarily on poverty or
          income/financial related effects, such as loss of access to benefits/subsidies, higher fees/taxes/tariffs,
          changes in employment policies, or job loss through redundancies. IEG also considers the
          possibility of other types of social effects such as displacement of people, loss of access to resources
          or services, or labor effects that may be attributable to policy reforms.
     •    The World Bank expert teams and IEG expert teams came to different judgments about what
          constituted a likely effect or a significant effect. IEG assessed the rate at which Bank task teams
          identified environmental or social risks as compared to IEG’s expert teams. The 2015 DPF
          Retrospective conducts a similar analysis for environmental effects, but for social effects it assesses
          only whether or not a PSIA was carried out. It is worth noting that the rate at which IEG recorded
          Bank task teams as identifying risks was significantly higher than the rate at which the
          Retrospective’s analysis identified task teams as identifying risks or carrying out a PSIA, and was
          also higher than the rate at which the Retrospective’s expert team identified risks or concluded that a
          PSIA should be conducted. This occurs in part because there is no “box to tick” that signifies that a
          task team has identified a likely significant negative effect, so experts can disagree on whether or
          not the task team identified a risk.




11
   The methodology for the Retrospective analysis made publicly available as part of the consultation process
on the report described the methodology as the “Methodology for analysis of short-term social and
                                                         19


3. What Explains the Risk Management Performance?
As the portfolio assessment described in Section 2 revealed, there is ample room for
strengthening the Bank’s application of the environmental and social risk identification and
management requirements of OP 8.60. OP 8.60 does not contain an elaborate set of formal
rules and procedures but rather is intended to enable greater application of judgment in
context, as is consistent with a risk-based management approach. Effectively implementing
such an approach, however, requires a strong support system to ensure that proper judgments
are made.

Bank policy and key concepts
Key concepts in the policy require further clarification. As presented in Section 1, the
descriptions of the environmental and social risk management requirements of OP 8.60 are
concise and at the level of general principles, and related requirements are presented in
various places in the OP. A key concept in OP 8.60 for determining whether additional due
diligence is required for a policy action is “likely significant effects.” But there is no formal
definition of this concept in the policy or in BP 8.60. The Environment Good Practice Note
from 2004, states in a footnote that “Significant effects are environmental changes of
sufficient magnitude, duration and intensity as to have non-negligible effects on human
welfare” (World Bank 2004). But “non-negligible” is not the same as “significant,” and does
not provide an operationally useful definition. Social guidance documents do not define
significant social or distributional effects. Similarly, there is no guidance on what effects
should be considered to be “likely.” This leads to a gap in clarity on determining when
downstream economic effects should be considered as consequences from upstream policy
interventions.

Lack of clarity on key concepts has led in some cases to practices that are not consistent with
policy and guidance. IEG’s review of documents and interviews with Bank staff has revealed
that “significant effects” are often interpreted to mean only those policy actions with “direct,
short-term effects” (see Box 2.7). This is not stated in the policy, and can lead task teams to
not consider many DPF-supported policies that may have important indirect environmental
or social effects, or those whose effects take some time to become fully apparent. Indeed, it is
inconsistent with the Bank’s guidance on these issues. The 2004 OPCS Policy Update states
that “the nature of poverty/social, environmental, and fiduciary aspects in policy-based
operations is typically related to policies and institutions, with effects that are not
geographically circumscribed, but are indirect, uncertain, lagging, and difficult to predict”
(World Bank 2004a). The OPCS Good Practice Note on Environmental and Natural
Resource Aspects of DPFs notes that "the effect of policy reforms on the environment is
often felt only indirectly (mostly through changing consumption and production patterns),"

distributional effects,” and noted that “Following the 2012 retrospective, it classified each prior action’s direct
and short-term distributional effects on the poor and vulnerable.” (World Bank 2015) In interviews, Bank
Management state that indirect and long-term effects were also considered for the 2015 Retrospective when
they carried out their review.
12
     See previous footnote.
                                            20


and the Bank's Environment Toolkit for DPLs is designed to facilitate "systematic analysis of
direct and indirect effects of development policy reforms" and presents tools for analyzing
indirect, as well as direct, effects.

Similarly, the OPCS Guidance Note on Using Poverty and Social Impact Analysis to Support
Development Policy Operations (2013) provides guidance that encourages analysis of longer-
term and indirect impacts. It notes that making distinctions between short-term and long-term
effects is important in devising mitigation strategies (para. 12) and provides guidance for
addressing indirect effects that cannot easily be measured (para. 23).

In considering the boundaries of which indirect or downstream effects should be considered,
a useful comparison could be drawn to World Bank support for technical assistance (TA).
Some activities supported by TA operations—such as development of a sector regulatory
framework or feasibility studies for proposed investments—are similar to actions supported
by DPF in the sample reviewed by IEG. It is highly unlikely that activities supported by a TA
operation would have direct environmental or social impacts. Yet TA loans are subject to the
same safeguard policies as World Bank IPF. The rationale is that activities supported by TA
operations could lead to investments or other actions that may entail environmental or social
risks, so it is important to consider the intended outcomes of the activities supported. For
example, a TA loan financing the preparation of a feasibility study for a hydroelectric dam
would likely be subject to OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessments, which would require
the terms of reference for the study to include the screening of environmental and social risks
of the future investment in line with World Bank Group operational policies (whether or not
the World Bank is planning to finance the investment). Though it would not be appropriate to
apply the current IPF safeguard policies to DPF, similar principles on determining the scope
of indirect impacts could be used.

There are issues with the sequencing of the requirements of the policy. According to OP 8.60
(paragraphs 9 and 10), the Bank is supposed to first determine if policies supported by a DPO
are likely to have significant social or environmental effects. If they do, the Bank is supposed
to next draw on and summarize in the Program Document relevant analytical work on the
effects and the member country’s systems for managing them. But it is unclear how one is
meant to make the determination of “likely significant effects” without first conducting or
drawing on relevant analytical work.

DPLs are also more than a collection of prior actions. As explained in Appendix A, they
support broader development objectives and a program of reforms that are intended to be
fulfilled through policy areas, which are a function of more than prior actions. OP 8.60
considers only environmental and social effects of specific policy actions.

Effects of procedures and practices
Since the approval of OP 8.60, there have not been standardized procedures across the Bank
for addressing the environmental and social requirements. Bank Procedures accompany
Operational Policies, and describe procedures for implementing the requirements of the OP.
However, the Bank Procedure 8.60 (BP 8.60) that accompanies OP 8.60 does not mention
environmental or social effects or their management. BP 8.60 does not specify the procedures
                                              21


to be followed by the Bank in order to determine likely significant effects, or how the Bank
will ensure that this is made in a consistent way. Previous versions of OP 8.60 referred in a
footnote to Good Practice Note No. 4 on Environmental and Natural Resource Aspects of
Development Policy Lending, which in turn indicated (also in a footnote) that “each region
will develop its own procedures to ensure that environment and natural resource aspects are
addressed adequately in accordance with OP 8.60.” Unlike the situation with respect to the
Bank’s IPF safeguard policies, no central mechanism to oversee and ensure consistent
application across Regions of OP 8.60’s provisions concerning its prescribed social and
environmental risk identification and management measures was established.

Practices within the Bank to ensure that environmental and social risks are adequately
managed have varied across regions and over time. The Latin America and Caribbean (LAC)
Region, at the direction of its Vice President, established in 2006-07 a formal review process
led by the Regional Safeguards Advisor (RSA) for all proposed new DPFs to help identify
environmental and social risks. Under this process the RSA provided advice and comments
on all DPOs, though unlike for IPF they had no formal clearance function, and there was no
requirement for task teams to implement their advice. In other Regions, review of such
potential impacts of DPFs was done inconsistently. . The systematic review of DPFs in LAC
was discontinued in July 2014 when the Bank was restructured and the former RSAs were
centralized into OPCS. The Africa Region reportedly puts application of OP 8.60
environmental and social risk requirements on the agenda for all Regional Operations
Committee (ROC) decision meetings for DPF at present, but this is not a Bank-wide
procedural requirement.

While the overall corporate review process for DPF requires a higher level of review than for
IPF (see Appendix A), current requirements and practices for the corporate review of
environmental and social risks in DPF do not ensure sufficient input from relevant experts.
According to interviews, at times in the past the former Bank Environment Department and
Social Development Department (or “anchors”) would provide corporate-level input for
review meetings on DPF operations. But the Environment Department stopped doing this
when it was dissolved in 2012 (though some functions were transferred to the SDN anchor),
and the Social Department’s role has been uncertain since the July 2014 Bank-wide
restructuring. According to OPCS, today the formal processes governing all stages of the
DPF operational lifecycle are described in the new “Development Policy Financing
Processing Instructions.” 13 The DPF Processing Instructions indicate that for Concept and
Decision Reviews, the Directors of all Global Practices should be copied, including the new
Environment and Natural Resources Global Practice (GP), which is responsible for
environment, and all of the GPs responsible for social issues and PSIA. But copying the GP
Directors is not the same as ensuring that adequate environmental and social input is
provided. The Processing Instructions note that “key advisors” for review meetings should
include relevant GPs/CCSAs as determined by the chair of the meeting. There is no explicit
reference to either environment or social input. By comparison, when OP 8.60 was approved
the Bank stated that all DPF operations would be reviewed by the Bank’s Environment and
Social Departments (World Bank 2004a).

13
     World Bank, November 2014.
                                                    22


Good practice examples often reflect initiatives on the part of individual Task Team Leaders
(TTLs). One factor appears to be the background and experience of the task team leader. In
IEG’s portfolio review, operations mapped to Energy, Agriculture, Transport, Water, Urban
and Environment sectors were more likely to identify the environmental risks noted by IEG
than were operations mapped to other sectors. Similarly, Program Documents for operations
mapped to economic management sectors were less likely to identify the social risks noted by
IEG than were operations mapped to other sectors. One possible explanation for this may be
that TTLs working on Energy, Agriculture, Transport, Water, Urban and the Environment are
often more familiar with environmental and social issues because they have more experience
addressing them in investment operations than do TTLs from economic or financial
management sectors.

Effects of guidance and training
Guidance materials vary in quality, usability, and relevance, and is non-mandatory. 14 Unlike
the case for IPF (including TA, as noted above), where environmental and social risks are
governed by a separate set of mandatory OPs and BPs, there is no equivalent for DPF. In
addition to the above mentioned Good Practice Note for Environmental and Natural
Resource Aspects of DPFs, a Toolkit entitled Assessing the Environmental, Forest and Other
Natural Resource Aspects of Development Policy Lending was published in 2008 to provide
more detailed guidance to Bank task teams. The 2004 Environment Good Practice Note
provides a good overview of the issues, although it focuses primarily on the potential for
generating positive environmental effects, and would benefit from an update to reflect
experience gained since then. The 2008 Environment Toolkit provides very practical and
fairly comprehensive guidance for Bank teams to determine the potential direct and indirect
environmental effects for a wide variety of types of policy reforms. The toolkit could also
benefit from an update to reflect actual experience with the use of Country Environmental
Analyses (CEAs), Strategic Environmental Assessments (SEAs), and other analytical tools,
and to better integrate climate change-related risks.

Guidance on the social side is more dispersed. The first Good Practice Note on the
preparation and use of a Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) was prepared in 2004.
This was updated in 2008 with a more ambitious note aimed at understanding the potential
distributional impacts of specific policy reforms on different social groups, especially the
poor. Its intention was to provide a platform for the identification and analysis of policy
alternatives and trade-offs as well as implementation risks. In contrast to the environmental
guidance, its primary focus was on the PSIA tool, rather than on the identification and
mitigation of social risks in DPF. A new Guidance Note on PSIA was produced in 2013. It is
more focused on identifying social risks in DPF, but at the same time broadened the
definition of PSIA to include almost any analytical work on social effects. According to
OPCS, the 2013 Guidance Note replaced the 2008 Good Practice Note, and after OP 8.60

14
  A footnote to OP 8.60 states: “For guidance to assist in the application of OP and BP 8.60…staff may refer to
the Guidance Note on Using Poverty and Social Impact Analysis to Support Development Policy Financing.”
The 2013 PSIA Guidance Note states: “This note is neither operational policy nor mandatory. For operational
policy and mandatory procedures please see OP8.60, BP8.60 and DPL processing Instructions” (World Bank
2013).
                                              23


was updated in July 2014, it referred only to the 2013 Guidance Note. But those working on
PSIA consider the Notes to be complementary, and still have the 2008 Good Practice Note
posted on the World Bank PSIA website. In addition to these notes, there are multiple PSIA
toolkits produced by different World Bank departments, including Social, Poverty, and the
Development Economics Department (DEC) (see Table 3.1). The large collection of social
guidance materials exists in part because the identification of poverty and social risks spans
several disciplinary boundaries. Unlike the user-friendly tables in the Environment Toolkit,
the social toolkits contain hundreds of pages of case studies of PSIAs. As the portfolio
review results in Section 2 demonstrate, more guidance does not necessarily lead to better
guidance: there were fewer cases where there were gaps in the environmental guidance than
the social guidance (see Tables 2-1, 2-3).

While there is a range of guidance on risk identification and assessment, there is little
guidance on how to conduct a meaningful and useful capacity assessment and gap analysis of
country risk management systems. Guidance notes and toolkits focus primarily on how to
identify risks, without providing support on what to do if a risk is identified. Country
Environment Assessments may describe the main features of environmental management in a
country, but these will not necessarily cover the risks associated with the specific policy
actions supported by a DPO. For social risks, the task can be complicated because unlike for
environmental risks with established counterpart environment departments, similar
poverty/social departments or line agency counterparts often do not exist except through the
creation of multi-disciplinary committees managed by some oversight ministry. The lack of
clarity and guidance on OP 8.60 requirements on consultations and participation of civil
society may contribute to the infrequent discussion of such consultations in Program
Documents. OP 8.60 (paragraph 5) generally indicates that consultations and participation
are the responsibility of the member country. But it also states that relevant analytical work
conducted by the Bank on environmental and social aspects should be made available to the
public as part of the consultation process. The Bank published separate guidance in 2004 on
participation in the DPL process (World Bank 2004c). That good practice note suggests that
task teams should involve civil society during preparation and discussion of analytic work on
environmental and social issues. However, the note is no longer available as part of the set of
good practice notes provided by OPCS on their website.
                                              24


Table 3-1: Guidance Available for Environment and Social Aspects of OP 8.60
  Type of Guidance             Environment                                 Social
OP                         OP 8.60, paragraph 10                    OP 8.60, paragraph 9
BP                        No reference in BP 8.60                 No reference in BP 8.60
Guidance/Good            Good Practice Note 4 –        Good Practice Note: Using Poverty and Social
Practice Notes          Environmental and Natural     Impact Analysis to Support Development Policy
                          Resource Aspects of                       Operations (2008)
                       Development Policy Lending
                                (2005)                Guidance Note: Using Poverty and Social Impact
                                                         Analysis to Support Development Policy
                                                                    Operations (2013)
Toolkits                Assessing the Environment,     A User’s Guide to Poverty and Social Impact
                         Forest, and Other Natural                  Analysis (2003)
                           Resource Aspects of
                       Development Policy Lending –    The Impact of Economic Policy on Poverty and
                       A World Bank Toolkit (2008)    Income Distribution: Evaluation Techniques and
                                                                       Tools (2003)

                                                        Tools for Institutional, Political and Social
                                                       Analysis of Policy Reform: A Sourcebook for
                                                        Development Practitioners (TIPS) (2005)

                                                      Analyzing the Distributional Impact of Reforms,
                                                                Vol I (2005), Vol II (2006)

                                                         Stakeholders, power relations, and policy
                                                       dialogue : social analysis in agriculture sector
                                                         poverty and social impact analysis (2006)

                                                      Poverty and Social Impact Analysis of Reforms:
                                                       Lessons and Examples from Implementation

                                                       Poverty and Social Impact Analysis – Linking
                                                       Macroeconomic Policies to Poverty Outcomes:
                                                              Summary of Early Experiences

                                                          Toolkit for Evaluating the Poverty and
                                                        Distributional Impact of Economic Policies


Training is available to task teams, but it its effectiveness is unclear. Participation in such
training is voluntary and the number of TTLs of DPFs who have taken such training and how
it has been applied in actual operations is not tracked. On the environment side, the training
course utilizes the Toolkit mentioned above. It identifies as among the elements of good
practice the need to select and use a sound body of analytical work to guide design, to assess
the Borrower’s systems for reducing adverse effects, and to involve environmental and
natural resource specialists who are familiar with the Borrower’s capacity and safeguards.

The use of analytical tools has been uneven, with many operations with environmental or
social risks lacking sufficient analytic work on these risks. When OP 8.60 was approved, the
                                                 25


Bank committed to increasing the quantity and quality of its environmental analytical work—
specifically CEA and SEA (World Bank 2004a). In some operations CEA is mentioned in
Program Documents, but often it is not specifically relevant to the environmental risks of
individual prior actions, though it can help to inform an assessment of the country’s capacity
to manage risks. SEAs of relevant sectors would be a useful input to DPFs with
environmental risks, but these are rarely carried out and it is not known how many of those
that were implemented were associated with specific DPFs. The number of SEAs and CEAs
produced has declined in recent years (see Figure 3.1). One reason for this is that there is
currently no trust fund for CEAs or SEAs; the previous Country Environmental Analysis
trust fund closed in FY12. The use of PSIA has been much more common, supported by a
Multi-Donor Trust Fund that has resulted in the production of a total of more than 100 PSIAs
across the World Bank. 15 PSIAs are used not only for assessing potential adverse
consequences, but also for assessing the positive poverty, social and distributional impacts of
reforms to maximize their benefits on the poor and the vulnerable; analysis of potential social
effects may also be conducted through reports not formally labeled as PSIA. However,
production of PSIAs declined in 2014, and with the MDTF scheduled to close in a year, their
future is uncertain. The original intention for CEAs, SEAs, and PSIAs was that trust fund
resources would be a temporary measure used to demonstrate the value of these analytic
tools, and that these tools would then be mainstreamed and funded by regular Bank budget,
but the extent to which this is occurring is not clear.

Figure 3-1: Environmental and Social Analytic Work Produced by the Bank Over Time
(number of reports)




Note: Data on PSIA from E-resource center. Data on CEA from World Bank Imagebank. Data on SEA from
World Bank 2011. Reliable data is unavailable for SEA after 2012.




15
  These data reflect the total numbers of analytical products carried out by the Bank since 2004 and
are not limited to the sample of operations used for the portfolio analysis described in Section 2.
                                            26


Effects of incentives and monitoring and evaluation
The incentives faced by task teams place a premium on preparing operations rapidly,
sometimes at the cost of careful treatment of environmental and social issues. Lending and
disbursement targets shape decisions and prioritization made during preparation (IEG 2014).
As explained in Section 1, DPF operations are often prepared quite quickly, in a matter of
months. Based on interviews carried out by IEG, task team preparation budgets are limited,
and pressure from management to deliver operations quickly is intense. For example, at the
point of ROC or Corporate Review of a DPF, there is an expectation that the Program
Document will be finalized and submitted to the World Bank’s Board for approval within a
matter of weeks. It is therefore often too late to carry out additional environmental or social
analytical work or capacity assessment at this stage, or to encourage the Borrower to adopt
mitigation measures. In interviews, environmental and social specialists also reported that
when they are included in DPF teams, it is often at a stage in the process too late to
meaningfully influence the design of the operation.

The lack of a formal role for environmental or social experts, and the absence of an effective
post-approval monitoring system, are likely contributing to TTLs and approving managers
not prioritizing due diligence in these areas. Environmental and social experts interviewed by
IEG report that their advice on potential risks is frequently not heeded by Bank Management
or TTLs, and that they have no leverage to ensure that relevant risks are noted. At the same
time, some TTLs report that environmental and social specialists do not always show up to
review meetings when invited or provide comments in a timely fashion. These TTLs are
concerned that formal roles for environmental and social experts would slow DPO
preparation. They also note that some specialists with expertise in IPF safeguards are not
necessarily the best candidates to offer advice on the effects of policy actions. Some DPO
TTLs are also unfamiliar with the environmental and social requirements of OP 8.60; others
see the requirements as a compliance burden that is ancillary to the goals of the DPO. This is
particularly true when DPFs are used in response to exogenous shocks when resources are
needed urgently to provide short-term relief to the Borrower—such as during the 2008-2009
global financial crisis.

The quality of environmental and social specialist input also depends on the skillset of
specialists providing advice. DPF is policy-oriented and has results chains and effects that are
quite different from IPF. Traditional safeguards specialists, whose focus is on the direct
effects of physical investments financed under IPF, do not necessarily have the right
expertise to conduct an assessment of the effects of policy reforms. Reviewers may provide
better advice if they also have backgrounds in environmental economics, macroeconomics,
poverty analytics, or similar fields.

The World Bank approach to environmental and social risk management in DPF that focuses
exclusively on the effects of policies rather than on the impacts of financing can be
undermined if DPF funds are used in a manner other than general budget support. As
mentioned in Section 1, the logic for this is that funds are not intended to finance specific
investments and so have no delineated “footprint” on which to apply environmental or social
safeguards. But if DPF funds are used to finance specific investments then this could lead to
environmental and social risks that are not fully addressed by the requirements of OP 8.60,
                                                27


and to reputational risks for the Bank. IEG has identified four cases through recent DPL
project evaluations and desk reviews where World Bank funds were earmarked by the
Borrower for specific investments. Appendix D provides more details on these three cases.
The cases are drawn from a small sample of recent cases (not from the larger sample used for
the portfolio review conducted for this Learning Product), so IEG cannot determine how
common this practice is in the wider portfolio. 16 World Bank non-mandatory guidance
indicates that funds should not be used to finance specific investments: the DPF Financial
Management Good Practice Note (2010) states that “once [DPF] funds enter the country’s
foreign exchange reserves and the budget, they are commingled with the government’s other
funds….DPL funds are also therefore not earmarked for specific line items in the budget”
(para. 12). However, there is nothing in OP 8.60 that explicitly prohibits such earmarking.

There is no system to determine whether possible negative environmental or social effects of
DPFs actually occurred after a policy action has been implemented, whether capacity to
manage risks was sufficient, or whether proposed mitigation actions were implemented.
When OP 8.60 was approved, the Bank stated that monitoring of DPO progress and
effectiveness “will be expected to give explicit attention to poverty/social, environmental,
and fiduciary aspects,” and this was also emphasized in the specific environmental and social
guidance (World Bank 2004b; World Bank 2008; World Bank 2013). 17 However, OP 8.60
focuses on the ex ante identification and mitigation of environmental and social risks, and
does not explicitly address their ex post monitoring or evaluation. Although both the
Environment Toolkit and the 2008 PSIA Good Practice Note emphasize the importance of
monitoring and evaluating actual impacts, neither the OPCS ICR Guidelines nor IEG’s
Handbook for ICR Reviews require reporting on environmental and social risks or their
mitigation in DPF. Similarly, the ICR and ICR Review templates for DPFs do not include
sections for reporting on potential adverse environmental or social effects analogous to the
Safeguards section used for environmental aspects in investment lending. There is a section
on Poverty Impacts, Gender Aspects and Social Development, where a discussion of social
risks and their mitigation might appear, but it usually focuses on the positive outcomes
supported by the operation. The 2013 OPCS PSIA Guidance Note places less emphasis on
monitoring and evaluation of social effects. It mentions them only in the context of “country
based monitoring and evaluation systems,” with no reference to the Bank’s responsibilities.
The absence of an effective monitoring system contributes to TTLs and approving managers
not prioritizing due diligence on environmental and social risks.

IEG’s validation of ICRs—the ICR Review—does not provide an effective check or review
of the system. This occurs because ICR Reviews of DPFs are not normally carried out by an
environmental or social specialist having the expertise needed to critically assess risks,
because it is fundamentally a validation of the ICR and not an independent project
evaluation, and because the ICR Review guidance and training does not make clear to

16
  Typically any earmarking is not described in the principle program documents and so may only be
observed in project evaluations with field visits and not in desk reviews.
17
  In the case of single-tranche, non-programmatic DPF operations, there is no period of
implementation or supervision after Board approval during which environmental and social risks
could be addressed or even monitored.
                                               28


evaluators the environmental and social requirements of OP 8.60. The ICR Review template
for DPF does not include an environmental and social risks section, analogous to the
Safeguards section for IPF ICR Reviews. IEG is in the process of addressing this, however if
the Bank does not make parallel changes to its ICR template and guidance, there will be little
for IEG to validate.

A robust grievance redress mechanism is an important part of any environmental and social
risk management system, and the current World Bank grievance redress mechanism may not
provide adequate opportunity for affected parties to register complaints with respect to DPF.
The World Bank Inspection Panel has jurisdiction over DPF, as well as IPF and other World
Bank instruments. But in the context of IPF, the Bank is required to prepare an Integrated
Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) at the time of Concept Review for an operation, and to
publicly disclose the ISDS once the Concept Note is approved. There is no analogous
requirement for environmental and social management in DPF. Therefore, potentially
affected civil society members in a DPF borrowing country would have little opportunity to
learn of the specific policies supported and their likely effects until the Program Document is
approved by the World Bank’s Board, because it is not made public until after Board
approval. As noted by World Bank Management, “most DPF implementation happens before
Board presentation.” Therefore, by the time the Program Document is made public, it would
be too late for affected parties to influence DPF implementation or understand its potential
impacts on them. The Inspection Panel is only able to consider requests filed before an
operation is closed and has not disbursed more than 95 percent of the loan. 18 That would
normally provide a much narrower window within which to file a request than in the case of
IPF, which typically provides a window of several years. There has only been one case of a
DPF operation being investigated by the Inspection Panel since OP 8.60 was approved in
2004, and that was in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC). In that case, the
meaningful window for accountability was 20 days (Inspection Panel 2013). The Inspection
Panel report from that investigation states: “the Panel finds that the system for determining
whether there will be significant effects on the environment and natural resources is flawed.
Little time is available for the initial assessment, and it would be difficult to reverse an initial
assessment that there are no significant effects” (Inspection Panel 2007). In cases related to
other DPOs, potential requestors have contacted the Inspection Panel, only to be told that the
window had already closed. The narrow window for the Bank Inspection Panel to look into
complaints by communities in the case of DPF is a concern that has been raised by civil
society organizations (see for example Bank Information Center and Global Witness, 2013).




18
   See Inspection Panel:
http://ewebapps.worldbank.org/apps/ip/Documents/Guidelines_How%20to%20File_for_web.pdf
                                               29


4. Strengthening the Bank’s Approach to Environmental
and Social Risk Management in DPF
There is ample scope for the Bank to strengthen its approach to environmental and social risk
management in DPF and attain the goals it aspired to when OP 8.60 was approved. Those
goals included establishing clear and unambiguous standards for DPF that are on a par with
those for IPF, but more appropriate for the type of instrument; taking a systematic approach;
underpinning program design with rigorous analytics; and aiming beyond the confines of an
operation to improve capacity for environment and social risk management at the country
level. But as discussed in Section 3, the current environmental and social risk management
system for Bank DPF is characterized by shortcomings in multiple areas. The policy,
procedures, guidance, and practices are characterized by a number of gaps and
inconsistencies, vaguely defined concepts, a lack of accountability, and misaligned
incentives. Strengthening environmental and social risk management in DPF would require
bringing together the disparate elements that currently govern environmental and social risk
management into a robust, well-coordinated system, and addressing gaps and shortcomings
in all aspects of the system. This would best be accomplished while preserving an adequate
level of flexibility for the instrument, and without placing an undue burden on client
governments. The following are lessons that could contribute to achieving these goals.

BP 8.60 could be revised to specify Bank procedures for management of environmental and
social risks in DPOs. The goal would be to ensure that the provisions of OP 8.60 with respect
to likely significant direct and indirect effects of a DPO in social or poverty terms, or in
relation to the environment, forests and other natural resources, are adequately applied for the
identification and proper management of any such impacts in all DPF operations. Procedures
could include requirements for the Task Team to obtain substantive input from qualified
social and environmental specialists, and for informed deliberations at both the concept and
final decisions stages for these operations. A central mechanism could also be established to
oversee and ensure consistency across Regions in the application of the social and
environmental provisions of OP 8.60. Specific referral to the Good Practice Note on
Environmental and Natural Resource Aspects of Development Policy Financing and the
Environmental Toolkit, as well as the PSIA Guidance Note, could also be included in BP
8.60.

Environmental and social screening could be brought into DPLs from the concept note stage.
DPO design is heavily frontloaded. By the time of approval and ROC meetings, the operation
has already been designed and the prior actions carried out; it is generally too late to add
substantive environmental and social analysis or mitigation measures. In some cases (for
example, an energy-environment DPL series in Turkey) the analytical work assessing policy
effects was completed part way through the series, after actions with social risks had already
been carried out. These and other processing roles for ensuring environmental and social due
diligence could be included in the Development Policy Financing Processing Instructions to
help ensure that they are regularly applied.

It frequently is difficult to determine whether potential issues have been identified and, if so,
how or whether they have been assessed. Many program documents simply assert that
                                            30


environmental and social effects are expected to be beneficial, and that no potentially
significant adverse effects are likely. No basis for that assertion is provided. To strengthen
risk management and program accountability, program documentation could provide a basis
for judgments made. Specifically, OPCS could add a template for all DPO program
documents, indicating potential environmental and social risks or impacts that have been
identified, whether or how they have been assessed in the course of program preparation, and
a summary of the decision reached regarding the need for mitigation measures as a result. A
screening approach such as the one used for this review, as described in Appendix B, could
form a useful framework for capacity building. A similar template could be considered to
document agreed measures to address any significant environmental or social risks or
impacts. The quality of the descriptions of policy actions in Program Documents could also
be improved to ensure that readers—including potentially affected populations—can better
determine the likely effects of policies supported.

Guidance provided to Task Teams and social and environmental specialists could be revised
and updated. Good Practice Note 4 – Environmental and Natural Resource Aspects of
Development Policy Lending – of 2004 is out of date. Similarly the Environment Toolkit
presently titled could be updated to reflect Bank experience over the past decade with the use
of Country Environmental Analyses (CEAs) and Strategic Environmental Assessments
(SEAs), and provide advice on upstream analytical tools in connection with DPF.
Operational definitions of key concepts such as “likely significant effects” could be provided,
as well as clearer guidance on identifying and managing indirect and long-term effects, and
on determining reasonable boundaries for responsibilities in this regard. The toolkits could
also include additional types of risky policy reforms such as those identified in IEG’s
portfolio review, and give greater attention to possible significant development policy
impacts in relation to climate change. Guidance could also be broadened to promote the
strengthening of country systems and capacity for managing environmental and social risks,
as envisaged when OP 8.60 was approved. A set of overarching principles for the
environmental and social risk analysis, to be applied upfront, including the analysis of direct
and indirect impacts, might be helpful for staff.

On the social side, the guidance could be consolidated and made more user-friendly and
practical. The voluminous current guidance materials reflect the complexities often
embedded in social issues but do not lend themselves to clear and simple means to decide
upon a course of action for a particular program. Though this guidance has reference value, it
provides limited utility for program screening. The many PSIA guidance notes, good practice
notes, and toolkits could be consolidated into one Guidance Note and one Toolkit that
provides accessible advice on how to identify and manage social risks, along the lines of the
Environment Toolkit. The various Bank units involved in PSIA could work together on these
documents to ensure coordination.

More broadly, the Bank could provide better guidance on determining the boundaries of the
Bank’s role for environmental and social issues within the broader program of reform
supported by DPF. Many DPOs support upstream policy reforms with downstream effects,
but there is little guidance on how far downstream the Bank’s responsibility lies. Indirect,
medium- and long-term effects can clearly have significant environmental and social effects,
and these should also be considered as long as they are attributable to the policy actions
                                               31


supported by an operation. At the same time, it is important to recognize that not all indirect
effects of a reform will be “likely significant.” Some potential downstream effects may be
too remote from the policy action to be reasonably attributable. If the Bank’s analysis
determines that adverse effects will not be significant or that existing country systems are
sufficient for managing risks, then task teams can state this in the Program Document and no
further actions are needed. This kind of due diligence would fulfill the Bank’s goals of using
DPLs to engage with country systems to manage likely effects of policy reforms.

The stated objectives of policy areas, and their indicators, can serve as a useful guide when
considering the likely effects of a policy. If particular outcomes are seen as attributable to
the DPO when considering the impact of the operation, any negative effects of those
outcomes could also be seen as attributable. It would be helpful for Bank teams to be
encouraged to conduct or draw on relevant analytical work for prior actions that have been
identified as potentially risky in guidance, before deciding whether “likely significant
effects” exist in the context of a particular operation. While the Bank cannot and should not
be expected to conduct environmental or social due diligence on entire government
programs, it could conduct analytic work, risk assessment, and mitigation measures on the
clearly foreseeable effects of the policy that were the motivation for selecting the prior
action. For example, if a prior action is to approve a policy that is aimed at increasing
infrastructure investment in particular subsectors, the Bank could assess the environmental
management capacity for those subsectors.

Once an environmentally or socially risky policy action is identified, there is a need for
guidance on how to implement the subsequent requirements of OP 8.60. Guidance on how to
conduct a meaningful and useful capacity assessment and gap analysis of country risk
management systems would be helpful to task teams, as would advice on good practice in
carrying out civil society consultations, include clearly delimiting the responsibilities of the
member country and the Bank with regard to environmental and social risks and analytical
work.

As the guidance is improved, it could be shared with the main players through training. This
could begin with a careful assessment of current training approaches to ensure adequate and
effective coverage of the social and environmental risk identification and management
requirements of OP 8.60 and the associated procedures to be added to BP 8.60, as well as the
guidance materials. The training could distinguish between three different audiences: in-
depth technical training for environmental and social specialists; more general training on
these aspects for task team leaders; and a discussion or training with management to ensure
that the right decisions are taken, and different considerations within DPF designs be
weighted in an informed manner. The training could be enhanced by working through case
study examples of actual analytical tools (e.g., PSIAs, CEAs, SEAs, etc.) employed in
connection with previous DPOs.

Incentives could be improved to encourage Task Team Leaders, Country Directors, and other
Bank staff to better balance management of environmental and social risks in DPF with the
demands of responsive delivery. Administrative changes on guidance and systems may not
be enough to change behavior; the Bank could consider other steps to ensure that
environmental and social specialist knowledge is utilized for every DPF—at a minimum for
                                                      32


the initial screening of the operation for environmental and social risks—and that all
significant risks including indirect and downstream negative effects are identified and
followed up. A change in culture may also be required; managers could model behavior by
demonstrating in review processes—starting from the Concept stage—that they see
environmental and social risk management as a priority. There is a clear need for leadership
from OPCS on these issues, but it would be important to work closely with relevant GP
management as well. A simple measure that could contribute to increased accountability
would be to require DPF Program Documents to list all team members that contributed to
preparation of the operation, along with their titles (as is done for IPF in Project Appraisal
Documents).

The Bank could also work to ensure that there are adequate resources available to conduct
analytical work and to incorporate environmental and social specialists into task teams when
needed. This could include reestablishing or continuing trust funds or more sustainable
sources of support for PSIAs, CEAs, and SEAs. Bank Management could also establish
budgets for environmental and social specialist inputs “off the top,” apart from task budgets,
as interviewees report is the current practice for covering the cost of safeguard specialist
input in IPF.

Clearer guidance could be provided on supervision, monitoring and evaluation of specifically
environmental and social risks in DPFs. A section could be included in the ISR and ICR
templates for DPF, as well as in IEG’s ICR Review template. Instructions could be added to
the harmonized ICR Guidelines and IEG’s ICR Review Manual on how to assess
environmental and social issues. 19 Including environmental and social effects in the Bank’s
monitoring and evaluation of DPF would also increase the incentives for TTLs and
approving managers to prioritize due diligence in these areas. For FY15, OPCS extended the
deadline for submission of ICRs for DPF from six months to one year, which could provide
more opportunities to assess the longer-term effects of policies.

The Bank could strengthen requirements to avoid the possible undermining of the OP 8.60
approach to environmental and social risk management through the actual or apparent
earmarking of DPF proceeds by Borrowers. This could be achieved by including a specific
prohibition in policy, as well as the inclusion of standard language in Legal Agreements for
operations. At the same time, given the fungibility of DPF resources, Bank efforts could be
broadened beyond individual DPOs to improving country systems for managing
environmental and social risks more broadly, as was intended when OP 8.60 was approved
(World Bank 2004a).

The window for requesting an Inspection of an operation from the World Bank Inspection
Panel could be extended beyond the closing date in the case of DPF—as it was for
submission of ICRs—to allow for a more realistic timeframe for affected people to have their
concerns addressed, including regarding potential adverse environmental and social effects.
Other International Financial Institutions (IFIs) allow up to two years after an operation


19
     IEG has a safeguards working group and a DPF working group that are currently looking into this question.
                                                  33


closes for complaints to be filed. 20 That would increase the credibility of the mechanism and
allay some of the concerns of civil society organizations about the instrument. The timeline
between disclosure of sufficiently detailed DPO documentation (including at least the
proposed policy matrix) and disbursement could also be extended. 21

The inclusion of environmental and social themes and risks in the World Bank’s new country
engagement model and risk management tool is a positive step (see Appendix F). The
country engagement model is based on a Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) designed to
feed into the Country Partnership Framework (CPF). The SCD will include analysis of
environmental and social sustainability as a key function, and will recommend an action plan
for knowledge gaps to be filled as part of the CPF. This process could be used to carry out or
encourage upstream analytical work on a country’s environmental and social capacity, policy
opportunities and challenges, and risks, and also to help improve country systems. Greater
support for upstream country-level analytical work on capacity for managing environmental
and social risks outside the boundary of any specific operation could help to provide a pre-
existing knowledge base that could then be drawn upon when rapid preparation is needed for
a DPF.

The Systematic Operations Risk Rating Tool (SORT) is a new tool for managing risks in
operations and strategies. Every operation will assign a risk rating for each of 8 risk types
including environmental and social risks, and these risks will be tracked and reported over
time (see Appendix F). SORT by itself does not change the process used for identifying risks,
but the tool could offer a useful way of directing management attention and resources to
operations that need them most if the higher risk ratings are used in practice. It is still too
early to determine how effective these new tools will be, but encouragement from Bank
management—by providing adequate resources, time, and attention to environmental and
social aspects—could increase their benefits for these purposes. In this context, it would be
helpful for the Bank to consider its risk appetite. A proper balance is required so that Bank
teams do not avoid supporting policy reforms with the potential for important poverty
reduction, equity, or sustainability benefits because there may be risks involved—as long as
those risks are adequately understood and mitigated.




20
 See for example the Asian Development Bank: http://www.adb.org/site/accountability-
mechanism/problem-solving-function/filing-a-complaint
21
  The restriction that the Inspection Panel cannot conduct investigations beyond the closing date of
an operation is enshrined in the Board resolution that established the Panel, so changing this is
beyond the power of Bank Management and would require a Board resolution.
                                                   35


References22
Bank Information Center and Global Witness. 2013. “World Bank Safeguards & Development Policy
        Lending: A Primer on Why DPLs Should be Part of the Safeguard Review.”
IEG. 2010. “Poverty Reduction Support Credits: An Evaluation of World Bank Support.” Washington, DC:
        World Bank.
_____. 2014a. “Learning and Results in World Bank Operations: Evaluation I.” Washington, DC: World
        Bank.
_____. 2014b. “Project Performance Assessment Report for the Ghana First, Second and Third Natural
        Resource and Environmental Governance Development Policy Operations.” Washington, DC:
        World Bank.
        https://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/Ghana_NRM_PPAR_889590PPAR0P1000Box38528
        5B00PUBLIC0_0.pdf
_____. 2015a. “Project Performance Assessment Report - Brazil: First Programmatic Development Policy
        Loan for Sustainable Environmental Management.” Washington, DC: World Bank. Available at:
        https://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/brazil-sem-dpl-ppar.pdf
_____. 2015b. “Project Performance Assessment Report Vietnam Poverty Reduction Support Credits 6-10,
        Program 135 Phase 2 Support Credits, Public Investment Reform 1-2.” Washington, DC: World
        Bank.
Inspection Panel. 2007. “Investigation Report DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO: Transitional
         Support for Economic Recovery Grant (TSERO) (IDA Grant No. H 1920-DRC) and Emergency
         Economic and Social Reunification Support Project (EESRSP) (Credit No. 3824-DRC and Grant
         No. H 064-DRC).” Available at:
         http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTINSPECTIONPANEL/Resources/FINALINVREPwhole.p
         df
_____. 2013. “Citizen-Driven Accountability: The Inspection Panel and Development Policy Operations.”
        Presentation by Serge Selwan, the Inspection Panel.
World Bank. 2001. “Adjustment Lending Retrospective – Final Report.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2003a. “A User’s Guide to Poverty and Social Impact Analysis.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2003b. “The Impact of Economic Policy on Poverty and Income Distribution: Evaluation
        Techniques and Tools.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2004-14a. “BP 8.60 – Development Policy Lending,” in World Bank Operational Manual.
        Washington, DC.
_____. 2004-14b. “OP 8.60 – Development Policy Lending,” in World Bank Operational Manual.
        Washington, DC.
_____. 2004c. “From Adjustment Lending to Development Policy Lending: Update of World Bank
        Policy.” Washington, DC.Available at:
        http://imagebank.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2005/03/31/000090341_20
        050331152108/Rendered/PDF/318130PAPER0OP1r0official0use0only1.pdf
_____. 2004d. “Good Practice Note 4 – Environmental and Natural Resource Aspects of Development
        Policy Lending.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2004e. “Good Practice Note 5: Supporting Participation in Development Policy Lending.”
        Washington, DC.



22
  These references are in addition to the many documents review by IEG for the operations in the portfolio
review sample.
                                                    36

_____. 2005a. “Analyzing the Distributional Impact of Reforms Volume I: A practitioner’s guide to trade,
        monetary and exchange rate policy, utility provision, agricultural markets, land policy, and
        education.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2005b. “Tools for Institutional, Political and Social Analysis of Policy Reform: A Sourcebook for
        Development Practitioners (TIPS).” Washington, DC.
_____. 2006a. “Analyzing the Distributional Impact of Reforms Volume II: A practitioner’s guide to
        pension, health, labor markets, public sector downsizing, taxation, decentralization, and
        macroeconomic modeling.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2006b. “Poverty and Social Impact Analysis of Reforms: Lessons and Examples from
        Implementation.”
_____. 2006c. “Stakeholders, power relations, and policy dialogue: social analysis in agriculture sector
        poverty and social impact analysis.”
_____. 2008a. “Assessing the Environment, Forest, and Other Natural Resource Aspects of Development
        Policy Lending – A World Bank Toolkit.”
_____. 2008b. “Environment and Natural Resource Aspects of Development Policy Lending,” training
        module. Washington, DC.
_____. 2008c. “Good Practice Note: Using Poverty and Social Impact Analysis to Support Development
        Policy Operations.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2010. “Good Practice Note Addressing Financial Management Issues in Development Policy
        Lending.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2011. "Strategic Environmental Assessment in Policy and Sector Reform: Conceptual Model and
        Operational Guidance.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2012. “2012 Development Policy Lending Retrospective: Results, Risks and Reforms.”
        Washington, DC.
_____. 2013. “Guidance Note: Using Poverty and Social Impact Analysis To Support Development Policy
        Operations.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2014a. “Interim Guidance Note: Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT).” Washington,
        DC.
_____. 2014b. “Development Policy Financing Processing Instructions.” Washington, DC.
_____. 2014c. “Interim Guidelines for Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD).”
_____. 2015. “Consultation template: 2015 Development Policy Financing Retrospective: Methodology for
        analysis of short-term social and distributional effects.” Washington, DC.
World Bank Group. 2014. “World Bank Group Directive: Country Engagement.” Washington, DC.
                                           37                                APPENDIX A


Appendix A. Some Differences between DPF and IPF
World Bank Development Policy Financing (DPF) differs markedly from Investment Project
Financing (IPF). The two instruments diverge in terms of what is supported by the loan, how
development impact is intended to be achieved, the mechanism for disbursement of funds,
and many of the specific requirements that govern the design and implementation of
operations. For example, a World Bank-financed agricultural IPF might reimburse a
borrower for eligible expenditures related to construction of a new irrigation system,
equipment and training for research and extension services, and fertilizer for farmers. DPF
operations are designed to achieve development goals through the positive effects of policy
reforms. An agricultural DPF might disburse funds to a borrower that had implemented a
program of policy reforms such as removing tariffs on the export of crops or the import of
farm equipment, or increased budget allocations to public agricultural research and extension
services.

DPF and IPF differ in other ways as well. While investment loans are typically implemented
over a period of five years or more, individual DPFs occur over a much shorter time period;
single-loan DPFs typically go to the Board, become effective, disburse, and close in a matter
of months. However, DPFs are often combined into programmatic series that can span
several years.

DPF is governed by a Bank Operational Policy (OP 8.60) that describes it as “rapidly
disbursing policy-based financing, which the Bank provides in the form of loans or grants to
help a borrower address actual or anticipated development financing requirements that have
domestic or external origins.” According to OP 8.60, DPFs are designed to support programs
of "policy and institutional actions that promote growth and sustainable poverty reduction.”
Most DPFs are designed to help alleviate poverty or have other positive social impacts
through macroeconomic or sectoral policy reforms, and some are designed to have positive
environmental effects by strengthening environmental policies or by improving incentives in
environmentally sensitive sectors.

The Bank introduced the current approach to Development Policy Financing in 2004, when
OP 8.60 replaced existing adjustment lending instruments. According to OP 8.60, DPF
operations are structured around a set of agreed actions determined to be “critical for the
implementation and expected results of the program supported” by the Bank (para. 12).
These include “prior actions” that are to be implemented by the borrower before the
operation is submitted to the Bank’s Board for approval, along with “triggers” for future
policy actions when the loan is programmatic (or occasionally, in tranches). The actions are
all summarized in a Policy Matrix, which is organized into policy areas. While disbursement
is based on the prior actions, Development Policy Operations (DPOs) are designed to support
broader objectives and a program of reform agreed with the member country. According to
World Bank guidance, there is not supposed to be a direct relationship between the
implementation of the policy actions supported by the loan and the use of the funds. Indeed,
while investment operations finance specific investments and activities, under development
policy financing (or DPF) “the Bank normally disburses the proceeds of the Bank Loan into
APPENDIX A                                    38


an account that forms part of the country’s official foreign exchange reserves” (OP 8.60,
para. 18).

World Bank processing of DPF operations differs from that of IPF operations. For the
Decision Review, the DPF Processing Instructions state that all DPF operations have either a
Regional Operations Committee meeting chaired by the relevant Regional Vice President or,
for certain types of operations (for example, high risk), a Bank Operations Committee
meeting chaired by a Managing Director (World Bank 2014b). For IPF operations, the
Decision Review is normally chaired by the relevant Country Director, which is a lower level
of decision-making (although in exceptional cases, the Decision Review for IPF can also be
chaired by the Regional Vice President or even the Managing Director).

The DPF instrument has been used in different ways by the Bank. Many DPFs support
economy-wide reforms, with the theme of Public Sector Governance being the most common
for prior actions, followed by Financial and Private Sector Development (World Bank 2012).
Though less common, in other cases, DPFs support policy reforms on specific themes, such
as Human Development, Energy Sector Development, or Environment and Natural
Resources Management. Although the amounts transferred through DPF have fluctuated
substantially over time—peaking at times of international financial distress—development
policy lending commitments generally account for about one third of the World Bank’s
overall lending portfolio.

There is also a requirement for the Bank to identify and manage operational risks in OP 8.60.
The latest version of OP 8.60 (revised in July 2014) does not refer to specific types of risks.
However, the Bank recently introduced the Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool (SORT),
which applies equally to DPF and IPF operations, and includes “environment and social” as
one of nine risk categories. See Appendix F for more on recent developments.

Both OP 8.60 and BP 8.60 discuss requirements for monitoring and evaluation of DPFs. OP
8.60 states that “The Member Country monitors progress…and evaluates results…. The
Bank assesses and monitors the adequacy of the arrangements by which the Member Country
will carry out these responsibilities” and “reviews implementation progress during
supervision” (paragraph 16 in the July 2014 version). Neither OP 8.60 nor BP 8.60 mention
monitoring and evaluation of environmental and social effects explicitly, though BP 8.60, in
the Supervision, Monitoring & Evaluation paragraph, refers to the need to “identify the key
risks to program sustainability and recommend appropriate risk management strategies and
actions to the Member Country” (paragraph 22 in the July 2014 version). An OPCS overview
of the transition From Adjustment Lending to Policy Lending states that DPO’s
“arrangements to manage program implementation, monitor progress and effectiveness, and
identify risks will be expected to give explicit attention to poverty/social, environmental, and
fiduciary aspects” (World Bank 2004a). 23



23
  See World Bank 2004a:
http://imagebank.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/IW3P/IB/2005/03/31/000090341_2005033115210
8/Rendered/PDF/318130PAPER0OP1r0official0use0only1.pdf
                                            39                              APPENDIX A


While in most respects the approach to environmental and social risk management in DPF is
distinct from that in IPF, the Bank uses the same grievance redress mechanism. The
Inspection Panel is an independent complaints mechanism for people and communities who
believe that they have been, or are likely to be, adversely affected by a World Bank-funded
operation, whether IPF or DPF.
APPENDIX B                                         40


Appendix B. Portfolio Review Methodology
One of the main activities under this Learning Product is an extensive portfolio review of
DPF operations over time. IEG conducted a desk-based portfolio review of randomly
selected DPF operations approved under OP 8.60. The sample covers the full period of the
Bank’s experience with DPF, from the effectiveness of OP 8.60 in 2004 until the end of CY
2014 (FY05-15). A randomly selected sample of 70 operations covering 692 prior actions
was used for assessing social risks. Because environmental risks are less common (see
below), IEG casted a somewhat broader net and randomly selected an additional 30
operations for a total of 100 operations and 970 prior actions to assess environmental risks.
The sample was drawn from the full population of DPOs which were required to comply
with OP 8.60 (i.e., all DPOs since FY05 excepting those that were prepared under previous
operational directives and were not required to comply with OP 8.60). The population
contains 616 operations.

The characteristics of both samples are very similar, and they both look very much like the
full population of DPOs. Results are reported primarily at the prior action level, because the
number of prior actions with environmental or social risk implications can vary by
operation. 24 For some questions where information at the operation level is of interest, that
information is also presented.

The sampling was designed such that if an operation was part of a series of DPOs (under a
single ICR), then the other operations in the series would also be selected. To do this while
making sure that each operation was still equally likely to be selected, random sampling was
conducted at the series level (with standalone DPOs effectively treated as a one operation
series), with each series weighted by the number of operations it contained. This left each
operation equally likely to be selected, while keeping series together.

Sample representativeness
The two samples are very similar to each other and both are similar to the population in terms
of temporal and regional coverage. The only unusual feature of the samples is that they have
a slightly higher than expected proportion of operations that are in programmatic series rather
than standalone operations (75 percent of the environment sample and 77 percent of the
social sample is from programmatic series, vs. 61 percent of the population). There is no
clear expectation that risks would be handled better or worse in programmatic series, so it is
unlikely that this biases the results.




24
   The unit of analysis of environmental and social effects in the World Bank Development Policy Lending
Retrospectives is at the prior level.
                                            41                              APPENDIX B


Table B-1: Environmental and Social Risks in the IEG Sample

 Distribution over time (% of total approved in each FY)
  Approval FY       Population    Sample of 100 (environment)       Sample of 70 (social)
2005                     3                        2                           3
2006                     8                       10                           7
2007                     9                       12                          11
2008                     8                        8                           7
2009                     13                      10                           9
2010                     14                      12                          17
2011                     12                      14                          16
2012                     9                       11                           9
2013                     10                      11                          11
2014                     10                      10                          10
2015                     4                        0                           0
Grand Total             100                      100                        100

Table B-2: Environmental and social risks in the IEG sample

 Distribution over regions (% of total approved in each region)
     Region         Population    Sample of 100 (environment)   Sample of 70 (social)
AFR                      35                      33                          31
EAP                      13                      15                          19
ECA                      15                      21                          19
LCR                      21                      18                          21
MNA                      7                        3                           3
SAR                      8                       10                           7
Grand Total             100                      100                        100

Risk identification methodology

IEG conducted separate screening processes for the environmental and for social risks.
Environmental risk screening was conducted for the full sample of 100 operations, covering
970 prior actions. Social risk screening was conducted for a randomly selected subsample of
60 operations, covering 603 prior actions. Screening took place at the prior action level,
using the World Bank’s Development Policy Actions Database (DPAD). In carrying out the
portfolio review, IEG noted a few cases where prior actions included in the Program
Document were not included in the database, including some with likely environmental or
APPENDIX B                                   42


social effects (such as a prior action in Mozambique requiring investments in irrigation
systems). But IEG did not conduct a systematic audit of the database, so the results used in
this review are based on analysis of only those prior actions included in the database.

For each prior action, IEG conducted a multi-stage stage process to assess risk management.
The process for identifying both social and environmental risks began with a review of the
language of the prior action. If the prior action could not plausibly have the potential for
significant adverse environmental or social/distributional effects, then it was not considered
further. If, however, the action could pose an environmental or social risk, then it was further
assessed based on the Program Document for the operation, and a decision would be made on
whether or not a risk was present.

The screening process followed parallel approaches on the environmental and social sides,
with in each case an iterative and collaborative approach between an initial specialist and a
secondary reviewer. All prior actions were reviewed by at least two environmental specialists
and at least two social specialists. In most cases these specialists would come to a consensus
on whether a prior action posed a risk. In the few cases where agreement between the initial
evaluator and the second specialist could not be reached, a third specialist was consulted.
Other specialists in IEG were drawn on in a few cases for their sectoral knowledge (e.g.,
public finance, energy, and urban specialists).

The process of risk identification was based primarily on the available guidance (such as the
Good Practice Notes on environmental aspects of DPOs and on PSIA, and the Toolkit on
environmental aspects in DPLs) which indicate that some types of policies have the potential
for negative social or environmental effects. However, the fact that a type of policy action
was identified as risky or potentially in the guidance was not a sufficient condition for IEG to
conclude that a particular policy action posed a risk – the specific context and content of the
policy action were also considered. For example, if there was analysis discussed in the
Program Document that made a credible case that no significant negative effects were likely
(e.g., that a specific tariff reform policy would be unlikely to trigger fuel switching behavior),
then the prior action would not be identified as posing a risk. Similarly, not all PPP reforms
would be identified as posing an environmental risk – only those that were designed to
support PPP in infrastructure investments or other environmentally sensitive sectors. On the
social side, one operation reviewed included a prior action that increased the budget
allocation for feeder roads and irrigation. IEG identified this as posing social risks due to
changes in land or water use that commonly result from the kinds of infrastructure
investment promoted by this action. By contrast, IEG did not identify as socially risky an
action in the same operation that was to simplify processes of obtaining construction permits,
as likely significant social effects—such as adverse poverty or accessibility outcomes—could
not be clearly attributed to streamlined bureaucratic processing.

The available guidance does not (and cannot be expected to) cover all possible types of
policy reforms, so some types of policies not specifically covered by guidance were also
assessed by IEG to have the potential for negative effects. In most cases these types of
policies were also sometimes identified by Bank task teams. But there are also inherent
difficulties in predicting whether a policy action will have “significant” environmental or
social effects, especially in cases where the Bank has not presented the evidence or analytical
                                              43                               APPENDIX B


material to substantiate their decisions in the Program Documents. As a result, ambiguities
can arise when trying to determine whether a prior action will have the potential for
significant adverse environmental or social effects, and ultimately a judgment call may be
required. This is in part a result of the lack of clarity and comprehensiveness in Bank policy
and guidance, but is also a result of the risk-based management approach the Bank has taken
in DPF, which the Bank has stated relies to a certain degree on judgment, as discussed in
Section 3. Consistent with this, IEG’s approach relied to a certain degree on expert judgment.
The possibility for inconsistencies was minimized by having multiple qualified experts
review each prior action in IEG’s sample. IEG also took into consideration the specific
country and reform context for each prior action reviewed. The numbers and types of these
cases are described in Tables 2-1, 2-2, 2-3, 2-4. Largely because the Bank’s guidance on
identification of social risks is less comprehensive and less user-friendly than on the
environmental side, there are more social than environmental risks that were identified
primarily based on expert judgment.

In determining the potential effects of a policy reform, indirect and downstream effects of
policies would be included. Though existing guidance makes clear that indirect effects
should be considered, it provides little support on how to set the boundaries of how far
downstream an effect should be to be still considered attributable to the policy action. Thus,
IEG relied on expert judgment in making this assessment, supplemented by evidence in the
Program Document and its annexes such as the stated objectives or goals of the policy or the
indicators used to assess the impact of the policy. As a rule of thumb: if a given effect was
part of the results chain of the operation, and would be attributed to the policy action as
evidence of positive impact of the operation, then the potential negative consequences of that
effect would also be included. However, if some effects of the policy were too remote from
the policy to be attributable, then the related negative effects would not be included. For
example, if a policy reform on PPP legal and operational frameworks was designed to
increase infrastructure investment (as demonstrated by for example the use of an indicator on
the number of PPP investments approved) then the environmental consequences of the
infrastructure investments would be considered to be likely effects of the policy reform. In
contrast, if a policy was aimed broadly at encouraging economic growth by simplifying
business registration procedures, the environmental consequences of growth would be too
remote to be attributable to the policy.

Assessment of other requirements

For policy actions determined to have the potential for significant adverse effects, IEG
assessed the operation against the requirements of OP 8.60. Specifically: whether the
Program Document had identified the risk, whether relevant analytic work had been
conducted on environmental or social/distributional aspects, whether consultations on
environmental and social aspects were reported in the program document, whether the
capacity of country systems to manage any adverse effects had been assessed, whether any
gaps in these systems had been identified, and whether any actions had been or were planned
to be taken to help address these gaps. A relatively low bar was set for each of these steps: if
the Program Document mentioned a possible negative effect, this would be coded as an
identification of the risk, even if the discussion was not specifically in the Environmental
APPENDIX B                                        44


Aspects or Poverty and Social Aspects sections of the document; if government systems for
management of a specific risk were discussed, this was coded as a capacity assessment; if a
weakness in capacity was discussed (or a statement that capacity was sufficient was made)
this was coded as a capacity gap analysis; if a mitigation measure was proposed, this was
coded as a mitigation measure. Thus, coding that there was some comment on these
requirements does not establish that the assessments or mitigation measures undertaken were
adequate (see Appendix E).

IEG also assessed whether there had been any monitoring or reporting on environmental and
social aspects over time, including in subsequent program documents (for programmatic
series) and in the Implementation, Completion and Results report produced after the
operation closed.

The specific questions answered by the reviewer for each prior action were:
     1. Based on the text of the policy action, could the policy action plausibly have significant
         negative environmental/social effects?
     2. Under OP 8.60 environmental and social analysis is not required in the program document in
         countries affected by crisis or conflict, where an unusually quick response required by the
         Bank and there may not be sufficient time or country capacity to address issues like
         distributional or environmental effects? Does the program document use this rationale to
         defer the requirement for analysis?
     3. Based on the reading of the program document and if needed other documents (ICR, etc.), is
         there a risk of significant negative environmental/social effects from the policy actions in this
         operation? 25
     4. If yes, does the program document identify any risk of significant negative
         environmental/social effects from any of the policy actions?
     5. Does the program document mention any evidence or analytic work done which may help to
         assess the potential for negative environmental/social effects? From a brief review of this
         analytic work, is it relevant and useful for assessing risks?
     6. Is there any evidence in the program document of consultation with non-government
         stakeholders on negative environmental and social risks?
     7. Is there any evidence in the program document that the Bank assessed the capacity for
         country systems to mitigate risks of negative impacts?
     8. Were any gaps identified in the capacity of country systems for mitigating risks of negative
         impacts?
     9. Were any mitigation actions identified in the program document?
     10. Was there any mention in ISRs or subsequent program documents in the series on monitoring
         of whether or not environmental risks occurred?
     11. Were there any environment/social specialist staff listed in the program document or the ICR
         as part of the team?
     12. Is there an ICR for the operation? Did it discuss any environmental or social risks?

25
  This was the language as provided to reviewers, however the intent and practice of the review was
to be consistent with the OP 8.60 requirement to consider “likely” significant effects, which requires a
subjective judgment on likeliness.
                                              45                                APPENDIX B

   13. Did the IEG ICR Review report on any environmental or social risks?

See below for a flowchart illustrating the process utilized for reviewing individual policy
actions.

In addition to the portfolio review as described in Appendix A, this review is based on a
variety of sources.
   •   Desk reviews of policies, guidance notes, toolkits, and other materials.
   •   Interviews and focus groups with Bank staff, including current and former TTLs, managers,
       safeguard advisors, and sector specialists.

Field evaluations (Project Performance Assessment Reports, PPARs) carried out by IEG,
which in turn draw on document reviews, interviews, and field missions.
APPENDIX B                                             46

                                              1
  Plausible negative
  effect based on
                                        yes                  no
  prior action text?
                                          2                 Stop

                                          3

Risk present based        yes                     no
on PD?
                                4




                                5



                                    6


                                7


                            8


                            9



                           10

                          11

   ICR           yes
   exists?                                    No
                     12


                     13

                                                                   Stop
                                                        47                                     APPENDIX C


Appendix C. Detailed Results of the Portfolio Review
One of the main activities under this Learning Product is an extensive portfolio review of
DPF operations over time. IEG conducted a desk-based portfolio review of randomly
selected DPF operations approved under OP 8.60. The sample covers the full period of the
Bank’s experience with DPF, from the effectiveness of OP 8.60 in 2004 until the end of CY
2014 (FY05-15). Appendix B contains details on the selection of the sample and the portfolio
review process. For the prior actions in operations in the sample, IEG assessed the
application of the requirements of OP 8.60, including the identification of environmental and
social risks, the extent to which analytic work on risks was carried out, the extent to which
country capacity for managing risks was assessed, the extent to which gaps in capacity were
addressed or risks were mitigated, and the extent to which risks were monitored over time. A
randomly selected sample of 70 operations covering 692 prior actions was used for assessing
social risks. Because environmental risks are less common (see below), IEG cast a somewhat
broader net and randomly selected an additional 30 operations for a total of 100 operations
and 970 prior actions to assess environmental risks. As described in detail in Appendix A, the
characteristics of both samples are very similar, and they both are broadly similar to the full
population of DPOs. Results are reported primarily at the prior action level, because the
number of prior actions with environmental or social risk implications can vary by
operation. 26 For some questions where information at the operation level is of interest, that
information is also presented.

IEG screened prior actions based on the Bank’s policy and guidance. The most fundamental
aspect of the portfolio review was an assessment of whether prior actions in the operations
were likely to pose significant environmental or social risks. This assessment was made using
the requirements of OP 8.60 and the specific guidance provided by the Bank for
environmental and social effects, supplemented by expert judgment as needed. As detailed
earlier (Table 2-1, 2-3), in most cases the types of risks identified by the IEG team were also
indicated by the Bank’s guidance materials or were identified by Bank task teams in other
operations in our sample. But as discussed in detail in Section 3, the policy is imprecise,
there is a problem of sequencing in the requirement for analytical work, the boundaries of
downstream effects to consider are not clear, and the guidance is not comprehensive. There
are also inherent difficulties in predicting whether a policy action will have “significant”
environmental or social effects, especially in cases where analytical work on the magnitude
of potential effects has not been undertaken. As a result, it is sometimes more difficult to
ascertain whether a prior action will have the potential for significant adverse environmental
or social effects, and ultimately a judgment call is required. 27 IEG minimized the potential
for errors by having at least two environmental specialists and at least two social specialists



26
  The unit of analysis of environmental and social effects in the World Bank Development Policy Lending
Retrospectives is at the prior level.
27
   The Bank’s guidance acknowledges this, for example stating that “The selection of policies for which PSIA is
appropriate is inevitably a matter of judgment…” (World Bank 2004a), and “The degree of transmission of
negative impacts will thus be a matter of judgment…” (World Bank 2008a).
APPENDIX C                                           48


review every prior action in the sample (see Appendix B for more details on the
methodology).

Findings on risk identification
The general finding of the portfolio review is that IEG’s experts identified significantly more
environmental and social risks than Bank task teams, indicating that there is an
underreporting of environmental and social risks by the Bank in DPO Program Documents.
Of the 970 prior actions in the sample, IEG determined that 66 (6.8%) posed potential
significant adverse environmental effects. 28 Of these 66 cases, the potential for some risk
was identified by the Bank task teams in 35 cases (53%). 29 In many of these 35 cases, the
identification of risk by the Bank was not unambiguous. That is, the Program Document
mentioned a risk but did not make clear whether it believed that this risk was a possible result
of the policy actions of the operation, and so would trigger the due diligence requirements of
OP 8.60. For example, in 15 of the 35 cases where an environmental risk was mentioned, the
Program Document also commented that “there is no potential for negative environmental
effects from the specific policies supported by the operation” or used similar language. Some
documents stated that there was no potential for “direct” adverse environmental effects, but
possible significant indirect effects were not considered. For the 692 prior actions screened
for likely significant adverse social effects, IEG identified such risks for 97 actions (14.0%).
Of these 97 actions, the Bank mentioned the potential for social risk in 54 cases (56%). There
were some good examples of risk appraisal and identification by the Bank, such as in
Georgia (Box 2-3), and Colombia (Box 2-4). IEG’s analysis also identified significantly
more risks than have been identified in the Bank’s Development Policy Financing
Retrospectives; some of the reasons for this difference are explained in Box 2-9.

The majority of prior actions do not pose environmental or social risks – in IEG’s sample
93.2 percent of prior actions were not assessed to have environmental risks, and 86.0 percent
of prior actions were not assessed to have social risks. However, risks are present in a
significant portion of the portfolio. The 66 prior actions with environmental risks are spread
across 44 of the 100 operations in the sample, and the 35 actions with environmental risks
identified by the Bank are spread over 27 operations. On the social side, the 97 prior actions
with social risks are spread over 49 of 70 operations, while the 54 actions with social risks



28
    Policy actions and the program logic are sometimes not clearly described in Program Documents, making it
difficult to determine what exactly a DPF operation is supporting. This in turn makes it more challenging to
predict environmental and social effects. For example, there are cases where a prior action required that a law
be passed, or an action plan implemented, or a trade reform be adopted, but the Program Document did not
describe the contents of these in sufficient detail to understand the implications of the policy. These are most
common in large multi-sectoral DPLs with many policy actions. In addition to the 66 cases with environmental
risks identified by IEG, a further 13 cases could in principle have had significant environmental effects but were
not identified as having risks because project documentation did not provide sufficient information on the
details of the action.
29
   IEG gave Bank teams the benefit of the doubt wherever possible, crediting them with identifying
environmental risks if they were mentioned as such anywhere in the Program Document (even if not explicitly
discussed in the “Environmental Aspects” section).
                                                          49                                     APPENDIX C


identified by the Bank come from 32 operations. More than twice as many policy actions
were identified as having social risks (14.0%) than environmental risks (6.8%).




 Figure C-1: Environmental and Social Risks in the IEG Sample


                                        Prior Actions in IEG sample
                                        0%    10%   20%   30%    40%   50%       60%    70%    80%    90% 100%

                      Total in sample


    Environmental risks ID'ed by IEG


   Environmental risks ID'ed by Bank


            Social risks ID'ed by IEG


           Social risks ID'ed by Bank




                              Percentage of Operations in IEG sample
                                             0%   10%   20%    30%   40%   50%    60%    70%    80%    90% 100%

                          Total in sample


    At least one Environmental risk (IEG)


   At least one Environmental risk (Bank)


            At least one Social risk (IEG)


           At least one Social risk (Bank)




Note: IEG bars are those risks identified by IEG; Bank bars are those risks identified by Bank task teams in the
Program Document.

IEG’s identification of environmental risk is based largely on the detailed typology of
policies and potential for negative environmental effects as laid out in the Bank’s Toolkit for
Assessing the Environmental, Forest, and Other Natural Resource aspects of Development
APPENDIX C                                           50


Policy Lending, or “Environment Toolkit” for brevity (World Bank 2008). Box C.1 provides
examples of some of the environmental risks not identified by the Bank.


 Box C-1: Examples of Environmental Risks Not Identified

 IEG identified environmental risks that were not considered in Bank Program Documents; some examples
 are discussed below.
 In a municipal DPL in Rio de Janeiro, a prior action supported the establishment of a framework for public-
 private partnerships in infrastructure and service delivery. The goal of this aspect of the operation was to
 support PPP development; the relevant indicator required that at least one project be prepared by the PPP unit
 established under the policy reform. The Borrower's ICR, which is annexed to the Bank ICR, notes that the
 operation was successful in helping to trigger PPPs, and indicates that these PPPs involved major
 infrastructure investments - including the largest basic sanitation concession in Brazil, building an express
 transit corridor, construction of a 28 km light rail system, and construction of the Olympic Park over an area
 of 1.2 million square meters. These investments would clearly pose some environmental risks, but the
 environmental aspects section of the Program Document made no mention of the PPP action, and there was
 no assessment of the capacity of existing institutions to manage the environmental or social effects of these
 investments. There are a number of other similar cases in IEG’s sample in which the Bank supports PPP
 legal frameworks, often with a performance indicator on the number of PPPs prepared and language
 suggesting that the goal is to attract private sector financing of infrastructure, but with no identification of
 environmental risks (Niger, Tajikistan, Guinea-Bissau, Mexico, Sierra Leone) while risks were identified in
 similar cases in Tanzania and Colombia. 30
 In Lao PDR a Poverty Reduction Support Credit (PRSC) programmatic series supported implementation of a
 Minerals Law, which would improve transparency and predictability in granting exploration/mining licenses
 to investors, clarify regulations regarding the transfer of mining rights, clarify government’s equity rights in
 mining projects, clarify and improve the competitiveness of the fiscal regime, and propose standard mineral
 exploration and mining agreements. The Program Document argued that the law would lay the foundations
 for the long term development of the mining sector. The planned version of the trigger included issuing of
 regulations on environmental standards, but this was deemed to be too ambitious to achieve and was dropped
 from the final formulation. The goal of the policy was to encourage minerals sector development and
 investment, but no environmental risks were identified and no assessment of environmental management
 capacity was made.
 In a private and financial sector development DPL in Serbia, a prior action supported a law on mining
 incorporating a new royalties framework. The Program Document noted that the goal of the law was to
 improve the legal and regulatory framework for the mining industry so as to attract green field FDI. No
 environmental risks were identified and no assessment of environmental management capacity was carried
 out.
 An economic recovery operation in Togo supported adoption of a strategy for managing the cotton sector.
 Indicators for the policy action included tracking implementation of a strategy to stimulate fertilizer use, and
 tracking whether farmers received a pre-agreed share of the world market price. Increased fertilizer use can
 contribute to water pollution, and higher prices can encourage farmers to expand production, which would
 often be accompanied by increased use of pesticides and herbicides, and land conversion. The Program
 Document did not consider any possible negative effects from the policy, noting that the prior action did not
 support any investments.
 A PRSC in Ghana supported implementation of rural and urban water investment plans. The goal of the
 policy area and relevant indicator in the DPF was to increase the access rate to safe water and sanitation,



30
  IEG did not identify likely significant effects in all PPP-related prior actions. Rather they were primarily
those that intended to promote increased infrastructure investments.
                                                       51                                      APPENDIX C

 which would require major water infrastructure investments. No potential for environmental risks was
 identified and no assessment of environmental management capacity was made.
 The common element behind these cases is a narrowly crafted prior action intended to support wider goals,
 with the consideration of environmental risks limited to the direct effects of the policies, rather than the
 indirect effects associated with the ultimate goals of the policy reforms.


IEG’s identification of social risks is drawn from a range of guidance but primarily the
Bank’s Guidance Note on Using Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) (World Bank
2013). However, as discussed in Section 3, the Bank’s guidance on social risks in DPF is less
comprehensive than for environmental, so there are many fewer social risks covered by
guidance (see Table 2-3). In most of those cases encountered in IEG’s sample, Bank teams
still identified the risk type in at least one case, but not necessarily in others. Box C.2
provides examples of some of the social risks not identified by the Bank.

 Box C-1: Examples of Social Risks Not Identified

 A Pakistan PRSC supported a range of actions including support for electricity tariff reform, privatization of
 a refinery, an electric company and a telecommunications company, and amendments to labor laws to
 improve labor market flexibility. These posed some potential for social risks: higher electricity tariffs could
 burden the poor, privatization of large companies could lead to job losses, and the amendments to the labor
 laws to achieve labor market flexibility made it easier to fire employees, and called for longer working hours.
 However, the Program Document did not identify any social risks from these actions. The document
 proceeds from the premise that this flexibility is needed and therefore justified, but this does not rule out the
 possibility of negative effects. The analytical work for this operation was ample but did not address the
 social risks of these three prior actions. The Program Document referred to consultations with respect to the
 labor law amendments, but did not specify the outcome of those consultations.

 A three-operation series of sustainable development DPLs in Colombia did not identify the social risks of
 environmental actions that included: i) drafting a law for water resources management; ii) supporting natural
 resource management action plans that would address rationalization and optimization of consumption of
 renewable natural resources; and iii) an action plan for the management of the integrated urban
 environmental policy. Each of these actions might pose land use/settlement-related social risks or natural
 resource access risks, as well as risks of higher financial costs of cleaner transportation, energy and water.
 The Program Document indicated that the poor would benefit disproportionately from environmental
 benefits of the policy reforms because they are most affected by, for example, polluted air and water, which
 the program addressed. However, even if the net social impact of the program is positive, this does not mean
 that the possibility of increased costs on the poor should not be identified or assessed. Sometimes it is the
 negative social side effect of environmental actions that opponents of environmental improvements use to
 undermine support for such initiatives.

 A Mali PRSC series offers examples where the Bank did not identify social risks from changes in the
 delivery of social services. The prior actions included: i) the execution of contracts between the government
 and private operators for management of a number of drinking water supply systems and ii) adopting
 operational guidelines on decentralization in the health sector, including a framework for the transfer of
 financial resources to the local communities. In these instances, the social risk is that water supply and health
 service delivery may be of poor quality or could exclude poor and vulnerable groups. The program document
 did not address whether the capacity of those parties taking on the responsibility for these social services was
 adequate. The operations did not have analytic work or consultations specific to these risks.

 A Togo DPO did not address a number of significant social risks. The relevant prior actions include: i) a
 strategy for the cotton sector that covers transfer of assets, pricing mechanisms and price risk management;
 ii) evaluating investments for scaling up phosphate mining; and iii) reviewing the adequacy of the electric
APPENDIX C                                             52

 company’s electricity tariff. In each case, the Program Document cited only the positive aspects of the action,
 despite the fact that each posed a social risk, even if indirectly. A strategy that could lead to far reaching
 measures in the cotton sector could adversely affect cotton farmers. If investments in phosphate mining are
 approved, risks associated with settlement as well as labor conditions are posed. Supporting an electricity
 tariff sufficient to attract investors indicates that higher tariffs are required and thus there is a distributional
 risk for poorer consumers.




IEG identified some policy types not specifically identified by guidance or Bank task teams
as posing risks, but where IEG concluded that a risk exists based on expert judgment. In
some cases, this reflects gaps or a lack of clarity in the Bank’s policy and guidance. On the
environment side, there was only one such case (see Table 2-2), while on the social side there
were several (see Table 2-4). Labor law changes are not specifically covered by Bank
guidance on PSIA and were not identified by Bank task teams in the IEG sample. DPOs in
Pakistan and Bhutan supported changes to labor laws or codes aimed at increasing flexibility
in the labor market – which may have positive effects on growth of enterprises, but could
also adversely affect workers by reducing job security. In another example of risk not
covered by Bank guidance, mandating compulsory secondary education could have a
negative effect on poor households who rely on family labor.

There were other cases where IEG did not identify policy actions in the sample as having
likely significant environmental or social risks after taking into consideration the specific
country and reform context, even when those policy types were identified as potentially risky
in Bank guidance. For example, IEG’s sample contained a number of cases of simplifying
business registration and permitting and licensing requirements, none of which, in IEG’s
view, appeared to have the potential for significant negative environmental effects. Similarly,
there were a number of trade-related policies in the sample which IEG did not assess as
having environmental risks, such as policies improving the operation of customs and border
control services.

IEG did not find evidence that identification of risks has improved over time. The Bank
identified social risks for 21 of 38 cases (55%) identified by IEG for operations approved
over FY05-09, as compared to 33 of 59 cases (56%) for operations approved over FY10-14.
Similarly, the Bank identified environmental risks for 15 of 26 prior actions (58%) for
operations approved from FY05-09, while environmental risks were identified for 20 of 40
prior actions (50%) for operations approved from FY10-14.

It is sometimes argued that environmental and social analysis is overly burdensome for DPOs
aiming to provide urgent crisis response. However, as described in Box 1-2, OP 8.60
acknowledges the possibility of a need for quick response, and allows for design
considerations such as environmental or distributional design considerations to be deferred,
as long as the Program Document describes how and when those considerations will later be
addressed. In IEG’s sample, though some DPOs were aiming to respond to crises, none of the
Program Documents invoked this option to delay.

It is not the case that risks are concentrated in sectoral DPOs. While it is sometimes
presumed that the potential for environmental or social risks lies primarily in DPOs in sectors
                                                53                               APPENDIX C


like energy or environment, 31 rather than in multi-sectoral economic management DPOs,
IEG’s portfolio review suggests that risks exist in a range of operations. Tables C-1 and C-2
show the distribution of environmental and social risks, respectively, based on the Sector
Board of the operation they were mapped to. These tables show that most risks are in
operations mapped to poverty reduction and economic management sectors (the former
PREM Network), which also feature the largest overall number of DPOs. Tables C-3 and C-4
show the distribution of risks based on the sector of the specific policy action. These show
that social risks occur across a range of sectors, but environmental risks are concentrated in
agriculture, water, energy, urban, or environment sectors (the former SD Network). SDN
sector-mapped operations identify 16/25 environment risks (64%) and 18/26 social risks
(69%) which is better than PREM-mapped operations, which identify 19/36 environment
risks (53%) and 32/63 social risks (51%).

Program Documents for operations mapped to Energy, Agriculture, Transport, Water, Urban
and Environment sectors were more likely to identify the environmental risks noted by IEG
than were operations mapped to other sectors. Of the 66 actions with environmental risks
identified by IEG, the risk was identified in the Program document 64 percent of the time
(16/25) for operations mapped to Agriculture, Water, Environment, Transport, Energy, or
Urban sectors. In contrast, these risks were identified in the Program Document 46 percent of
the time for operations mapped to other sectors (19/41). Similarly, Program Documents for
operations mapped to economic management sectors were less likely to identify the social
risks noted by IEG than were operations mapped to other sectors.

Table C-1: Distribution of Environmental Risks by Sector Category, Using Operational
Mapping
                                                                  Number of
                                 Number of                       prior actions     % of prior
                                prior actions     % of prior         with         actions with
                Number of            with        actions with   environmental    environmental
               prior actions   environmental    environmental   risks ID’ed by   risks ID’ed by
 Network        in sample        risks (IEG)     risks (IEG)         Bank             Bank
 SDN               161              25             15.5%             16              9.9%
 PREM              613              36               5.9%            19              3.1%
 HDN               141               0               0%               0               0%
 FPD                57               5               8.8%             0               0%




31
     See for example World Bank 2004a.
APPENDIX C                                               54


Table C-2: Distribution of Social Risks by Sector Category, Using Operational
Mapping
                                                                                 Number of
                                       Number of           % of sample          prior actions          % of sample
                  Number of           prior actions        prior actions         with social           prior actions
                 prior actions         with social          with social        risks ID’ed by        with social risks
 Network          in sample            risks (IEG)          risks (IEG)             Bank              ID’ed by Bank
SDN                    90                   26                29.0%                   18                  20.0%
PREM                  472                   63                13.3%                   32                   6.8%
HDN                    83                    3                 3.6%                   2                    2.4%
FPD                    47                    5                10.6%                   2                    4.3%
Note: Prior actions are categorized based on the sector they were mapped to. An operation may be mapped to one sector but
contain policy actions relevant to other sectors.
The networks are the organizational groupings of sectors that the World Bank used to operate under. These structure was
superseded by Global Practices on January 1 2014, but the Networks were the structure under which all operations in the
sample were approved, and provides a convenient way of bundling similar types of sectors. The Sustainable Development
Network (SDN) includes infrastructure sectors (such as energy and mining, and transport) and landscape sectors (agriculture
and environment), while the Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Network (PREM) includes public sector
management and governance, the Human Development Network (HDN) includes health and education, and the Financial
and Private Sector Development Network (FPD) includes private sector development.

Table C-3: Distribution of Environmental by Sector Category, Classified at Prior
Action Level
                                                        Number of
                          Number of                    prior actions     % of prior
           Number of prior actions       % of prior        with         actions with
              prior           with      actions with environmental environmental
            actions in environmental environmental risks ID’ed by risks ID’ed by
 Network     sample       risks (IEG)   risks (IEG)        Bank             Bank
SDN            188             35          18.6%            20             10.6%
PREM                 439                  12                  2.7%                     6                    1.4%
HDN                  221                   3                  1.4%                     3                    1.4%
FPD                  122                  16                  13.1%                    6                    4.9%


Table C-4: Distribution of Social Risks by Sector Category, Classified at Prior Action
Level
                                               % of
                                             sample       Number of       % of sample
                            Number of         prior      prior actions    prior actions
            Number of      prior actions actions with     with social      with social
           prior actions    with social    social risks risks ID’ed by risks ID’ed by
 Network    in sample       risks (IEG)       (IEG)          Bank             Bank
SDN            105               29          27.6%             18            17.1%
PREM                  325                   40                12.3%                  22                    6.8%
                                                             55                                          APPENDIX C


 HDN                   156                    16                10.3%                    7                     4.5%
 FPD                   106                    12                11.3%                    7                     6.6%
Note: Network definitions are as for previous table. Prior actions are categorized based on the sector of the individual prior
action as coded by OPCS, regardless of which sector their operation was mapped to.


Findings on other due diligence requirements
There is wide variation in the degree to which operations assess country capacity or gaps in
this capacity. As presented in Section 1, when a policy action is identified as having likely
significant environmental or social effects, additional due diligence is required. The
requirement to assess the country capacity is not always carried out. For the 66 prior actions
identified by IEG as having environmental risks, a comment on country capacity was made
in 40 cases, or 61 percent. 32 For the 35 prior actions where the Bank had noted an
environmental risk in the Program Document, a comment on capacity assessment was made
in 25 cases, or 71 percent. For the 97 prior actions identified by IEG as having social risks, a
comment on country capacity was noted in 42 cases (43%). For the 54 prior actions where
the Bank identified a social risk in the Program Document, a comment on capacity
assessment was made 33 times, (61%). However, the treatment was often perfunctory, such
as stating that the country’s legislation required environmental impact assessments to be
carried out (without considering whether such assessments are adequate or lead to
implementation of mitigation measures). Detailed assessments based on evidence were rare.
In some cases the Program Document gives a general description of environmental
management systems in the country rather than addressing the capacity to manage the
specific risks posed by the DPF. Environmental capacity assessments were more detailed and
evidence-based in cases where a Country Environmental Analysis (CEA) had been carried
out, but those were rare (see below). The main reason for a lack of capacity assessment is
that an environmental or social risk was not identified in the first place. However, there were
also some cases in which there was no assessment of capacity even when a risk was
mentioned in the Program Document, especially for social risks (21 of 54 cases).

Of the 40 cases where some environmental capacity assessment was made, gaps in the
borrower’s capacity to manage the risks were identified in 20 cases. For the 42 prior actions
where some social capacity assessment was made, gaps in the borrower’s capacity to manage
the risks were identified in 23 cases. In some cases this identification of gaps was implicit
rather than explicit; no gap was formally identified, but some form of mitigation measure to
support the capacity to manage risks was supported. If there are no gaps in the capacity of
country systems to manage a risk, then mitigation measures are not required. But in cases
where gaps are not identified, Program Documents usually do not present evidence as to why
the Bank determined that country systems will be adequate.


32
  In some cases some form of capacity assessment was mentioned in the Program Document for prior
actions identified as risky by IEG, even when no risk had been identified by the Bank team. For
example, an operation might not identify any environmental risks from PPP reforms aimed at
supporting infrastructure investment, but might still include an overview of the Environmental Impact
Assessment process.
APPENDIX C                                           56


In cases where the Bank has identified gaps in the analysis or shortcomings in the member
country’s systems for environmental risks, Program Documents usually include a mitigation
measure. Overall, some mitigation action was discussed for 36 of the 66 prior actions where
IEG identified an environmental risk. In cases where the Bank has mentioned an
environmental risk, carried out a capacity assessment, and identified gaps in capacity, a
mitigation action is described in 19 of 21 cases. Thus, the main reasons for a lack of
mitigation measures are because the risk was not identified, or because the capacity of the
country to manage the risks without further mitigation was not assessed. The mitigation
measures mentioned were a mix of support through environmental management plans of
related Bank investment lending operations (6 cases), technical assistance to be provided by
the Bank (9 cases) or IFC advisory services (1 case), mitigation actions built into the DPO
itself (18 cases), actions taken by the government to improve environmental management
capacity (8 cases), or using existing governmental systems such as environmental
assessments (2 cases). 33 Mitigation measures were identified for 39 of the 97 prior actions
with social risks. Where the Bank identifies social risks, there is some sort of mitigation
referenced in most but not all cases (34 out of 54).

The Bank does not always ensure adequate analytical work on environmental and social
risks. Analytic work is required to assess significant environmental and social risks. 34
Otherwise, it is difficult to know the magnitude of a potential risk or to identify appropriate
mitigation measures. While Poverty and Social Impact Analysis (PSIA) is used regularly
(though not universally) for analyzing social risks, no equivalent standard analytical tool is
applied regularly for environmental risk. In IEG’s sample, of the 66 actions assessed as
having environmental risk, analytic work relevant to the environmental risks posed by the
specific prior action was discussed for 11 actions (17%). 35 In addition, for 6 actions the
Program Document referred to some environmental analytic work that was not clearly
relevant to the operation, and 10 referenced analytic work that was relevant to the operation
but not the specific prior action.

On the social side, of the 97 actions with social risks, analytical work on the specific social
risks of the prior action was referenced in 17 cases (18%). An additional 17 cases refer to
some analytic work relevant to social risks in the policy areas but not those specifically
relevant to the prior action. PSIA is the main tool for assessing social risks of DPFs, but
IEG’s definition of analytical work for the portfolio analysis was relatively generous, giving
credit for any sort of analysis cited of the poverty and social impacts of a prior action.
However, while poverty assessments and other, mostly technical analyses are fairly common


33
     Note, some actions have multiple mitigation measures, so the total sums to more than 34.
34
  IEG did not conduct an in-depth assessment of the quality of the analytical work conducted on either the
environmental or social side
35
   Of these 11 cases of relevant analytic work, two are reviews of the country’s environmental assessment
system, 3 are some unpublished analysis done on the environmental effects of adopting an electricity market, 1
is technical reports considering the environmental effects of an energy action plan (Tonga), 1 is a PSIA looking
at the effects of energy tariff changes, 3 are on environmental effects of irrigation changes (Pakistan), and 1 is
on the environmental effects of removing fuel subsidies.
                                                        57                                       APPENDIX C


underpinnings for DPF preparations, PSIAs are not. 36 Even in the minority of DPFs that are
informed by PSIAs, the analysis often does not address all of the prior actions under the
operation that pose social risks. Thus, the risks of other actions in the program are not
evaluated. This omission of PSIA work also includes prior actions with potentially adverse
indirect impacts, such as power sector studies, energy strategies, and agriculture and
irrigation strategies.

IEG identified few cases in its portfolio review where a Program Document discussed the
Borrowing government’s consultations with non-government stakeholders on environmental
and social risks or on relevant analytical work. Program Documents often discuss
consultations on the operation more generally with government, IMF, and other development
partners, and sometimes discuss consultations with other stakeholders. But it is rare that they
record consultations on environmental or social risks. IEG identified only four cases where
Program Documents discussed consultations on potential negative environmental effects or
systems for mitigating them (Tonga, Mexico, Bhutan, and Ghana), and ten cases where the
Program Documents discussed relevant consultations on social risks.

DPF task teams appear to often lack specialists with appropriate environmental and social
technical skills. IEG recorded whether or not a specialist (as defined by whether
“Environment” or “Social” was in their job title) was present for the operations where
environmental and social risks were identified. 37 Of the 44 operations with at least one
environmental risk, relevant staffing could be determined for 28 operations. Of those 28
operations, the task team included an environment specialist in 15 cases (covering 20 prior
actions with environmental risks), while the task team did not include an environmental
specialist for the other 13 cases (cover 24 environmental risks). 38 For the 24 actions where
no environment specialist was on the team, the environmental risk was identified in 5 cases
(21%). Of the 20 actions where an environment specialist was on the team, the program
document identified an environment risk for 14 actions (70%). This could either be because
environment specialists are more likely to be assigned to teams for operations where the

36
  It is important to keep in mind that the unit of account for the analysis of poverty and social risks is the prior
action. The PSIA tool was introduced as an approach to address the risks associated with prior actions. So other
generic poverty assessments and technical analyses not addressing the prior actions of the operation, even
though relevant in the broader country context, would be considered as addressing the poverty and social risks
of the instrument on poor and vulnerable groups.
37
   The use of job title is a weak proxy, as environmental or social specialists may take on jobs with different
titles, and as a range of sectoral specialists may have environmental or social skillsets (e.g., energy specialists,
urban specialists, poverty specialists, social protection specialists, etc.). The team composition could not be
determined for the full sample, as titles and full team lists are usually present only in ICRs not in Program
Documents.
Also, team composition as listed in ICRs may be inaccurate. IEG has also identified two cases (one in this
sample, one external) where environmental specialists listed as team members in task teams reported that they
were unaware of the operation and had not been involved. But in other cases TTLs reported participation of or
consultations with environmental or social specialists who were not listed as team members in the respective
ICRs.
38
  For the other 22 actions with environmental risks, the team composition was not listed or staff were listed
without titles.
APPENDIX C                                            58


Bank identifies the presence of an environmental risk, or because having an environment
specialist on the team improves the ability to identify potential environmental risks in the
first place. 39 On the social side, it was less common for teams to include social specialists,
with a social specialist present for 7 of the 43 operations in the sample for which team
composition could be determined. 40 The lack of appropriate technical skills to assess
environmental and social risks on DPO teams was a common concern cited in interviews
with IEG.

Although various Bank documents discuss the importance of monitoring and evaluating of
environmental and social risks in DPF, 41 the Bank’s Implementation Completion and Results
Reports (ICRs) did not report on environmental aspects, and rarely reported on adverse social
effects, in the sample of DPFs reviewed by IEG. Any monitoring of environmental and social
risks that is undertaken by the task team was not formally documented. Implementation and
Supervision Reports (ISRs) focus on tracking achievement of intended goals rather than
assessing unintended side effects. Subsequent Program Documents for programmatic series
rarely report on monitoring of environmental and social effects 42, and often repeat verbatim
the comments from the Program Document for the first operation in the series. In a few
cases, risks that were identified in an original Program Document did not appear in those for
subsequent operations in the series—even though the actions with risks identified in the first
operation had additional similar follow up actions. 43 An ICR was available for 41 of the 66
actions with environmental risks. 44 Of those 37 cases, in 2 cases there were comments on
negative environmental aspects or their mitigation measures. 45 The ICRs in the sample
rarely addressed social risks or their mitigation either– for the 36 prior actions with a social
risk where an ICR was available, the ICR discussed the social risk in 13 cases (across 3
ICRs). The sections on social and poverty effects tend to provide a general treatment of
broader impacts that may not even be attributable to the program. One case in which the ICR
considered the social risks of the program was the ICR for a Vietnam Higher Education DPF.

39
  It was beyond the scope of this review to determine which of the two. Given the approach used, IEG could
only get an idea of correlation, but not the direction of causation.
40
  The presence of social specialist was determined by having a team member listed in the ICR with “Social” in
their title. This was possible to determine for 82 prior actions with social risks; for the 63 prior actions where no
social specialist was on the team, in 27 cases the Bank identified the social risk (43%). Of the 19 prior actions
where a social specialist was on the team, in 12 of the cases the Bank identified the social risk (63%).
41
     See World Bank 2004a.
42
  Of the 62 policies where an environmental risk was identified, 5 cases (across two series) included some
discussion on monitoring of the potential for negative environmental effects in subsequent Program Documents.
43
   For example, in a power sector series in Vietnam that supported electricity market development, the initial
Program Document noted analysis carried out showing that while the overall long term effects would be
positive for the environment, there would be some risk of fuel-switching from gas to coal in the short term.
Subsequent Program Documents did not mention this negative risk, and discussed only positive aspects.
44
   An ICR will not be available for active operations, recently closed operations, or incomplete programmatic
series.
45
  In Bhutan the ICR reported that some capacity building activities in the environmental management
agency had been carried out; in Pakistan the ICR reported that environmental monitoring had been
carried out.
                                             59                              APPENDIX C


This ICR provides an update on mitigation measures that were called for in the Pprogram
Document and provides results attributable to those measures. Two other ICRs addressed
social risks, in Brazil and Jamaica.

IEG also did not assess environmental and social risks or their management in most of its
validations of ICRs in the sample. As part of its normal operations, IEG conducts a desk
review validation of all ICRs, called an ICR Review, but this system does not provide
meaningful coverage of environmental and social risks in DPOs. This is largely because
IEG’s ICR Review is a validation of the Bank’s ICR self-assessment, and this information
was not available in the ICR. For the operations present in the portfolio review sample, ICR
Reviews did not report the Program Document’s mention of environmental risks except in
one case, and in none of the cases was identification of risks critically assessed. Similarly,
there were only two ICR Reviews that addressed any aspects of social risks, and this
occurred because social risk management was directly part of the prior action. Even in the
few cases where the Bank has done a good job in assessing and addressing social risks, IEG’s
ICR Review still did not reflect that performance.
APPENDIX D                                  60


Appendix D. Cases Where DPF Funds Were Channeled to
Specific Investments
In a forest and environment development program DPO in Cameroon active from 2006 to
2011, the Bank specifically required in its legal agreement with the client (the Development
Grant Agreement) that DPO grant funds be used to finance the government’s Forest and
Green Environment Sectoral Annual Budget, which supported a range of activities that could
have positive and negative environmental effects. The government’s budget plans made clear
that it intended to use IDA and GEF grants to finance a number of specific activities in its
environmental and forest ministry. The operation “included both aspects of DPOs and SILs
[investment loans],” even though it was identified as purely a DPO in the Bank Program
Document, and no investment lending safeguards were applied (though the government did
voluntarily prepare environmental and social studies and an indigenous peoples development
plan for its forestry program).

A programmatic DPL for Sustainable Environmental Management in Brazil approved in
2010 had objectives to strengthen environmental management in Brazil, and it included prior
actions that targeted a number of key environmental sub-sectors. In addition to the Ministry
of Environment and its agencies, the DPL also included the Brazilian National Bank for
Economic and Social Development (BNDES) as an implementing agency. BNDES primarily
finances large infrastructure and energy projects, such as hydroelectric dams, stadiums,
roads, ports and mines across Brazil and increasingly in developing countries around the
world, and its lending volume is several times that of the World Bank’s.

According to the SEM DPL Program Document, both the World Bank and the Government
of Brazil recognized that BNDES’s environmental and social safeguards needed
strengthening, and one of the nine policy areas of the operation included actions to improve
BNDES’s system. The first loan in the SEM DPL series was fully disbursed to the Brazilian
Treasury in two tranches, for a total of US$ 1.3 billion (at the time, the World Bank’s largest
ever loan to Brazil). Evidence gathered by IEG from multiple sources confirmed that the US$
1.3 billion were then on-lent by Brazil’s Treasury to BNDES with the express intent of
financing BNDES’s investment projects. Because this was done in the context of DPF,
World Bank investment lending safeguards were not applied. Moreover, there has been little
if any discernible improvement in the performance of BNDES’s own environmental and
social management system. High-profile investments financed by BNDES—including
hydroelectric dams in the Amazon rainforest—continue to experience an array of
environmental and social problems, and a lack of transparency on safeguards by international
standards.

A programmatic DPO series on Natural Resources and Environmental Governance in Ghana
approved in 2008 supported a range of policy reforms in the forestry, mining, and
environmental management agencies. The policy actions of the program had a number of
positive effects: major elements of the program included increased revenue collection from
forestry royalties, creation of a system for tracking the legal origin of timber consignments,
benefit sharing schemes with land users and investors, mining regulatory reform, more
collaborative forest management, a social conflict tracking tool, increased use of
                                            61                               APPENDIX D


environmental impact assessment and strategic environmental assessment tools, and
development of a climate change strategy. However, the government chose to earmark DPO
funds directly to implementing agencies. This meant that the Bank and other co-financers
were indirectly financing up to 40-60 percent of the budgets of the forestry, mining, and
environmental agencies and so were effectively financing their core operations, which could
have a range of positive and negative environmental and social effects. One goal of budget
support is to encourage regular budget processes between the finance ministry and line
ministry, but this was undermined as line agencies perceived funds as flowing from the
donors rather than the government.

The fact that these three examples are from forestry and environmental should not be read to
presume that earmarking is more likely in these sectors; these simply represent an area where
IEG has been recently carrying out evaluations of DPOs.

In Vietnam the Bank has provided budget support through a series of PRSCs and through
sectoral DPOs including a rural development program, a power sector reform program, and a
climate change reform program. In some cases the government chose to earmark DPO funds
to support implementation of specific sectoral programs. In the case of the rural development
program, the operation had originally been designed as investment lending, but during
preparation the design was changed to use a DPO instead. The DPO funds were earmarked to
fund implementation of the government program, which primarily financed rural
infrastructure including roads, irrigation works, and other facilities. These works could
potentially have environmental or social impacts including possible resettlement. The
Program Document for the second operation in the series noted that resettlement issues
would be covered through parallel policy dialog, but the environmental and social issues
were not fully identified and mitigation measures were not proposed.

Sources:
Implementation Completion and Results Report Review for the Cameroon Forest and
Environment Development Program. IEG, 2015. Available soon at
http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/

Project Performance Assessment Report for the Brazil First Programmatic Development
Policy Loan for Sustainable Environmental Management. IEG, 2015. Available at:
https://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/brazil-sem-dpl-ppar.pdf

Project Performance Assessment Report for the Ghana First, Second and Third Natural
Resources and Environmental Governance Development Policy Operations. IEG, 2014.
Available at:
http://ieg.worldbankgroup.org/Data/reports/Ghana_NRM_PPAR_889590PPAR0P1000Box3
85285B00PUBLIC0_0.pdf

Project Performance Assessment Report for the Vietnam Poverty Reduction Support Credits
6-10, Program 135 Phase 2 Support Credits, Public Investment Reform 1-2. IEG, 2015.
Available at http://ieg.worldbank.org/Data/reports/VIETNAM_PPAR.PovtyReduction.pdf
APPENDIX E                                      62


Appendix E. Limitations and Possibilities for Future
Work
This review was designed to provide rapid and just in time support to complement the 2015
World Bank DPL Retrospective. As such, limited time and resources imposed a number of
constraints.
   •   The review focused on how OP 8.60 was applied in Bank DPF operation documents; it did
       not assess whether the requirements under OP 8.60 were sufficient to provide an effective
       level of risk management and mitigation (although to the extent that the desk review and
       accompanying interviews could shed light on the policy, this is reflected in the review). For
       example, OP 8.60 covers only environmental and social aspects from specific policies
       supported by the operation, and not from other aspects of the Policy Areas or areas of policy
       dialog. The OP also does not cover environmental and social aspects from the funds
       disbursed under the operation.
   •   The review focused narrowly on the prior actions specified in Program Documents, as
       required by OP 8.60, rather than on the broader objectives and reform programs that DPF
       operations are supposed to support.
   •   The review did not assess environmental or social aspects of “benchmarks” (policies included
       in the policy matrix but not legally required prior actions) or “triggers” (indicative policies in
       the policy matrix for future operations in a programmatic series, which may later become
       prior actions). Bank management argues that the “specific policies” language of OP 8.60 does
       not apply to benchmarks or triggers, as they are not legally required or monitored policies.
       Use of benchmarks is now discouraged and is being phased out, but past benchmarks could
       have had environmental or social implications. The Bank guidance materials are not clear on
       this subject.
   •   The review was purely desk-based; it did not carry out field missions, to consult with clients,
       to assess the adequacy of mitigation measures, or to assess whether negative environmental
       or social effects had actually occurred. It drew only on a limited pool of existing field work,
       as many existing field evaluations do not thoroughly assess adverse environmental or social
       effects.
   •   The review was based on a limited level of stakeholder consultation; though the review drew
       on interviews with a number of Bank staff, it did not carry out wider stakeholder engagement,
       including with civil society organizations.
   •   The review did not assess the quality of analytic work being conducted, or provide a detailed
       assessment of the links between analytic work and risk management.
   •   For the most part, the review did not assess the quality, appropriateness, or efficacy of
       mitigation measures. The latter would require fieldwork.

These and other tasks could be carried out in a future assessment.
                                             63                                  APPENDIX F


Appendix F. Recent Developments
Following the World Bank’s 2015 reforms, a number of new developments are in progress
that offer opportunities to improve management of environmental and social risks in DPLs.
Under the new country engagement model, the Bank will carry out a Systematic Country
Diagnostic (SCD). The SCD is designed to support an evidence-based and selective approach
to country prioritization, and to inform the development of the Country Partnership
Framework. The SCD is built to answer five main sets of questions, one of which is “how
sustainable (environmentally, socially and fiscally) is the current pattern of growth,
distribution and poverty reduction?,” and will draw upon and synthesize existing knowledge
products and evidence with additional analysis as needed.

The approach to the SCD and CPF offers an opportunity to help to provide upstream
analytical support that could help task teams to meet some of the requirements of OP 8.60.
The SCD can serve as an entry point to make sure that analytical work on critical
environmental and social aspects is completed, such as assessment of the adequacy of social
safety nets or the effectiveness of environmental impact assessment processes. If capacity
assessments of key management systems are carried out up front, this will reduce the burden
on the preparation process and budget of any individual DPO, which can then draw on pre-
existing work. It can also serve as a gap analysis to guide capacity building and other support
in generation of the CPF. However, there are risks that upstream analysis will be too general
to inform risks surrounding specific policy reforms; some additional work will still be
required within the DPO preparation to ensure that social and environmental risks posed by
specific policy actions are addressed appropriately.

The Bank will also adopt a new tool for tracking and managing risks, the Systematic
Operations Risk-rating Tool (SORT). This tool will require all operations (including DPF
and IPF) and country programs to assign a risk rating (High, Substantial, Moderate, Low) to
each of eight categories (plus potentially an “Other” rating), one of which covers
environmental and social risks. The intention is that this will cover both risks that may affect
implementation of the operation, and risks of potential negative effects that stem from the
operation. Risks that are deemed to be significant will be discussed in the Program Document
and elsewhere, but discussion is required only for the highest risks, as one goal of SORT is to
reduce the compliance costs of risk tracking and reduce low-value commentary.

The SORT could help to improve management of environmental and social risks in DPOs by
providing a way of acknowledging the presence of risks more formally (as the risk will
require a rating), of tracking risks over time, and of focusing attention and resources on the
operations to where they are needed most. But in order for it to do this, it must be that
significant risks are identified and rated appropriately. The adoption of SORT does not
directly address the majority of issues discussed in this review that contribute to a lack of risk
identification, including gaps in guidance, oversight, and incentives. One distinctive feature
of the SORT is that it tracks net risks, after mitigation elements have been applied – so the
due diligence requirements of OP 8.60 (which apply before risk mitigation) may need to be
applied even to operations that end up with Moderate risk ratings. There is some danger that
APPENDIX F                                    64


if higher risk ratings are not used, resources will not be allocated appropriately to risk
management issues.

The SORT and the CPF are in their early stages, and use of these tools is too early for IEG to
meaningfully assess. IEG examined one completed SCD, for Myanmar. The SCD discussed a
range of relevant issues, including the need for a nationally agreed environmental and social
safeguards framework, a framework for managing natural resources, and the adequacy of
safety nets. The proposed analytical work program included work on improving poverty data
and diagnostics, but did not include environmental issues.

IEG also examined the 7 DPOs approved by early March 2015 that had used the SORT
system, including cases that likely had no potential for negative environmental or social
effects. In all 7 cases environmental and social risks were rated as Low or Moderate, and
there was no discussion of environmental or social risks except to state that no significant
risks were present. One Program Document interpreted environmental risks to mean the risks
that natural disasters could pose to the macroeconomic situation and reforms.
