                           99006




CHALLENGE




            r.•
            .Il l
                    Procurement for
                    Complex Situations
            . . . . Challenge
© 20 14 Internatio nal Bank for Reconstruction and Development I The World Bank
18 18 H Street NW, Washingt on DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473- 1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org

Some rights reserved
123417 16 15 14

This work is a product of t he staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The f ind ings, inter-
pretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World
Bank, its Board of Execu ti ve Directors, or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not
guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations,
and other information shown on any map in th is work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
World Bank concerning the legal stat us of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
boundaries. Nothing herein shall constitute or be considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the
privi leges and immun ities of The World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.


Rights and Permissions




The materia l in t his work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination
of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, fo r non-commercial pu rposes as
long as ful l attribution to th is work is given.


Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of
the Pub lisher, The World Bank, 18 18 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax 202 -522 -2422;
e-ma il: pubrights@worldbank.org


Publication Coordinator: Norma Ga rza, The World Bank
Editor.· Sheldon Lippman
Design.- Greg Berger

Cover Photo.·
Supply Chain Management System for AIDS relief in Haiti, from Challenge #3
photo by Jean-Jacques Augustin

                                                                                               j
PROCUREMENT FOR
COMPLEX SITUATIONS
CHALLENGE

                                               COMPETITION WINNERS




 ••• •
•• •
•• • •
 WORLD BANK GROUP                 WORLD BANK GROUP      Open Contracting
  Fragility, ConfHct & Violence   Governance                 Commun1lyo!Pracbce




                                                I
PREFACE

Dear Reader,


Allow me to give personal perspective to this publication and challenge : Two years ago, I shared
an innovative approach in a case story, Starting from Scratch - Creating Procurement Capacity in
Post-conflict South Sudan, that was published by the Procurement Innovation Challenge, the first
such endeavor to gather and select outstanding examples of procurement stories. I was thrilled and
applauded by colleagues in the Fragile States Hub (FCS Hub) at the World Bank. The Open Contract-
ing Community of the World Bank Institute, which championed the Challenge, had successfully
mobilized, selected, and pub li shed 15 interesting case stories that continue to provide examples of
innovative approaches to procurement. This was an idea worth replicating!

On the basis of this first Challenge on innovation, a second Challenge was initiated with focus on
approaches to design and implementation of procurement in situations of urgent need of assistance
due to man-made or natural disaster, conflict, or capacity constraints due to fragility or specific
vulnerabilities (including for small states). The Procurement for Complex Situations Challenge is
a collaborative initiative of the FCS Hub, now called the Fragility, Conflict, and Violence (FCV) Group;
the Open Contracting Community of t he World Bank Institute, now operating under the World Bank
Governance Global Practice; and the East Asia and Pacific Procurement Unit of the World Bank.

In this publication, you will read about 14 different experiences by real people from around the
world, who have carried out procurement in very challenging situations. Such approaches include
cases of increased disclosure of procurement information, including opportunities for the participa-
tion of third parties and cases of community-driven development interventions that responded to
situations of fragility, conflict, and violence. By sharing these experiences, our aim is to empower
practitioners with solutions and tools to improve procurement performance in complex situations and
foster the "science of delivery". The challenging experiences featured in this publication range from
case stories of a project team having to change its approach to procurement reforms under prevailing
political economy of Iraq to teams designing, packaging, and implementing the supply chain to meet
culturally acceptable urgent needs to address the tsunami effects on Banda Aceh, Indonesia. Hope-
fully, these stories will inspire you, the practitioner or concerned advocate, to innovate and to take
action . In situations of fragility, conflict, and violence, inaction or delayed action in procurement can
escalate the risk of catastrophic failure of government and markets.


Within the Challenge Team, we built on the success of the Procurement Innovation Challenge to
develop a clear roadmap for the Procurement for Complex Situations Challenge. This included
mobilizing a Circle of Advisers who supported the Challenge Team during the design and peer-review
of the original 40 case stories that were submitted online. All submissions were evaluated online



                                                II
with the 5 top-ranked case stories winning the Science of Delivery Award and the 14 top-ranked,
including the top 5 winners, qualifying for showcasing in this publication . During the Science of
Delivery award ceremonies, the top 5 case story authors were recognized for contribution to
this Challenge.

Personally, the ride over the past few months of this Challenge has been a great experience; and
after working closely with the authors to further elaborate the 14 case stories, we on the Challenge
Team are pleased to share them in this publication . These real world experiences have each been
developed for this publication as a learning resource to empower practitioners working on the design
or implementation of procurement in complex situations. The case stories will also be shared on
theHive knowledge platform on fragility, conflict, and violence as well as other knowledge platforms
such as the Open Contracting Community and the Community-Driven Development Community of
Practice . These stories will continue to be shared on external networks to further facilitate learning
about procurement performance in complex situations.


On behalf of the Challenge Team, I wish to acknowledge the help, input, and hard work of all who
have contributed to the Procurement for Complex Situations Challenge, including all participants
of the original 40 case stories submitted for the competition, the authors and project teams behind
the 14 selected stories, and the 14 members of the Circle of Advisors and my colleagues on the
Challenge Team (all listed on the following page). I also extend a special thanks to the Challenge
sponsors: the FCV Group, Open Contracting Community, and East Asia and Pacific Procurement Unit
of the World Bank.

On behalf of the Challenge Team, I invite you to explore the 14 case stories in any order that you
may choose and use the case stories as reference material based on the theme or sector of particular
interest. We welcome any feedback on how these stories may have contributed to your work .



Richard Olowo
The Challenge Team




                                                                III
THE CHALLENGE TEAM :

Norma Garza, World Bank Open Contracting
Carey Kluttz, World Bank Open Contracting
Nicholas Mbocha, World Bank Fragility, Conflict, and Violence Group
Marcela Rozo, World Bank Open Contracting
Richard Olowo, World Bank Fragility, Conflict, and Violence Group




THE PROCUREMENT FOR COMPLEX SITUATIONS CHALLENGE
CIRCLE OF ADVISORS :

Alexandre Borges de Oliveira , World Bank
Claire Schouten, Integrity Action and Network for Integrity in Reconstruction
Elodie Beth , OECD
Enzo De Laurentiis, World Bank
Felipe Goya, World Bank
Francesco De Simone, Anti-Corruption Resource Centre
Federico Rabello, World Bank
Gustavo Piga , University of Tor Vergata, Rome
Hiba Tahboub, World Bank
Irina Luca, World Bank
Joao Veiga Malta, World Bank
Julia Keser, Sunlight Foundation
Marcela Rozo, World Bank
Marcelo Jorge Fabre, World Bank
Richard Olowo, World Bank
Shaun Moss, World Bank
V.S. Krishnakumar, World Bank
Yulia Johansen, Reproductive Health Supplies Coalition




                                             IV
A running tap in Tombo Community, from Challenge #7




                                               v
INTRODUCTION
KNOWLEDGE SHARING WHEN URGENCY IS A KEY ISSUE


An estimated 20 percent of the world's poorest people now live in situations affected by fragility,
conflict, and violence; this number could double by 2030 if current trends continue. Procurement
markets in these situations can be particularly challenging given the widespread weakness of gover-
nance and some institutions. Governments often lack the capacity to manage procurement; contrac-
tors are not equipped to participate in bidding opportunities; oversight authorities and citizens are
not able or not empowered to effectively monitor projects, leading to a high risk of ineffectiveness
and corruption . Finding practical solutions and innovations to deal with these vulnerabilities along
with advance development in complex situations is paramount. In complex-situated countries,
inaction or delayed action in procurement can escalate the risk of catastrophic failure of government
and markets.


The Procurement for Complex Situations Challenge is an innovative crowdsourcing mechanism used
to identify and highlight evidence of solution approaches for the design and implementation of
procurement in complex situations. The Challenge represents an effort to mobilize and disseminate
knowledge from a wide range of practitioners doing procurement work in complex situations-
situations in urgent need of assistance due to fragility, capacity constraints, conflict, or emergencies.
In these situations, practitioners designing and implementing procurement face unique challenges.
And while success is touted and many innovations do deliver positive results on the ground, failure
is not uncommon. The World Bank and other development-focused institutions are turning the table
on how failure is viewed, encouraging task teams to foster learning from failure (along with success)
through the " science of delivery" .

A practitioner faced with a procurement task in a complex situation should have access to informa-
tion on what has been done before in similar situations. With this knowledge, task teams and
practitioners can either replicate or benefit from the lessons learned as they formulate new solutions
in similar situations. However, stories are not commonly shared by procurement practitioners on
their experiences leading to a dearth of vital knowledge . For example, seeking stories of innovations
generates the highest demand among all services offered by the Fragility, Conflict, and Violence
Group, formerly FCS Hub, of the World Bank Group.


This Procurement Challenge publication presents a selection of stories on procurement in complex
situations, mobilized globally through a case story competition and structured for learning .
Practitioners who design solutions that adapt productive innovations and avoid past failures
will save valuable time and resources . By using or adapting tested methods, these practitioners
are better prepared to implement effective procurement that contributes to service delivery and




                                               VI
plays a crucial role in restoring citizen confidence in the state and in societies faced with violence,
low trust, and weak institutions, all facets that contribute to the existing fragility.


The approaches used in the 14 case stories can be adapted or simply "tweaked" to meet specific
needs and to improve procurement performance in complex situations. They cover a range of sectors
as shown in the accompanying matrix. Any one of these case stories, which were submitted by
practitioners from non-government organizations and development donors, might just trigger a new
solution in response to similar challenges being faced today and tomorrow.


The following pages elaborate on the challenges, the approaches, the results, and the lessons
learned from these 14 case stories:

Case Story #1: Geotagging: An Innovative Tool To Enhance Transparency and Supervision, and
Fighting Corruption in Development Projects in the Philippines by Noel Sta Ines, The World Bank


Case Story #2 : Finding Needles in a Haystack: Breaking Down Information Barriers between
Buyers and Suppliers in Developing Economies by Morgan Ashenfelter and Kayla Cassavant,
Bu ilding Markets


Case Story #3: Saving Lives through Stronger Supply Chains by Jay Heavner, Supply Chain
Management System


Case Story #4: The Procurement Solution Was Inside the Box, but Only Thinking Outside the Box
Helped the Team Reveal It by Toufiq Ahmed, The World Bank


Case Story #5: The Political Economy of Public Procurement Reform in Iraq: The Long and Difficult
Road by Nazaneen Ali with co-authors Andrew Jacobs, Rachel Lipson, and Fabio lsoldi,
The World Bank


Case Story #6: Rethinking Infrastructure Delivery: Improving Transparency and Competition in
Community-Driven Development Projects by Francisco Rodriguez, The World Bank


Case Story #7: Tombo Community Demands Contract Transparency, by John Momo, the Network
Movement for Justice and Development


Case Story #8: Ten Years of Procurement Reforms in Sierra Leone: Lessons Learned at the
Intersection of Procurement, Fragility, and Governance by Stephan Eggli and Doris Voorbraak,
The World Bank




                                                                  VII
Case Story #9: Realistic Procurement Based on Local Market Conditions in Iraq: A Successful
Experience from a Conflict-Affected Country by Nazaneen Ismail Ali with co-authors
Andrew Jacobs, Rachel Lipson, and Fabio lsoldi, The World Bank


Case Story #10: Solving the Procurement Challenge in Pacific Island Fragile States for Major
Infrastructure Projects by Christopher Bennett and Anna L W ielogorska, The World Ban k


Case Story #1 1: Shell-Shopped: Procurement for Revitalization of SMEs through Commercial
Practices by Rehan Hyder, The World Bank


Case Story #12: New Contractual Framework with FAQ for Locust Control Operation by
Lova Ravaoarimino, The World Bank

Case Story #13 : The Envelope Approach: Innovation in Procurement to Deliver Community-Recovery
Services in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Situations by Paul Bance and Sophie Grumelard,
The World Bank


Case Story #14: Establishing a Three-Tier Supply Line for Relief and Development in Northern
Sumatra by Keith Neroutsos, PATH on behalf of World Vision Indonesia .




                                            VIII
                    REFERENCE TO PROCUREMENT CHALLENGE CASE STORY




Agriculture


Aviation


Education


Energy


Environment


Health


HIV/AIDS

Human Develop-
ment
Local economy and
small business

Nutrition


Private sector


Procurement


Social Safety


Transport


Water/Sanitation




                                       IX
      THE 14 CHALLENGES                               PROCUREMENT FOR COMPLEX SITUATIONS


                                                                         r.••
                                                                         ••==
                                                                         ··-     r   O Iv. P E f I T I 0 N W I ~ ".J ERS



r.:   CHALLENGE 1page1
•••
••    Geotagging in Isolated Areas, Philippines

      How can readily available, inexpensive web-based technology help to get broader participation in
      monitoring and evaluating progress of a project with minimal need for on-site visits in hard-to-reach
      locations?


r.:   CH ALLEN GE    2 page 6
•••
••    Boosting lagging Market with Supplier Directory, Liberia

      How is it possible to find local small and medium-size enterprises in places where market
      information is scarce, advertising is inaccessible, and a small percentage of businesses use
      the Internet less than once per month or never use it?


r.:   CHALLENGE 3page12
••
••    Pooling Procurement for AIDS/HIV Program, Botswana, Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire,
      Ethiopia, Guyana, Haiti, Kenya, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa,
      Tanzania, Uganda, Vietnam, Zambia, and Zimbabwe

      How do multiple countries work together to provide a flexible, reliable, cost-effective and secure
      supply of products for HIV/AIDS program to reduce costs and service emergency needs?


r.:   CHALLENGE 4page18
•••
••    Outsourcing with limited Capacity Availability, Afghanistan

      How is it possible to outsource health work when there are too few capable or interested
      organizations to compete for the limited number of health-related service contracts?


r.:   CHALLENGE      5 page 22
::•   Reforming Procurement along with Good Governance, Iraq

      How is complete reformation of a country's procurement fu nction possible when it is equally
      important to engage the larger governance context of instability, corruption, and lack of capacity?




                                                     x
CHALLENGE          6 page26
Improving Competition in Community Delivery Needs, Nicaragua

How does a local community organization work with government to attract the private sector in the
local need of paving materia ls for isolated road restoration when competitive bidding is nonexistent
and shopping has been the default procurement method?

CHALLENGE          7 page30
Demanding Transparency and Accountability, Sierra Leone

How does a sma ll community organization take action in an effort to demand more transparency
and accountability from its local authorities in a water project for which the local people are
the beneficiaries?


CHALLENGE          8 page34
Decentralizing Procurement Reform, Sierra Leone

Following a decade of civil war, how does a country, with assistance of development partners,
overhaul its centralized, non-transparent. and inefficient procurement system into one with
transparent and accountable institutions that deliver services and bring economic prosperity
to its citizens?

CHALLENGE          9 page40
Keeping It local, Iraq

How can procurement practices be modified for local conditions to allow for more efficient
bidding procedures allowing the local market to participate and removing constraints from
small and medium-size enterprises?

CH ALL ENG E       1 0 page 44
Harmonizing the Regions, Kiribati, Samoa, Tonga, and Tuvalu

How might a procurement approach offer solutions for a regional aviation project in small island
countries that have limited human capacity and no experience in implementing major infrastructure
projects?


CH ALLEN GE        11 page 48
Trading in the Traditional Methods, Pakistan

How can small and medium-size enterprises in war-torn Pakistan rebuild economic viab ility
by following their traditional procurement methods instead of the World Bank-prescribed
shopping methods?



                                                                XI
CHALLENGE 12 page 52
Bidding Against the locust, Madagascar

How does a government deal with a locus plague that threatens its country's agriculture but the
existing World Bank technical assistance agreement is not su itable for procuring the needed supplies
and services to tackle the urgency and potential countrywide devastation?


CHALLENGE 13 page56
The Envelope, Please. Building Together, Not Just Building, Central African Republic

How does a project team deal with a lag in procuring community recovery services and building
community participation and statebuilding in a constrained environment of weak suppliers,
emergency procedures, a dysfunctional banking system, no state presence in lagging areas,
and damaged social fabric at the local level?


CH ALLEN GE    1 4 page 62
Sourcing for Emergency Relief, Indonesia

Is there a procurement strategy that will help a confused market, following a major natural disaster,
to use financial resources in rebuilding the local economy and provide products that are already
culturally acceptable and practical in the local context?




                                                XII
Local loom technicians in Pakistan, from Challenge #11



                                                         XIII
CHALLENGE                   1
GEOTAGGING IN ISOLATED AREAS
Philippines

How can readily available, inexpensive web-based technology help to get
broader participation in monitoring and evaluating progress of a project
with minimal need for on-site visits in hard-to-reach locations?




                             Th is case story, Geotagging: An Innovative Tool To Enhance

                             Transparency and Supervision, and Fighting Corruption in
                              Development Projects in the Philippines!, addresses this challenge.

                              It was submitted by Noel Sta Ines, Senior Procurement Specialist, on

                              behalf of World Bank's project team Carol Figueroa-Geron, Sector

                             Coordinator; Felizardo Virtucio, Team Lead, and Keith Clifford Bell

                              and Hanif Anilmohamed Rahemtulla, Techn ical Advisors; and Arnel

                             de Mesa, Team Lead and Director, Department of Agriculture .




SUMMARY

Geotagging is an innovative and cost-effective way of using GPS technology and web-based
mapping as a project visualization tool to aid project supervision . Geo tagged objects can be
easily and accurately located on a map, enabling government authorities and citizen part icipants
to " virtually" monitor and evaluate progress in the projects, with minimal need for physical visit
for hard to reach areas.
THE CONTEXT
There had been some suspicions of possible fraud and corruption on several infrastructure
subprojects in the conflict-affected province of Mindanao, an archipelago of 7, 100 islands.
To address this issue that arose during a joint procurement-technical review of the Mindanao
Rural Road Development Project (MRDP), the World Bank's procurement specialist recommended
the use of geotagging.


Geotagging uses global positioning system (GPS) technology and web-based mapping as a
visualization tool to aid project supervision . The experience in the Philippines did not require
the use of proprietary software or high-definition imagery and highly skilled engineers and
techn icians that is more typically used in other Bank-supported geotagging projects. The essential
elements for this project in the Philippines included inexpensive GPS-enabled Android cellphones
and access to free web-based applications . The use of this cost-effective technology allows the
geotagged object to be easily and accurately located on a map . Geotagged project data like base
and progress photos, tracks, and polygons are collected primarily by staff of the local government
units and can also be undertaken by non-engineers such as teachers, accountants, and other citizens.
Put briefly, the process assigns a geographical coordinate (latitude and longitude) plus elevation to
an object. The tagged object is easily and accurately overlaid on a map, in a geographical context
through Google Earth, enabling government authorities and citizens to "virtually " monitor and
evaluate progress in the projects, with minimal need for physical visits in hard-to-reach areas .


Geotagging was not part of the original project design . The Bank's task team leader supported the
idea and, in agreement with the Department of Agriculture, the project's responsible agency, hired


                                                                  1
a GPS specialist to design the geotagging monitoring system . The Department of Agriculture
nurtured the design of a working and user-friendly system and developed training tools, materials,
and programs for its staff with input and guidance from the World Bank.


To accelerate the bidding process and increase participation, the Department of Agriculture
integrated geotagging into the Philippine Government's Electronic Procurement System (PhilGEPS),
which allowed the bidders to virtually visit the project site at the same time they download the
bidding documents from the Agriculture Department website . As a result, it instilled increased
competition into the MRDP procurement, and the average number of bidders for each development
project has risen from three to about ten, boosting competition, reducing costs, and giving officials
more options .



THE APPROACH
Initially, the World Bank team suggested to the Department of Agriculture that geotagging be made
a requirement in the "governance-challenged" local government units of Mindanao where recurring
procurement and supervision difficulties abounded . At first Agriculture officials were reluctant and
skeptical of the technology since they were not familiar with the use of GPS for project supervision
and also saw this requirement as an unnecessary Bank-imposed activity with an untested value . But
skepticism turned to enthusiasm with the demonstrated effectiveness of the tool.


The MRDP pilot implementation of geotagging proved usefu l in combating corruption and boosting
transparency in the procurement process. Through virtual site visits, geotagging also addresses
security concerns that arise when trying to reach off-the-beaten-path project sites in conflict-affected
areas, particularly the Autonomous Region of Muslim Mindanao, known as ARMM. For the
Department of Agriculture, local government, and the World Bank, using GPS technology
demonstrated that better project managemen- from approval to execution- in conflict areas
and on island locations can be made more robust and effective.

Geotagging was initially intended for procurement monitoring of infrastructure projects such as
farm-to-market roads, bridges, irrigation systems, and water supply in MRDP, but the application
was expanded to cover other project components - reforestation, marine sanctuary rehabilitation,
and community-driven development projects to be implemented by thousands of small communities.
The scope of geotagging was also scaled up to include planning and monitoring and subsequently
mainstreamed countrywide into Department of Agriculture projects outside World Bank financing as
well as into10 other Bank-financed projects in other sectors.


The World Bank's Country Director supports geotagging as a main tool for data collection in portfolio
mapping . A number of projects in Papua New Guinea, Samoa, and Solomon Islands have taken steps
to implement geotagging . Also, the use of geotagging was tested successfully in a joint Philippine
financial managemenVprocurement supervision of a reforestation project in July 2013 .


                                               2
THE RESULTS
Transparency in procurement and implementation was the primary result of geotagging . Geotagged
data disclosed on the Department of Agriculture website allows access to bidders, civil society
organizations, other government agencies as well as the World Bank. It also allows a wide breadth
of citizen participation to better monitor procurement and project implementation and helps assure
accountability of project managers. As an example, from geotagged photos, citizen monitors were
able to see cracks in the newly poured concrete of a 1.6-kilometer road project. The citizens issued
a comp laint, and the Department of Agriculture sent a special team that confirmed the low-quality
work. The contractor had to remove and replace the entire 1.6 kilometers of concrete road .


Geotagging significantly improved project procurement by (a) providing ready access to information
on specific subprojects to be bidded out; (b) facilitating and increasing interaction among all partici-
pants in the bidding process; and (c) increasing the number of bid participants and bid competition,
thus increasing the chance for local governments to get the best offer.


By providing an additional means of verification, geotagging reinforced good governance in the
interaction and relationship among the Bank task team, the Department of Agriculture, the partici-
pating local government units, and other project implementers. Attempts to overbill the project were
prevented. For instance, through geotagging it was discovered that previously completed and paid
civil works were included in the payment claim of an on-going roads subproject.


The use of geotagging has "gone viral", serving the thrust of good governance, a value that propels
Philippines President Benigno Aquino and his administration. The successful implementation of
geotagging approaches in the Department of Agriculture inspired the other agencies of the Govern-
ment. As an example, geotagging was adopted in 2012 by the Department of Environment and
Natural Resources in the implementation of the National Greening Program aiming to grow 1. 5
billion trees in 1. 5 million hectares nationwide within a period of six years . The system has easily been
mainstreamed as well in other government agencies in the Philippines; the World Bank has recently
received a request from the President's office to provide a briefing to the Cabinet on how to scale up
geotagging in public works, education, health, and social services departments. The use of the tool is
sustainable because it is cost-effective . It uses open source and freely available applications. And the
hardware is affordable .




                                                                  3
LESSONS LEARNED
The experience from introducing geotagging was not easy w ith the initial skepticism of Government
staff and some resistance from other World Bank colleagues. Patience and persistence are required in
demonstrating the usefulness of the tool. It is also important to secure the support of Bank specialists
in geotagging to help confirm the technical soundness of the scheme .

The approach of starting small to test and demonstrate the application in different circumstances
such as on roads, irrigation, reforestation, and livelihood and then scaling-up proved very effective .
Critical to the success was that the Department of Agriculture took the lead in pilot testing and
development of a working and user-friendly system . The World Bank extended its support in the
background through guidance and advice.


The situation and challenge in every country is unique. Nevertheless, the basic technology of geotag-
ging is simple and not intimidating, well established and easily adaptable to different country-specific
situations. It was valuable to have consensus within the Bank team that geotagging is the sustainable
route to go. In the Philippines, the country management un it fully supports this initiative.



RESOURCES
The Philippines Government, the Department of Agriculture, and the World Bank have relevant
training tools available at http://www.daprdp.net/ that can be shared and serve as starting points
for other countries who may be interested in the tool.

Link to the You Tube of March 6, 2014, WBI event (How Ca n Technology Accelerate Citizen
Engagement? Maximizing the Impact of Mapping and Crowdsourcing - Open Development
Technology Alliance) .
http://odta.net/post/how-can-technology-accelerate-citizen-engagement-maximizing-the-
impact-of-mapping-and-crowdsour




                                                4
5
CHALLENGE                   2
BOOSTING LAGGING MARKET
WITH SUPPLIER DIRECTORY Liberia
How is it possible to find local small and medium-size enterprises in places
where market information is scarce, advertising is inaccessible, and a small
percentage of businesses use the Internet less than once per month or
never use it?




                             This case story from Liberia, Finding Needles in a Haystack:

                             Breaking Down Information Barriers Between Buyers and

                             Suppliers in Developing Economies, was submitted by

                             Morgan Ashenfelter, Communications & Donor Management

                             Associate, and Kayla Cassavant, Market Research Associate,

                             on behalf of Building Markets, a nongovernmental organization

                             working across all sectors.




SUMMARY
In post-confl ict and developing economies where there is often a dearth of ma rket information,
buyers and suppliers can find it difficult to impossible doing business with each other.
Through simple technology that can be easily replicated throughout the world, the NGO,
Building Markets, bridges information gaps by maintaining a Supplier Directory and Tender
Distribution Service. In Liberia the result is increased local procurement rising to more than
US$26.2 mill ion since April 2012 .
THE CONTEXT
Market information gaps prevent buyers in Liberia from finding quality local suppliers while in turn
comp licating access to tender opportunities for small and medium-size enterprises (SME) . In-country
advertising rates are set too high for local businesses . Small and medium-size enterprises have no
affordable and accessible means to pitch their services or goods to customers while local buyers are
often forced to rely on word of mouth. In today's widening Information Age, around 42 percent of
businesses in Liberia either use the Internet less than once per month or never use it. On the supplier
side, newspapers, the primary source of tender announcements, are only printed in Monrovia,
the cap ital, and distribution to the counties is inconsistent and late. The lack of resources in both
time and finances makes access to newspaper advertising inconsistent for small and medium-
size enterprises.

Often it is quicker and more cost-effective for buyers to import what they need . The challenge is to
connect buyers with quality local suppliers for certain goods and services that do exist. A simple yet
effective tool was introduced by the non-governmental organization, Building Markets, to break
down information barriers, resulting in increased local procurement in tough environments.




                                                                7
THE APPROACH
Building Markets had success designing business directories in Afghanistan, Haiti, and Timor-Leste.
Building Markets designed a comprehensive and accurate on line Supplier Directory to fit Liberia's
context. The Supplier Directory provides a free listing of verified local businesses that any buyer can
easily access. Building Markets staff visited each small and medium-size enterprise in the country to
ensure they operate out of a standing office and are legal entities registered with the Government
of Liberia . The Supplier Directory also provides basic information about the business, goods, and
services offered; annual turnover; and client references . Free access provides buyers with an efficient
means to search for local suppliers who often have no other way to engage buyers.

Building Markets also provides opportunities to small and medium-size enterprises through its Tender
Distribution Service, which sends out daily tender alerts through e-mail and SMS . The alert system
is based on the directory database, which tags each small and medium-size enterprise by sector and
location ensuring the enterprises receive only relevant tenders. Upon receiving a tender, businesses
can download more information from the web-based directory.

For the majority of businesses that lack easy access to the Internet, information can also be collected
in hard copy at Building Markets' office in Monrovia . In the counties, Building Markets relies on the
support of community officials who receive e-mails of tender information for regular posting on their
community bulletin boards.

As a nation with one of the world's highest foreign direct investment rates, Liberia has prioritized
SME development through its Poverty Reduction Strategy. Therefore, Building Markets works closely
with the Ministry of Commerce and Industry and the National Investment Commission . To target
businesses for verification, Building Markets engaged the Liberia Business Registry and the Ministry
of Commerce and Industry, both of which provide additional resources to businesses . Also, Building
Markets forged relationships with all types of buyers to conv ince them to route tenders through the
Tender Distribution Service. Most buyers responded positively to utilizing a tool that could bring more
local suppliers into their vendor pool.

Building Markets maintains the integrity of the directory by re-verifying this information every
six months .




                                                8
THE RESULTS
Out of 40 buyers surveyed by Building Markets in Liberia, 58 percent use the Supplier Directory
regularly while 30 percent have incorporated the directory into their regular procurement process.
The Supplier Directory assists buyers in developing their local supply chains, which improves the
business climate by increasing competition and reducing transaction costs. In the end, increasing
local procurement creates income and jobs, revives and builds the local economy, and generates
taxable revenues .


One international NGO, for example, uses the directory to find businesses to ask for bidding quotes
via e-mail. The outcome, as reported by the NGO, is a more efficient and cost-effective procurement
process. Not only does the NGO save money on fuel and driver costs by moving the process online,
but it also receives more honest prices from suppliers.


The Tender Distribution Service leads to the most contracts won by local suppliers. Since April 2012,
small and medium-size enterprises won 174 contracts worth over US$22 .7 million out of a total of
US$26 .2 million facilitated by Building Markets. Additionally, the Tender Distribution Service positively
impacts buyers, of which 3 out of 4 surveyed reported receiving more and higher-quality bids when
sending their tenders directly to Building Markets. Of local businesses that won a contract with
international clients, 68 percent won additional contracts in a six-month timeframe . The percentage
is even higher-82 percent-for businesses winning a contract with a national entity.


While these statistics take into account all of Building Markets' services, they still demonstrate the
sustainability of local SME-based procurement. Once buyers find quality suppliers, they prefer to
continue to use those same suppliers, resulting in increased experience for the small local companies,
local job creation, more competitive businesses, and a faster-growing national economy.




                                                                 9
LESSONS LEARNED
Even though 3 out of 4 buyers report an increase of higher-quality bids when using the Tender
Distribution Service, sending tenders to businesses still does not guarantee a high-quality response
or, for that matter, any response. Thus, the Tender Distribution Service is best coupled with training
programs that encourage high-quality suppliers to bid and teach them how to be successful in
the process.


Improving access to tenders for small and medium-size enterprises outside of Monrovia, the capital,
remains a challenge. While posting tenders to community boards may improve the number of
viewings by rural businesses, it still requires time and money from these businesses to physically
pick up the tender documents, which, depending on the buyer, often requires travel to Monrovia.
For example, the Liberian Government procurement system requires bids be picked up and dropped
off only in Monrovia regardless where the procurement is taking place. Therefore, rural businesses
are at a disadvantage to those based in Monrovia .


The Supplier Directory requires a small team dedicated to the verification of businesses and the
maintenance of the accuracy of the information. Seven employees do this work at Building Markets .
In replicating this directory and its maintenance, large-sca le donors, some governments, or for-
profit companies with wide-reaching Corporate Social Responsibility programs that focus on local
procurement are best poised to offer this service .

In contrast to the Directory, the Tender Distribution Service is more replicable . Once buyers
create vendor lists, they can easily send tender information via SMS and e-mail. Based on the
aforementioned statistics in Liberia, the cost to do so for buyers would be well worth it.




                                               10
 Ttn:ler Notification
flan 81..ilding Markets
Ttmer is from MCPC




                   11
CHALLENGE                  3
POOLING PROCUREMENT FOR AIDS/
HIV PROGRAM
Botswana, Burundi, Cote d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Guyana, Haiti,
Kenya, Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, South Africa,
Tanzania, Uganda, Vietnam, Zambia, and Zimbabwe
How do multiple countries work together to provide a flexible, reliable,
cost-effective and secure supply of products for HIV/AIDS program to reduce
costs and service emergency needs?




                            This case story, Saving Lives Through Stronger Supply Chains,

                            add resses th is challenge .

                            It was subm itted by Jay Heavner, Director of Strat egi c Engagement,

                            SC MS, on behalf of PEPFAR (Preside nt's Emergency Pla n for AIDS

                            Re lief), USAID, SC MS/USA, rep resent ing HIV/AIDS wo rk .




SUMMARY

In 2005, USAID established the Supply Chain Management System (SCMS) to provide a flexible,
reliable, cost-effective, and secure supply of products for HIV/AIDS programs in PEPFAR-supported
countries . Awarded the SCMS contract, the Partnership for Supply Chain Management moved
quickly to support rapid scale-up of HIV/AIDS prog rams, creating a reliable global supply chain
where none existed, leveraging economies of scale to reduce costs, and serving as an emergency
provider of choice for AIDS programs.
THE CONTEXT
Over three decades ago, the first case of AIDS was diagnosed in the United States. By the turn of
the century, the world was experien cing a global AIDS crisis . On the African continent alone, some
30 mi llion people were infected with HIV, but only 50,000 had access to treatment. It was in this
context that U.S. President George W. Bush announced in his 2003 State of th e Union Address the
establishment of the President's Em ergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR), the largest international
health initiative ever by one nation to address a sing le disease .


In 2005, PEPFAR established the Supply Chain Management System (SCMS) with the goal of
procuring a reliable, cost-effective, and secure supply of antiretroviral drugs for HIV/AIDS programs
in PEPFAR-supported countries. The hardest-hit countries lacked basic supply chain infrastructure
and systems . Public health supply chains were challenged by frequent stockouts, overstock, expiry,
and wastage .




                                                                  13
THE APPROACH
SCMS established global pooled procurement and a reliable integrated supply chain in developing
countries where none had existed . Key innovations included regional distribution centers in Sub-
Saharan Africa; transformation of supply chain infrastructure and performance in multiple
countries; and innovative quality assurance programs for pharmaceuticals, rapid test kits, and
other commodities .

USAID awarded the SCMS contract to the Partnership for Supply Chain Management (PFSCM), a
consortium of 13 companies with expertise in international public health and development, logistics,
and project management. PFSCM established field offices initially in 16 countries (now 22), which
worked closely with Ministries of Health and PEPFAR implementing partners. To ensure that program
design met local needs, some of the PFSCM partners took on the following key roles: l+solutions
(Netherlands), pharmaceutical procurement; Crown Agents (United Kingdom and United States),
non-pharmaceutical procurement; United Parcel Service (UPS), international logistics; Imperial Health
Sciences (formerly Fuel Logistics, South Africa), African logistics; North-West University (South Africa),
quality assurance; and John Snow and Management Sciences for Health (United States), field office
management and technical assistance .

SCMS created an integrated, global supply chain, leveraging economies of scale to reduce the cost
of medicines and other commodities, ensure a reliable supply, and serve as an emergency provider
of choice for the global AIDS response. The project established pooled procurement for PEPFAR-
supported countries. High volume and high frequency of procurement-averaging over
US$20 million in commodities and 250 deliveries per month-have helped SCMS develop
relationships with key suppliers and freight forwarders, leveraging lower prices and ensuring
availability of commodities and space on key shipping routes.

The volume of pooled procurement through SCMS also provides the project with unique market
intelligence to identify and respond to trends in pricing of commodities and shipping, availability
of supply, and other factors that can impact AIDS treatment programs. To support global pooled
procurement and reduce turnaround times for antiretroviral drugs, SCMS established regional
distribution centers in Ghana, Kenya, and South Africa . These regional distribution centers hold
strategic stock, provide regularly scheduled shipments to neighboring countries, and expedite
emergency orders to prevent stockouts.


In most countries, SCMS delivers commodities to central medical stores from international suppliers
of antiretroviral medicines and other commodities but, when possible, procures from local suppliers
of laboratory commodities and, in limited cases, essential medicines. Central and regional medical
stores, often under the Ministry of Health, then distribute to testing and treatment sites .




                                               14
THE RESULTS
As planned, the SCMS project has virtually eliminated stockouts at the central level in PEPFAR-
supported countries. The annual cost of antiretroviral drugs dropped from about US$1,500 per
patient to between US$100 and US$200. The project met its mandate to provide a safe, reliable,
and secure supply. The rate of antiretroviral drug expiry in SCMS regional distribution centers is
0.55 percent compared to an industrialized world standard of between 3 and 7 percent.


SCMS's robust, quality assurance program has created a credible threat to potential theft and
to suppliers of substandard or counterfeit commodities. SCMS has had no serious breach of
pharmaceutical quality and has experienced just 0.03 percent product loss from theft out of more
than 18,550 deliveries worth more than US$1 .8 billion. Additional benefits include on-time delivery
of around 80 percent to some of the hardest-to-reach areas of the world, with emergency orders
delivered to more than 25 countries to avoid life-affecting stockouts.


The approach is indeed sustainable and replicable; between January 2010 and January 2012, SCMS
procured 21.9 million bottles of generic antiretroviral drugs worth US$102 million for South Africa,
saving US$93 million (48 percent) by comparing prices with those paid by previous South African
tenders. The South African Government then followed the SCMS model, resulting in a 53.1 percent
cost saving of US$630 million.



LESSONS LEARNED
SCMS succeeded in this challenge by building supply-chain capacity in two key areas: infrastructure
and human resources . Warehouses were equipped with modern racking, security, forklifts, cold
rooms, and computerized inventory systems . The project also installed innovative modular systems
-referred to at times as warehouse-in-a-box, storage-in-a-box, and clinic-in-a-box-in several
countries.

To build human resource capacity, SCMS has provided traditional training programs, partnered with
universities to provide pre-service training, and has sent more than 250 participants to intensive
warehousing training in South Africa . Increasingly, SCMS and relevant ministries are engaging private
sector firms to store and distribute commodities .


The project did face unexpected challenges . To help mitigate such problems, collaboration with
partners, including Ministries of Health and the Global Fund, was key to effective responses to,
for example, political turmoil in Cote d'Ivoire and Zimbabwe; hurricanes, earthquake, and cholera
outbrea k in Haiti; and global product recalls, including a large recall of HIV test kits. Global crisis
committees convened to prevent significant interruption in supply and contribute to relief efforts.




                                                                   15
The take-away lesson is, whenever possible, to pool procurement; procure appropriate commodities
from the local market; implement robust quality assurance, quality management, and performance
management programs; and employ the private sector for storage and distribution . At a global level,
the SCMS model is scalable to meet needs of small and large countries, in stable and in fragile and
conflict-affected situations.



RESOURCES
Six Years of Saving Lives Through Stronger Public Health Supply Chains, SCMS website,
http://scms.pfscm.org/scms/communitycenter




                                             16
17
CHALLENGE                  4
OUTSOURCING WITH LIMITED
CAPACITY AVAILABILITY Afghanistan
How is it possible to have a meaningful competitive procurement when
the number of capable organizations is too few compared to the volume
of procurement contracts?




                              The case story, The Procurement Solution Was Inside the

                              Box, But Only Thinking Outside the Box Helped The Team

                              Reveal It!, addresses th is challenge.

                              It was submitted by Toufiq Ahmed, Senior Procurement

                              Specialist, World Bank, on behalf of the Ministry of Public

                              Health, Afghanistan, and the World Bank project team.




SUMMARY

Hea lth services in Afghanistan have been outsourced thro ugh NGOs since the end of civi l war.
A scarcity of capable and/or interested NGOs in fragile and conflicted-affected situations does
not generate effective competition. Employers are compel led to adopt single source sel ection
as the default cho ice thus el iminating any opportunity for innovation and variety t hat comes
from competit ive selection . The case story is about creating competition among only 26 NGOs
for 18 service contracts complying w ith World Bank Guideli nes.
THE CONTEXT
Since the end of civil war in Afghanistan, delivery of basic health services are largely contracted out
to the NGOs- some are performing well and others are not. Ending in December 2013, the existing
18 contracts with NGOs for 18 provinces of Afghanistan required renewal for uninterrupted health
services. Due to low interest and lack of capable NGOs available in this fragile and conflict-affected
situation, extension of existing contracts through sing le source selection was the typical and rational
de facto choice. The perception being that single source selection mitigates the high risk of procure-
ment delay or failure . Into this mix was also the understanding that there is hardly any possibility of
meaningful competition where only a few NGOs are expected to compete.


The challenge was how to introduce effective competition within a pool of only 26 NGOs competing
for 18 health consultancy packages, one per province.


The selection of NGOs also had multiple boundary conditions and constraining factors:

a. There would be a limited number of NGOs that show either the necessary capability or interest.
b. There was an operational requirement limiting a maximum of 2 contracts per NGO to safeguard
  against forming a monopoly by a single, large NGO . Such limit was required to protect against
  mass service disruption in multiple provinces in case one NGO fails to deliver, and also ensuring
  qua lity service from each NGO with high level of control.
c. The widely varied funding of the 18 contract packages-the highest being US$30 million and
  the lowest US$2 .9 million- would hold differing attraction for the NGOs.



                                                                19
d. A high probability of collusion could exist among the NGOs.
e. The selection design had to mitigate the risk of key expert duplication (the same expert being
   proposed by different or same NGO in different provinces) in the nearly 100 proposals but at
  the same time factor in appropriate flexibil ity to maximize utilization of limited, in -country
  human resources .
f . And, finally, the selection needed to build capacity of the Ministry of Health to handle this
  mammoth task but keeping uniform standard of evaluation across all 18 contract packages .



THE APPROACH
The procurement team used the similar but custom ized concept of "slice-and-package" while also
balancing the multiple operational constraining factors and boundary conditions . The ultimate goa l
was to instill reasonable competition and award no more than two contracts to any one NGO . One
NGO could be shortlisted for up to a four-package maximum to increase competition per package
but ensuring an NGO is not burdened by preparing multiple proposals. The shortl isting criteria were
provided in the Request for Expression of Interest (REOI), which mentioned no limit on expressing
interest and the maximum limit of contracts per NGO. During the proposal stage, key experts were
prohibited from participating in multiple proposals coming from a single NGO . However, key experts
were allowed to participate in single proposals from other NGOs in the same province .

The award decision of 18 contracts was sequenced from the highest to lowest funding size in order
to ensure transparency of selection; avoid the pick-and-choose approach of a favorite contract
package by an NGO; and ensure the most capable NGOs are competing for the high-stake, large
contracts. This package sequencing helped NGOs to offer the best proposals for the higher-size
contracts. The sequencing strategy also lessened risk of collus ion . However, a greater mitigating
step against collusion was a letter issued by the Minister of Health to all NGO heads communicating
a zero-tolerance policy against fraud and corruption . The letter also reminded the NGOs of their
accountabil ity for measures against fraud and corruption.

This competitive method for consultant selection generated more innovative and cost-effective
proposals from the NGOs. Some innovative ideas generated for health service provision were use of
mobile phones, closer work with the communities needing services in insecure areas, cash and kind
for mothers to encourage regular checkup during pregnancy and for immunization, and use of local
community transport for routine referrals rather than use of an emergency ambulance.




                                               20
THE RESULTS
All 18 health services contracts were signed with services beginning January 1, 2014. With only
26 NGOs shortlisted for 18 contract packages, the competitiveness at each stage of selection was
as follows :

• An average of 7 NGOs were found to have expressed interest per package.
• An average of 4 NGOs were short-listed per package .
• An average of 3 NGOs per package were found to have passed technical evaluation .


The competition generated out of the contracting strategy was highly satisfactory for the World Bank
and the Ministry of Health. The competitive selection paved way for NGOs to propose a variety of
innovative approaches to address the health service needs, which was the ultimate expectation from
the Ministry and the stakeholders.


The procurement strategy was unique by itself and helped open an avenue for using a customized
approach of "slice and package" for consultancy services. In similar complex situations, the
contracting strategy can be adopted with appropriate modifications .



LESSONS LEARNED
Contracting 18 packages all at one time was a mammoth task. The planning should start at an early
stage. Other options could have been explored; 2 provinces could have been combined in one pack-
age, thereby reducing the total number to 9 packages from 18. However due consideration should
be given to operational risks before opting to go this route.


Early stage capacity-building training proved very beneficial and raised the quality of the process,
especially prior to each stage of the selection process when the focus helped the selection drivers
to understand uniformly the requirements of the process.

The process benefited from the European Union's provision of two procurement specialists to the
Ministry of Health in assuring that the participating NGOs were well acquainted with fairness and
transparency of the process. Leadership commitment and close supervision are critical roles in
mitigating fraud and corruption .


Other methods such as qualifications-based se lection or fixed-budget selection could possibly
generate better results on operational outcomes.




                                                               21
CHALLENGE                  5
REFORMING PROCUREMENT ALONG
WITH GOOD GOVERNANCE Iraq
How is complete reformation of a country's procurement function possible
when it is equally important to engage the larger governance context of
instability, corruption, and lack of capacity?




                            The case story, The Political Economy of Public Procurement

                            Reform in Iraq: The Long and Difficult Road, addresses this

                            challenge.

                            It was submitted by Nazaneen Ismail Ali, Senior Procurement

                            Specialist, and co-authors Andrew Jacobs, Rachel Lipson, and

                            Fabio lsoldi, MENA Procurement Unit, the World Bank, on behalf

                            of the work done by the Government of Iraq and the World Bank

                            procurement team.




SUMMARY

Over the period 2006-2011, the Government of Iraq with support from the World Bank under-
took the ambitious effort to reform its procurement system . Among other actions, an Inter-
Ministerial Task Force was created, consultation workshops were held with civil society and private
sector, and a comprehensive new law was drafted based on international good practice . Yet, after
years of work, implementation has proven elusive. This case analyzes why progress was limited,
with recommendations how to approach procurement reform in Iraq and challeng ing situations.
THE CONTEXT
The World Bank's procurement engagement in Iraq began in 2006 with a request from the Govern-
ment of Iraq to assist in reforming the country's legal framework . Recognizing the effect that existing
poor practices had on efficiency and value for money, the Government aimed for a new procurement
law based on internationally recognized good practice .


To manage the reform of the public procurement legal framework, the Government formed a
25-member Inter-Ministerial Task Force. In addition, a team of internationally recognized and local
procu rement lawyers was hired to assist in the drafting and preparation . Several workshops were
organized in Amman, Baghdad, Beirut, and Erbil with participants from the public and private sectors
and rep resentatives of civil society to discuss issues related to the process .

The drafting of the new Procurement Law was completed in late 2007. The Shura Council reviewed
and approved the law in December 2009, at which point it was submitted to the Council of Ministers
for its approval. However, the Council of Ministers decided to delay the approval of the draft law in
favor of a set of regulations . At the same time, the Council recommended abolishing the existing
legal framework without passing any law to replace it. These decisions would create a legal vacuum
in public procurement. With no legal foundation, the highly disorganized procurement system was
vulnerable to abuse, waste, and corruption .


After the decisions by the Council of Ministers, Iraq lacked clear direction . The country went through
several conflicting and incompatible attempts to develop different new legal instruments in parallel
with different stakeholders . With an unclear legal framework, the reform strategy needed to be
adapted to better fit the conditions on the ground.


                                                               23
THE APPROACH
The World Bank remained committed to the same goals of modernizing public procurement in Iraq.
There was a need to adopt a more gradual approach. In 2010, the Government of Iraq adopted
standard bidding documents that were piloted in five ministries and disseminated from the Ministry
of Planning website in 2012, accessible to all implementing agencies. The Government also
developed new sector bidding documents aimed at ensuring fair, non-restrictive, clear, and
comprehensive bidding requirements.


More recently, a national implementation manual and a national train ing strategy have been
developed, and capacity-building efforts in procurement have been amped up across the country.
Recent reform efforts in Iraq have also featured a renewed focus on transparency. Iraq's Governance
Action Plan for 2013-2014 calls for the creation of one sing le portal for procurement notices. The
portal will enhance transparency in the government procurement system by providing more public
information, both through the publication of bidding notices and the announcement of bidding
awards. While these reforms with a focus on capacity building and transparency are certainly not
totally encompassing, they represent a viable path forward under difficult circumstances.



THE RESULTS
Experience in Iraq showed the importance of adapting gradual fixes as ways to tackle institutional
building . While maintaining long-term vision, it becomes critical in post-conflict environment to
demonstrate early results . Iraq's experience illustrates that the initial pursuit of smaller reforms is
often more impactful than attempting to fix a whole system at once. This kind of measured ap-
proach, which prioritizes and highlights early successes, can help to create broader demand for
services over the long term that would facilitate larger reforms .

The challenges faced in reforming Iraq's public procurement system mirror traditional obstacles
encountered in implementing public sector reforms . However, given the environment and country
context, this case also presents additional unique lessons to inform future decision-making on how
to approach procurement reform in other conflict states.


The key takeaway from the World Bank's early engagement in Iraq was the futility of trying to
address public procurement reform in isolation . The experience showed that complete reformation of
a country's procurement function is highly unlikely without engaging the larger context of instability,
corruption, and lack of capacity. The future success of procurement reforms in Iraq (and other fragile
states) will depend on the country's willingness to build a foundation for change that addresses each
of these factors in the governance environment.


Subsequent reform efforts will benefit immensely from having a detailed stakeholder analysis, which
would help to identify reform champions who can guide the reforms through the process from
beginning to the end .

                                                 24
LESSONS LEARNED
Th is case illustrates the nature and complexity of procurement reform, particularly in a post-conflict
state. Iraq will continue to face serious challenges stemming from the country's political environment,
the conflicting vested interests within the executive branch, and weak credib ility. These obstacles are
compounded by the lack of top-level executive and legislative support for reforms .


Procurement reform also becomes particularly challenging in Iraq because confronting public
procurement reform in the country means tackling corruption . Thus, it should come as no surprise
that pushing for procurement reform in Iraq requires substantial patience, deliberativeness, and
tolerance. The prioritizing of interventions, effective management of the political economy environ-
ment, and careful stakeholder analysis (whom to engage in reform) will all be key to success.


Most prominently, reform will require strong political leadership and robust decision-making
structures for policymaking, oversight, and guidance . It is important to note that reforms tend
to take time in any environment (though especially in this one). There is a need to prioritize
interventions, look for opportunities for success, and adopt gradual fixes . The likelihood of
fi xing the whole system at once would be impossible. Instead of trying for a one-stop fix,
stakeholders should focus on translating reform priorities into actionable implementation .



RESOURCES
The Political Economy of Public Procurement Reform in Iraq, The World Bank
Public Procurement Reform in Iraq: A long and Difficult Road, The World Bank




                                                               25
CHALLENGE                 6
IMPROVING COMPETITION IN
COMMUNITY DELIVERY NEEDS                                                            Nicaragua

How does a local community organization work with government
to attract the private sector in the local need of paving materials
for isolated road restoration when competitive bidding is nonexistent
and shopping has been the default procurement method?




                              This case story from Nicaragua, Rethinking Infrastructure Delivery:

                              Improving Transparency and Competition in Community-Driven

                              Development Projects, addresses this challenge.

                              It was submitted by Francisco Rodriguez, Procurement Specialist,

                              World Bank, on behalf of the Nicaragua Ministry of Transport and

                              Infrastructure, the Modulos Comunitarios de Adoquinado, and the

                              World Bank project team, Andres Mac Gaul, Anne-Marie Guth,

                              Leonel Estrada, and Luz Marina Bojorge.




SUMMARY

Community Modules for Adoquines (MCA) are local entities formed under the leadersh ip
of local mayors in Nicaragua . Since 2011, a new kit of standardized documents, extensive
advertising, and contract grouping improved the efficiency in the implementation and increased
the number of bidders, strengthening the MCA model . The approach includes the design of
"super" simplified standard documents (for competitive bidding).
THE CONTEXT
Operating in Nicaragua since 2004, Modulos Comunitarios de Adoquinado (MCA) are local entities
formed under the leadership of local mayors. Within each MCA, a board of five directors provides
staffing to operationalize a specific road-upgrading task. Each Community Module for Adoquines
individually needs to contract earthworks contractors, local labor, and adoquines suppliers. The
MCA personnel receive technical support and training from the centralized Ministry of Tran sport &
Infrastructure (MTI) from project inception, and have an MTI supervisor and promoter accompanying
them throughout the implementation process .


Adoquines are concrete-like paving blocks that are precast in an offsite factory location . The
adoquines used for vehicular traffic in Nicaragua are hexagonal in shape and 10 centimeters thick.
After fabrication, the adoquines are transported to the project site to be laid as the final surface
course of the newly paved road .


Since earthworks have to be contracted first, MCA had to take into consideration the timing of the
earthworks, procurement of adoquines, and contracting for the laying processes. Given physical
isolation of some roads, transport becomes a crit ical factor for areas where adoquines manufactur-
ing is far from project sites, or where interest in the private sector to supply these areas becomes a
challenge to the procurement process.


Normally, these contracts for works, road material, and labor have been awarded using shopping
procurement procedures, which have low impact in real competency-often meaning difficulty in
getting three valid quotations-and transparency and direct contracting. Since 20 11, a new kit of
standardized documents, extensive advertising, and contract grouping has improved the efficiency
in the implementation and increased the number of bidders, strengthening the MCA model.

                                                                27
THE APPROACH
The Ministry of Transport & Infrastructure and local MCAs introduced "super" simpl ified standard
documents (for competitive bidding). The new procurement process was designed to increase the
number of bidders, establish more transparent procurement processes, and increase efficiency and
value for money. Because of the collaborative approach of the MCA scheme, the design of any
change had to consider the participation of the M inistry of Transport and Infrastructure, local
governments, the communities, and the private sector (particularly adoquines producers, small
civil works contractors, and material transporters).


As part of the design of the Rural Roads Infrastructure Improvement Project, the World Bank
conducted an assessment of the performance of the MCA-utilized procurement system, followed
by another assessment of the agreements with the counterparts in the design . Following are some
outcomes of the assessments:

a. Multiple Community Modules that work in the same road sector would continue jointly to
  procure earthworks and adoqu ines for sound economic measures in terms of contract pricing
  and adm inistration .
b. Competitive bidding would replace shopping, bringing addit ional transparency and competit ion.
  Standard bidding documents for "simplified " competitive bidding were designed to avoid
  administrative bottlenecks; the standard bidding template was formatted as a PDF document
  on which only changes in the quantities and bidders names were permitted.
c. All procurement processes had to be published through SISCAE (the Nicaraguan procurement
  electron ic system ).
d. The Min istry of Transport and Infrastructure had to review all MCA-conducted competitive
  bids prior to publishing .
e. The competitive bidding process took into consideration t he community-driven nature of
  the Commun ity Modules for Adoquines. It was not expected that foreign firms would bid
  on supplying the low-value construction materials despite the cost estimate being higher
  than the international competitive bidding threshold for goods applicable to Nicaragua .




THE RESULTS
The first challenge was not to impact the normal implementation of the Rural Roads Infrastructure
Improvement Project. To date the main activities on the rural roads component have advanced rapidly
at 77 percent and disbursements are at 59 percent, the initial project activities are expected to be
finished well ahead of projected timing .


The number of bidders for civil works has increase to an average of 5, and prices are compet itive;
however, a more detailed analysis of prices and results to evaluate the effectiveness of the changes
should be implemented .


                                               28
More challenging was the implementation of changes in the procurement of adoquines. Many trans-
port companies are informal and not legally incorporated. After several changes in the procurement
strategy, which included meetings of the Ministry with transport companies and adoquines produc-
ers, a combined approach was successfully applied that improved delivery and storage of adoquines
between the roadwork and producer's space with transport paid the next day following service .

The standard bidding documents were adjusted to reflect suggestions of the suppliers . The Ministry
of Transport and Infrastructure, the communities, and local government are now successfully using
these bidding documents.



LESSONS LEARNED
The World Bank's Procurement guidelines can be tailored to meet client's and communities realities .

An open dialogue with clients and the communities, bringing together the knowledge of local
condit ions and innovative changes and practices, increased the effectiveness of the MCA approach
in terms of best value for money.


Community-driven development projects are an ideal laboratory to develop and test changes that
could positively impact accountability, transparency, and efficiency. This model, with the necessary
knowledge of local condition, can be replicated worldwide .



RESOURCES
Stephen Muzira, and Damaris Hernandez de Diaz, Rethinking Infrastructure Delivery:
Case Study of a Green, Inclusive and Cost-Effective Road Program in Nicaragua,
The World Bank, 2013 .




                                                               29
CHALLENGE                   7
DEMANDING TRANSPARENCY
AND ACCOUNTABILITY SierraLeone
How does a small community organization take action
in an effort to demand more transparency and accountability
from its local authorities in a water project for which the local
people are the beneficiaries?




                                The case story from Sierra Leone, Tombo Community Demands

                                Contract Transparency, addresses this challenge.

                                It was submitted by John Momo, Project Officer, on behalf of the civil

                                society organization, Network Movement for Justice and Development.




SUMMARY
A Concern Citizens Group engaged district authorities to demand transparency and
accountability for a water project from which the citizens and beneficiaries were left
out of the planning and monitoring processes. Because of the citizen's demonstrable
action, the District Council responded by providing the Bill of Quantity, and a Rapid
Result Initiative helped to establish a citizen monitoring team for the water project.
THE CONTEXT
Tombo is a bustling fishing town in the Western Area Rural District of Sierra Leone . On Wednesday,
November 16, 2011, at 10:00 in the morning, the community group headed by Mrs. Angela
Langley, Abdulai B. Sankoh, and Abdul Karim Max-Kanu, along with the Station Manager of Radio
Tombo, ward committee members, youths, and women of Tombo saw work starting on the Gravity
Water Supply Rehabilitation Project in their community, a project that fell under the World Bank
decentralized service delivery program . However, the local people had not been informed of the
project's launch . They had not been involved in the project design . Only a few influential community
members, primarily chiefs, were involved in the implementation .

Fortunately, Tombo had a Concerned Citizens Group. The Group had been established by the
Network Movement for Justice and Development in Sierra Leone as part of their community
sensitization program . With regard to the water supply project that would be providing 50 water
taps in Tombo, the Concern Citizens Group engaged the Western Area Rural District Council
in discussions on the project contract. This was a matter of transparency, accountability, and
participation-all matters of concern to the community who are the beneficiaries of the
project's outcome.


The intervention by the Concerned Citizens Group made clear to the District Council that as a
community they are knowledgeable about contractual issues; however in this instance they were
left out but should be able to participate in the process. This experience was aligned to project
priorities and systems that had precedence in the Local Government Act of 2004 and the Public
Procurement Act of 2004. The legislation clearly provides for community participation in the
implementation of community projects. The partners comprise local council, the contractors, and
the community people. The role of the council is to award and supervise the contract, the contractor
implements the contract, and the community serves as "watch dogs" .

                                                               31
THE APPROACH
The Concerned Citizens Group represents a multi-stakeholder approach with the participation of
women, youth, and men; although few community elders ta ke part. As an organized coalition, the
Citizens Group was able to engage the local council in meetings and dialogue about the Water
Rehabilitation Project, which propelled the Chief Administrator and the District Council to present
the Bill of Quantity to the Citizens Group after work had started . The project was officially launched
after work started . The project was budgeted at 477 million leones (or US$115,000) and serviced
25,000 citizens as project beneficiaries.

The whole episode sent a signal for the importance and need to enhance procurement transparency
at all levels. The Council's role and responsibility is to share the contract information to the com-
munity and involve them in the processes. The contractor's role and responsibility is to involve the
indigenous people in the contract by providing employment potentially for the community citizens,
including young people, who have the skills, and establishing a relationship of amicable co-existence
during the project implementation . The community's role and responsib ility is to participate in and
monitor the process and demonstrate its capacity to take ownership of the project.




THE RESULTS
Clearly, there was an initial lack of disclosure of the contract since the community was not involved
in the project design; just a few influential members of the community (the chiefs) were involved
initially. Also, there was limited community involvement in the evaluation processes of the project.
These challenges were addressed by the intervention of the Concern Citizens Group pressuring
the Council to involve the community in full participation; the Council responded positively to the
community's proposal.

Community awareness and involvement was the major impact resulting from the intervention of
the Concerned Citizens Group . They made their voices heard to the local authorities that exclusion
of the community in community-driven development and secrecy in contract implementation and
management is unacceptable. The long-term effect for Tombo should be sustained participation,
transparency, accountability, probity, value for money, and community ownership in future projects.


This experience in Tombo did lead to more effective procurement implementation and better
performing systems-to some extent. Community satisfaction was rated as "average" at the end of
the water supply project implementation . The project earned the "average" rating because at project
completion the 50 taps were running efficiently, but after some time just 25 of the 50 taps were run-
ning properly (due to gravitational problems as diagnosed by the technical experts and contractor of
the project) . An unplanned outcome was the establishment of a Rapid Result Initiative for monitoring
community projects by the community.




                                              32
In communities like Tombo, the sustainability of the outcomes are fragile due to the complexities and
dynamics in community-driven development. They are sustainable as long as the community refuses
to be co-opted or disorganized. For longer-term initiatives, the impacts could be productive and
positive once communities are united .



LESSONS LEARNED
Organized communities can articulate their
concerns when they are knowledgeable and
united. The Tombo community persuaded
the service providers and civic authorities to
make available information that should be in
the public domain and to be accountable and
transparent when dealing with the public trust.


Action is a byproduct of empowerment.
Shown lacking in this experience, there is room
for more participation by women to take the
lead on these social-related issues and the
media to help in galvanizing the community
and becoming a more formidable force to
engage constructively.


Community action is key to organization and
empowerment when demanding entitlement
from service providers. Communities should
form citizen-awareness groups and look for
opportunities to demystify policies and laws,
learn about lobbying and advocacy skills, and
advocate for and demand transparency and
accountability from their civic leaders and
service providers .


The Tombo experience could be applied in
countries with a similar fragile and conflict
context like Sierra Leone . This experience could
be scaled up in larger countries like Liberia,
for example.




                                                              33
CHALLENGE                    8
DECENTRALIZING PROCUREMENT
REf 0 RM Sierra Leone
Following a decade of civil war, how does a country, with assistance of
development partners, overhaul its centralized, non-transparent, and
inefficient procurement system into one with transparent and accountable
institutions that deliver services and bring economic prosperity to its citizens?




                                 The case story, Ten Years of Procurement Reforms in Sierra Leone:

                                 Lessons Learned at the Intersection of Procurement, Fragility,
                                 and Governance, addresses this challenge .

                                 It was submitted by Stephan Eggli, Operations Officer, World Bank,

                                 and Doris Voorbraak, Harvard Fellow, on behalf of the World Bank

                                 project team, Allan Rot man and Ferdinand Tsri Apronti.




SUMMARY
This case, situated at the nexus of fragility, procurement, and governance, analyzes
the 2002-12 procurement reforms in Sierra Leone with a focus on how government
and development partners worked together to bui ld transparent and accountable
institutions that deliver services to citizens.
THE CONTEXT
More than a decade of civil war caused enormous damage to Sierra Leone's socio-economic fabric, and the
capacity and integrity of the procurement system were seriously eroded . The year 2002 marked the ending
of a brutal civil war in Sierra Leone that dragged the country to the lowest rank on the UN Human Develop-
ment Index. The Truth and Reconciliation Commission set up to identify the roots of the conflict and to
provide a vision moving forward, stated that " it was years of bad governance, endemic corruption, and the
denial of basic human rights that created the deplorable conditions that made conflict inevitable."


After re-election in 2002, President Kabbah realized that overcoming fragility and conflict would require the
establishment of a government system that can deliver basic services and shared prosperity for its citizens.
However, achieving this vision would require a complete overhaul of the centralized, non-transparent, and
inefficient procurement system . At that time, procurement planning and monitoring was perceived corrupt
and characterized by bad practice such as splitting of tender packages and the use of sole source instead of
competitive tendering.

In a 2002 survey, 23 percent of public officials stated that bribes were necessary to obtain public contracts.
Ninety percent of all procurement cases illegally bypassed the central authority responsible for procurement.
In response, the President launched a public procurement reform program with the assistance of the Euro-
pean Union, UK Department for International Development (DFID), United Nations, and World Bank. The
reform program foresaw the update of the obsolete legal framework; the establishment of a procurement
authority; the recruitment and training of procurement staff; and, most importantly, the decentralization
of procurement.


Within 10 years, the country managed to establish a decentralized procurement system that produced good
practice in the areas of transparency, accountability, and participation (Box 1).

                                                                 35
                             BOX 1. KEY PROCUREMENT REFORM STEPS

 2002       • President Kabbah launches public procurement reform program

 2003       • Central Tender Board dissolved & Procurement Reform Steering Committee established

            • Public Procurement Act enacted
 2004
            • Local Government Act enacted

            • National Public Procurement Authority and Independent Procurement Review Panel established
 2005
            • National procurement website established

            • Public Procurement Regulations and Manual released
            • Standard procurement documents and reporting formats released
            • Institute for Public Administration and Management selected as main procurement training
 2006
              institution
            • Procurement Committees and Units gradually established
            • Procurement Plans for 9 ministries, departments, and agencies approved

 2007       • 19 procurement officers for local councils recruited

            • Anti-Corruption Act enacted
            • 19 procurement officers assigned to the local councils
 2008
            • First Public Procurement Forum held
            • One-year procurement degree and post-graduate courses offered by IPAM

            •Trained procurement officers employed to ministries, departments, and agencies
 2010
            • 55 Procurement Plans approved

 2012       • Country Procurement Assessment Report (CPAR) finalized




THE APPROACH
While the reforms followed to a large extent an establ ished pattern of a "first generation" procu re-
ment reform, they also stood out for a particular reason - decent ralizat ion and the related space for
participation and increased accountability. Implemented in parallel to the procurement reforms, local
government reforms addressed the concentration of power in the capital, to the detriment of the
provinces, one of the root causes of conflict and fragility in Sierra Leone.

The Govern ment and donors made contin uous investments to strengthen the capacity of civil society
and to increase their participation, especially at the local level. As a result, loca l councils show hig h
levels of accou ntability and the increased civil society participation led to tangi ble improvements in
procu rement outcomes. A num ber of civic society orga nizations have a trai ned membership and play
an active role in monitoring local procurement and raising awareness.


                                                  36
The case of Sierra Leone illustrates that procurement reform design and implementation was
successful when integrated with the broader public sector reforms. The adverse impacts of the
weak links between procurement planning and budget execution or the reform space created by
the decentralization testify to the interdependency between procurement and wider reforms.


President Kabbah (2002-07) championed the reform process in 2002 and created the initial momen-
tum for change . President Koroma (2007- present) showed continued commitment to the procure-
ment reforms. International technical and financial support had a significant influence on reform
policies, speed, and outcomes . Financial support for procurement reforms has been provided through
projects, budget support programs, and broader initiatives such as the HIPC debt relief.



THE RESULTS
There is broad con sen sus on the significant progress made during the 10 years of procurement
reforms . The Procurement Law meets international good practice, and the organizational restructur-
ing required to comply with the legislation is for the largest part completed . Procurement units and
committees in both local councils as well as in mini stries have been established and staffed with
trained procurement officers. In 2010, around 50 percent of government's expenditure was spent
through public procurement processes, and the trend is increasing. For example, the procurement
of health care supplies rose from US$9 million in 2008 to US$19 million in 2011 .


Several success stories highlight that civil society organization (CSO) oversight at the local level
contributes to improved procurement outcomes (Box 2). While a functioning decentralized system
of government is now in place, both legislation and implementation still leave room for tension
between central and local levels of government with opportunities for divide and rule . In line
with the previous presidencies, the decision-making power in Sierra Leone continues to lie with
the President. The newly emerged accountability institutions provide a certain level of checks and
balances but are often not strong enough to oppose the informal power structure. The reform
agenda call s for continuing efforts to institutionalize good practice and to build the capacity of local
procu rement staff. In spite of these challenges, analysts agree that the decentralization has brought
about a system that is reasonably robu st and has helped to create a whole new local dynamic with
local politicians and citizen's action incentivized toward improving service delivery outcomes.

The sustainability of the reform achievements depends on a number of factors . First, the broader
public sector reforms (including civil service and public financial management) have to continue.
Second, development partners have to remain engaged and transition to increased reliance on
count ry systems. Most importantly, however, there is a need for renewed political commitment
to continue the process of decentralization .




                                                                 37
          BOX 2 . CIVIL SOCIETY PARTICIPATION IN THE PROCUREMENT PROCESS

There are various ways through which CSOs contribute to the procurement process:
• CSOs organized a number of procurement workshops and sensitization events.
• CSOs produced and disseminated reports and educational material explaining the procurement processes and
  how it can be monitored.
• Civil society and media participated in bid opening ceremonies. Certain ceremonies recorded over 50 people
  attending, including media and CSO representatives and local community members.
• CSOs participated in the bid evaluation process at local councils.
• Sierra Leone participates in the World Bank-supported West Africa Contract Monitoring Network, which aims to
  establish multi-stakeholder, country-level, contract monitoring coalitions.




LESSONS LEARNED
Sierra Leone had the macro ing redients for success-political will and commitment, buy-in
from key stakeholders, enabling public sector reforms, and a more assertive civi l society. The
procurement reforms encountered a w elcoming, enabling domestic policy environment to reverse
t he dysfu nctional pract ices of the past. Contin uous investments in capacity build ing and sensit izat ion
of stake holders proved to be another key success f actor. The broader decentralization reform w as
not only an instru ment to overcome th e ce nt ralized and corrupt government syst em , but also
strongly influenced public procurement and helped to make it more accountable and participatory.

These lessons might be useful for project teams working on procurement reforms in a fragile context:

• Understanding the implications of conflict and fragility. In the case of Sierra Leone, bad
   governance an d corrupti on w ere ident ified as root causes of the conflict. As the civi l war came to
   an end, citizens discontent wit h poor governance created pressure on the government to reform .
   The civil war also created a demand for increased participation .
• Acknowledging the centrality of political will. The nation al leadership made procu rement
   reform happen soon after the civil war ended . Moving forward, politica l commitme nt will be the
   major determinant for the sustainability of procurement refo rms.
• Using decentralization as entry point. Decentralization can create space fo r increased
   participation at the loca l level an d lead to higher levels of accountability and transparency in
   local procu rement.
• Starting afresh. Inst ead of build ing on the existi ng systems, the refo rm committee decided to
   replace t he dysfunctiona l system and recruit and train a new generation of procurement officers.
   This approach successfu lly helped overcoming "the old ways of doing thin gs" .




                                                    38
• Collaborating with broader reforms. Independent procurement reform sequencing is hard
   to achieve given the dependency on broader public sector reforms. It is therefore crucial that
   procurement reform teams collaborate closely with other reform teams.
• Strengthening accountability institutions. Procurement capacity building for accountability
   institutions (i .e., audit, anti-corruption agency) should start as early as possible to facilitate reliance
   on country systems.
• Addressing civil service issues. Civil service reform issues, including appropriate remuneration
   and setting up of a procurement cadre within the civil service, should be addressed in the early
   stages of the reform .



RESOURCES
Government of Sierra Leone. 2003 . Issues Paper on Public Procurement.
 2005. Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (SL-PRSP).
 2011. Local Council PEFA Summary Report.
 2011. Assessment of National Public Procurement System based on OECD Benchmarking Tool.
Ministry of Finance and Economic Development, Sierra Leone . 2012 . Sierra Leone Second Poverty
Reduction Strategy Paper.
National Public Procurement Authority. 2008 . Annual Report 2005-2006 .
 2011 . 2010 Annual Compliance and Performance Assessment.
 2011 . Procurement Bulletin, Volume 1, Issue 1.
Sawyer, Edward . 2008 . "Remove or Reform? A Case for (Restructuring) Chiefdom Governance in
Post-Conflict Sierra Leone" . African Affairs 107(428), pp . 387-403 .
Sierra Leone Truth and Reconciliation Commission . 2004. Witness to Truth : Report of the
Sierra Leone Truth and Reconciliation Commission .
Srivastava, Vivek, and Marco Larizza. 2011 . "Decentralization in Postconflict Sierra Leone: The Genie
is out of the Bottle" in Chuhan-Pole, Punam , and Manka Angwafo (eds.) Yes Africa Can : Success
Stories from a Dynamic Continent, Washington, D.C.: The World Bank
Srivastava, Vivek, and Marco Larizza. 2012 . Working with the Grain for Reforming the Public Service
-A Live Example form Sierra Leone. Washington, D.C. : The World Bank
Zhou, Yongmei (ed .). 2009 . Decentralization, Democracy and Development: Recent Experiences from
Sierra Leone . Washington, D.C.: The World Bank.




                                                                   39
CHALLENGE                  9
KEEPING IT LOCAL                                     Iraq


How can procurement practices be modified for local conditions
to allow for more efficient bidding procedures allowing the local
market to participate and removing constraints from small and
medium-size enterprises?




                               The case story, Realistic Procurement Based on Local Market

                               Conditions in Iraq: A Successful Experience from a Conflict-
                               Affected Country, addresses th is challenge .

                               It was submitted by Nazaneen Ismail Ali, Senior Procurement

                               Special ist, and co-authors Andrew Jacobs, Rachel Lipson,

                               and Fabio lsoldi, MENA Procurement Unit, the World Bank.




SUMMARY
Adapting procurement practices to the local cond it ions played a key role in completion of the
project. Rather than allowing inefficient bidding procedures to block implementation, the team
adjusted their approach and adopted simplified methods, tested the ability of the local market
to supply equipment through numerous smaller-value contracts, and removed constrai nts that
discouraged the participation of local SMEs. In doing so, Government saved funds and was able
to improve the functionality of Social Safety Net.
THE CONTEXT
After 30 years of conflict and embargo, the Iraqi Government sought to strengthen social protection
for its citizens by transforming traditional subsidies into a targeted, cash-based Social Safety Net program.
However, the initial iteration of the program was ineffective in reaching the poorest Iraqis: just 1.2 percent
of the popu lation was assisted through cash transfers. Under a US$8 million Iraq Emergency Socia l
Protection Project (ESPP), the World Bank and the Iraqi Government aimed to help reform the program
by establishing a basic information system within the Iraqi Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs (MOLSA)
to record and process information on safety nets through accurate and timely data collection .

This move required the establishment of functioning Socia l Safety Net Centers in Baghdad and the
regional governorates. These centers would be supplied with essential IT equipment. The total cost
for the equipment, connectivity, and generators for all centers was estimated at US$5 .2 million during the
project's appraisal. Given the large amount of money involved, three international procurement processes
were planned for the launch. This decision fo ll owed traditional thinking about procurement policies at the
World Bank: it was presumed that international competition would best capture economies of scale and
value for money.




                                                                41
THE APPROACH
The reality in Iraq was quite different than the design of the project. In 200 7, the first of these large
procurement processes was floated with an estimated cost of US$830,000. Yet after an extended
period of time to prepare bids, only one company had responded . Its US$5 million bid was over
six times more than the original estimate. The initial approach had not accounted for the unique
constraints of Iraq, particularly the difficulty of linking up with outside firms and the weakened Iraqi
private sector.


Distressed that this would require a drastic reduction in the scope of the rollout, the Bank task team
sought advice from the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) Regional Procurement Manager who
proposed testing the ability of the local market to supply the equipment through multiple smaller-
value contracts.

The new approach, in addition to offering multiple smaller-value contracts, removed constraints such
as bid guarantee requirements and high financial capacity fo r firms, which would have discouraged
participation by local small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs). In order to encourage competition
and ensure appropriate prices from small and medium-size enterprises, several important measures
were taken:

•   Preparing and publicizing annual procurement plans, including smal l procurement packages.
•   Using simplified procedures and simple procurement packaging; publicizing procurement
    opportunities broad ly (e .g., on the official Ministry's website and local newspapers) even for
    lower-value contracts .
•   Using simple but standard bidding documents, request for quotations, and general conditions
    of contract.
• Bidding documents were not sold but issued at no cost.
• Allowing alternatives like Bid Securing Declaration instead of guarantees for security requirements .
• Allowing payment of advances on small contracts as well as payments for partial deliveries to
  assist sma ll and medium-size enterprises for contract implementation.
• Streamlining approvals processes for prompt payments without delays.



THE RESULTS
The testing of the three smaller procurement contracts for IT equipment by small and medium -size
enterprises was a resounding success in terms of costs and efficiency. It led to the restructuring of
all contracts into the smaller sizes that smaller local businesses could provide . In the end, the procure-
ment from the loca l SME market not only helped promote growth for these businesses but also
provided substantial cost savings for the country. By effectively responding to local market conditions,
the project saved US$1.4 million, or around 20 percent of the original estimated cost of the contract;



                                                42
this saving was much bigger compared to a situation if the single bid received through international
competitive bidding had been accepted. These savings allowed for the purchasing of additional
equipment for disaster recovery, monitoring equipment, software, and more-all necessary for
proper functionality and sustainability of the system in the long term .


By adopting innovative solutions that fit to local market conditions, the MOLSA-administered cash
transfer program could be scaled up. It now reaches nearly one-million families, with a budget of
about US$800 million.



LESSONS LEARNED
Challenges related to Iraq's volatile situation, including the lack of interest from international
suppliers, encouraged the World Bank to look for alternative solutions in the design of the
procurement process. The experience of working in a conflict-affected country led to smaller
procurement packages and simplified procedures. An unorthodox and riskier approach at the
outset ended up not only saving costs but also strengthening the local private sector and
generating jobs in the country.



RESOURCES
Realistic Procurement Based on Local Market Conditions in Iraq: A Successful Experience from a
Conflict-Affected Country by Nazaneen Ismail Ali, Andrew Jacobs, Rachel Lipson, and Fabio lsoldi,
MENA Procurement Unit, The World Bank

Implementation Completion and Results Report (TF-56808) for Iraq Emergency Social Protection
Project, Report No : ICR 00002724




                                                                 43
CHALLENGE                  10
HARMONIZING THE REGIONS
Kiribati, Samoa, Tonga, and Tuvalu


How might a procurement approach offer solutions for a regional aviation
project in small island countries that have limited human capacity and no
experience in implementing major infrastructure projects?




                               The case study, Solving the Procurement Challenge in Pacific

                               Island Fragile States for Major Infrastructure Projects, addresses

                               this challenge.

                               It was submitted by Christopher Bennett, Senior Transport Specialist,

                               World Bank, and Anna L. Wielogorska, Senior Procurement Specialist,

                               World Bank, on behalf of the Tonga Airports Ltd., and World Bank

                               procurement team working on the projects in Kiribati, Samoa, Tonga,

                               and Tuvalu.




SUMMARY

Most Pacific island countries are small with limited human capacity and no experience in
implementing major infrastructure projects. For the successful delivery of the Pacific Aviation
Investment Program (PAIP), a complex multiple-country aviation project, a central Technical and
Fiduciary Unit was established to act as the central team leading all aspects of procurement.
A harmonized approach was adopted across all PAIP-participating countries, and a Regional
Procurement Evaluation Committee was introduced to undertake joint evaluations and awards.
THE CONTEXT
In 2012 the World Bank began the Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP), a multi-phased series
of projects with US$125 million in funding to improve aviation safety and security in up to six Pacific
island countries: Kiribati, Tonga, and Tuvalu (Phase 1); Samoa (Phase 2); and Solomon Islands and
Vanuatu (future phases). In addition, PAIP is reforming the Pacific Aviation Safety Office, an agency
responsible for safety and security oversight. With populations of some 100,000 and 10,000,
respectively, Kiribati and Tuvalu have very limited human capacity and no experience in implementing
major projects such as PAIP (US$22.91 million for Kiribati and US$16 .94 million for Tuvalu ).


With complex investments in sophisticated aviation equipment such as navigation aids, major civil
works investments such as runways and airport terminals, and complicated consulting services such
as reforming sector operations, the PAIP needed to adopt an appropriate approach to mitigate
the high risk of procurement issues in capacity-constrained countries. The solution consisted of
(a) establishing a central Technical and Fiduciary Unit (TFSU) that would act as the central team,
leading all aspects of procurement; (b) adopting a harmonized approach where all participating
countries agreed on harmonized specifications for equipment; and (c) introducing a Regional
Procurement Evaluation Committee to undertake joint evaluations and awards.




                                                                45
THE APPROACH
The Kingdom of Tonga was selected as the host for the TFSU since the country had successfully
implemented a smaller aviation project financed by the World Bank. Tonga Airports Ltd. (TAL),
a state-owned enterprise, would host the Unit. Each participating entity would sign Services
Agreements that clearly outline the services that the TFSU would provide .


For simplicity, the cost of the TFSU was prorated among participating countries based on the relative
size of the individual country's projects. In each country, a small project support team was established
to be the project focal point in the country. With the support of TAL and other specialist consultants,
the participating countries decided among themselves which specific investments were required.
Specifications were prepared by the PAIP design and supervision (D&S) consultant and then agreed
upon by each country and the World Bank. Not all countries received the same investments since
some investments were only required in a single country whi le others applied to multiple countries
and airports.

The TFSU, with support from the D&S consultant, prepared t he final bid documents, which
required clearance by each country before issuing. The TFSU then posted ads for the procurement
opportunities, received the bids, and had a public opening .

If the procurement is only for a single country, then that country with TFSU support undertakes
the evaluation and recommends the award . When more than one country is involved, the Regional
Procurement Evaluation Committee-comprised of one member from each country, the TFSU
Director, and Leader Procurement Specialist-undertakes the evaluation and collectively
recommends the award . Once the award has received "No Objection" from the World Bank,
each country signs their own individual contract. The countries then monitor the implementation
of the contract, again with the TFSU support.



THE RESULTS
This approach has developed skills and generated capacity across the PAIP-participating countries,
created a strong esprit de corps among the PAIP participants, simplified the World Bank's procure-
ment and associated fiduciary oversight, and reduced costs across the project by procuring the
equipment in large quantities across the region .


This approach has provided harmonization across the PAIP-participating countries in procuring
aviation equipment to ensure the availability of spare parts, and long-term maintenance will be easier
to manage and procure in the future . Bundling the airport civil works across multiple PAIP countries
offers significant economies of scale and helps attract large contractors to bid on the works .




                                              46
It is anticipated the TFSU approach will be utilized in future World Bank projects in the Pacific, both
at a country and regional level, given its performance, experience, and knowledge gained through
implementing the individual PAIP components. The TFSU can now offer other Pacific island countries
additiona l support and knowledge for procurement and other fiduciary services.



LESSON LEARNED
Th is regional approach with a central procurement team has proved to be very effective on
several fronts :

•   Having an experienced central procurement team, with technical specialists and other resources
    to support fragile states, has ensured that procurement delays and complications are minimized .
• The TFSU has been ab le to train the inexperienced staff from Ki ribati and Tuvalu in the
  principles of proper procurement at the same time as undertaking the practical operations
    of procurement-much better than just theoretical training.
• With harmonized procedures used between countries (a single Project Operations Manual, for
    example), the procurement and associated fiduciary oversight by the World Bank is
    greatly simplified .
• By procuring the same goods for multiple countries, not only has the cost been reduced from
    procuring separately for each country but, with harmonized equipment, future support and spare
    parts are easier to manage .


Above all, the project has shown that a country such as Tonga can help its neighboring states in
fragile and conflict-affected situations by sharing its experience and supporting their development.
This has created a strong connection among the PAIP participants and has been recognized at the
highest levels of government, such as at the Pacific Islands Forum .



RESOURCES
Tonga Airports Ltd : http://www.tongaairports.com/

World Bank Project Appraisal Document:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2011 /11 /1 5496050/east-asia-pacific-pacific-aviation-
investment-project-east-asia-pacif ic-pacific-aviation -i nvestment-project




                                                                  47
CHALLENGE                  11
TRADING IN THE TRADITIONAL
M ET H 0 D S Pakistan

How can small and medium-size enterprises in war-torn Pakistan rebuild
economic viability by following their traditional procurement methods
instead of the World Bank-prescribed shopping method?




                              This case story from Pakistan, Shell-Shopped: Procurement

                              for Revitalization of SMEs through Commercial Practices,

                              addresses this challenge.

                              It was submitted by Rehan Hyder, Senior Procurement Specialist,

                              World Bank, on behalf of the World Bank procurement team in Pa kistan .




SUMMARY
Militancy crisis over decades forced people in Pakistan to lose their homes and livelihoods.
Through the World Bank's Multi-Donor Trust Fund, small and medium-size enterprises across
the Federally Administered Tribal Areas are provided grants. The shopping procurement method
was found to be a roadblock due to undocumented economy and grant approval process. Local
commercial practices were reviewed and accepted with fiduciary checks and have improved
grant uptake.
THE CONTEXT
Over more than three decades, military operations in Pakistan have forced more than 300,000
people to flee their homes in Federally Administered Tribal Areas (FATA) and take shelter in camps
for internally displaced persons (IDP). More than 4,000 shops and other commercial establishments
in the FATA were destroyed rendering thousands of people, many with small and medium-size
enterprises, without livelihoods.

Under a World Bank-administered Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF), small and medium-size enterprises
across the FATA were awarded matching grants through a sustainable rehabilitation model . With the
grants, recipients-selected after detailed due diligence and assessment of the case-could procure
raw material, machinery, equipment, or services.

Fiduciary risks in financial and procurement management were identified during the project appraisal
missions. Given the importance of these fiduciary aspects of the MDTF project, the task team placed
additional qualified and experienced financial management and procurement staff in each project
management unit and issued procurement and accounting procedures (embodying internal controls)
as disbursement conditions of the project.


In FATA there is lack of clarity on the extension or a complete absence of particular procurement
regulations . The public sector is the main procurer in FATA. Community-driven procurement practices
are not well defined .




                                                              49
The MDTF grant recipients were asked to use the shopping method for procuring by asking for three
quotations for the desired commodity with the intention that the lowest bidder will be selected . The
assets acquired include (a) raw materials (marble gold, food items, cloths, flooring, wheat grain, etc.);
(b) machinery and equipment (complete stone crushing plant, vertical machining center, gang saw
blades, slab cutter, 18-inch cutter machine, compressor, dispenser, computer, generator, conveyer
and crane, excavator, mixer, block, planner, spindle gauge and polishing machine); and (c) various
types of infrastructure (construction of rooms, underground water tanks, foundations for crane
machine, boundary wal ls, etc.), rehabilitation, and up-gradation works. The sma ll shopkeepers found
the shopping method to be too foreign a procedure to their more traditional ways of doing business
with the more binding, verbal agreements . Despite the effort, the shopping method was complex
and rife with misguided attempts to comply with the three-quotation rule . Often one or more of the
offers was fabricated . Moreover auditors sought compa rative statements and reasons for not buying
from the lowest bidder.



THE APPROACH
A procurement process was needed that would be naturally aligned to local practices to enhance the
uptake of grants. The World Bank's Pernambuco Rural Economic Inclusion Project in Brazil primarily
relies on us ing commercial practices and in principle was considered a good example of how com -
mercial practice in procurement can apply in fragile and conflict-affected situations. The underlying
principle of the approach of relying on local practices was also followed in Bajaur, the most conflict-
affected agency (country subdivision) of the FATA; and, although outwardly different, it was found
consistent with the World Bank's core procurement principles.

Grant recipients were allowed to follow the locally established commercial practices, which are
generally based on reputation, integrity, technical prowess of seller, cartage, and ease of after-sales
support. The results were encouraging since the main impediment in grant processing had been
removed . In the marble mining and processing business, for example, existing commercial practices
consist of sourcing the decision for raw material, which in t urn is linked to its intended use, lowering
logistics costs and faci lity of partial payments. The mines have a widely known reputation of produc-
ing a particular type of marble, and purchasers have a legacy of relationship and creditworthiness.
These mutually agreeable parameters catalyze the deal. In terms of marble processing machinery, the
reputation of machine manufacturer is known for sourcing good quality metals and skilled labor. The
payments are interestingly output based and linked to the incremental manufacturing of machinery.
However, in all these cases, the deals are seldom documented and word of mouth is sufficient.
Generally for payments made, a cash register is maintained at the seller's premises where transactions
are recorded .




                                               50
Grants to the small businesses were processed through a project unit set up with the Small and
Medium Enterprise Development Authority (SM EDA). SM EDA performed the field-level fiduciary
checks. These grants were then further subjected to the the World Bank's intermittent reviews. Grant
eligibility criteria set a prioritization process: first, women-owned businesses or partnerships/company
where a woman is a partner/director; second, small and medium-size enterprises that were part of a
baseline survey done by SM EDA and the Government of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa; and third, first-come
first-serve from all districts, agencies, and frontier regions based on their share of the total pool
of applicants .


While recipients were eager for less-bureaucratic processing, SM EDA and the World Bank were
required to ensure that funds were being used for purposes as intended and conformed with Bank's
procurement policies. SMEDA and the Bank's streamlined procedural process used a Unit Cost
Database for checking reasonableness of prices and cross-checking of payments, integrity in grant
applications, and verification of assets rather than procurement processes.



THE RESULTS
Many small and medium -size enterprises across FATA have been largely rehabilitated and upgraded .
These businesses have reported significant improvement in business turnover and profits.


In one community-driven development project, the construction of schools in remote reaches of
Balochistan (a province of Pakistan) received an affidavit from a notable of the area; while this
established local practice in not a direct outcome, it does represent the locally recognized adoption
of the commercial practice. By following the commercial practice, the pace of school construction
had accelerated . The change in rules of engagement has its share of encouraging dividends some-
times ecl ipsed by elements that stand to benefit from loosely defined structures.



LESSONS LEARNED
Fiduciary assessment, which also includes findings of economic analysis and social assessment,
at prepa ration stage helps design the procurement arrangements better. The building blocks of
commercial practices for procurement of goods, works, and services, which are being created to
operate in the low capacity and fragile environment of Pakistan, can be easily used in African or
other South Asian fragile areas. Similarly as in the FATA case, the practices that have worked can
be studied and further built upon with an open mind, ideally disengaged from bias for complex
procurement structures.




                                                                 51
CHALLENGE                   12
OUT-SMARTING THE LOCUST OR
BIDDING AGAINST THE LOCUST Madagascar
How does a government deal with a locus plague that threatens its
country's agriculture but the existing World Bank technical assistance
agreement is not suitable for procuring the needed supplies and services
to tackle the urgency and potential countrywide devastation?




                               The case story from Madagascar, New Contractual Framework with

                               FAO for Locust Control Operation, addresses this challenge.

                               It was submitted by Lova Ravaoarimino, Procurement Specialist, World

                               Bank, on behalf of the UN Food and Agriculture Organization and the

                               World Bank procurement team. comprising Joao Veiga Malta and

                               Knut Leipold. Regional Procurement Management; Maria Vannari,

                               OPCS and focal point for UN agreements; Alison Micheli, Legal

                               Department; and lvonna Kratynski, Comptroller.




SUMMARY
Declaring a national state of emergency to deal w ith a locus plague, the Government of
Madagascar launched an appeal to the donor community for assistance. The World Ban k
responded favorably in approving the restructuring of the Emergency Infrastructure Preservation
and Vulnerability Reduction Project to reallocate US$10 million for this activity. The Ba nk has
also agreed that implementation of the locust control operation be outsourced to FAO on a
sole source basis given its expertise and comparative advantage.
THE CONTEXT
A major locust infestation (in early mid-2013) compou nded the socioeconomic effects of a five-year political
crisis in Madagascar. Thi s devastating event caused extensive losses of agriculture production where over
17 million people depend on agriculture for all or part of their livelihoods . The Government of Madagascar
therefore launched an appeal to the donor community for assistance. The Government requested the UN
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) to conduct outbreak assessments and develop a locust containment
plan . FAO came up with a three-year Locust Response Plan (2013-16) with US$22.4 million required for the
first year to undertake an urgent pesticide spraying campaign to control invasions of other major agricultural
production areas.


In response to the urgency, the World Bank approved the restructuring of the multi-sectoral Infrastructure
Preservation and Vulnerability Reduction Project (PU Pl RV) and rea llocation of US$10 million to the
contingency funds in July 2013 to allow financing the most urgent activities caused by the severe locust
invasion. The Bank also agreed that implementation of the PUPIRV locust control operation shou ld be
outsourced to FAO on a sole source basis given its expertise and comparative advantage.




                                                                53
THE APPROACH
The existing World Bank/FAO standard Technical Assistance Agreement template was not suitable for procure-
ment of pesticides, equipment, and related services for spraying and storage facilities . To address this issue,
a Bank team met with Government officials and a full quorum of FAO counterparts (legal, procurement,
financial management, and technical) to carryout negotiations . With a go-ahead from Regional Procurement
Management, the Bank team, comprising staff from Operations and Country Services (OPCS), Legal Opera-
tions (LEGOP), and Controller (CTR), and fellow counterparts developed a new template with exceptions,
flexible enough to allow FAO to procure goods and related services .


Developed in just one month, the new Supplies and Related Services Agreement allowed for financing the
procurement of pesticides; vehicles; surveillance equipment; and related services, including air spraying and
pesticides storage (US$8.5 million).

The new custom-tailored agreement is compliant with the policy requirements in World Bank Procurement
Guidelines. Quality standard requirements with regard to the handling of pesticides have been cleared by
the safeguards specialist and are consistent with the requirements in the legal amendment.




THE RESULTS
The entire procurement agreement process was completed within 21 days for a timely initial locust campaign
to be started in September 2013 as planned . The procurement of goods and services critical for survey and
control operations-aerial services/flight hours, vehicles, pesticides and equipment for surveying, spraying,
camping, communications, and protecting personnel- was carried-out on time between June and August
2013 . The hiring and deployment of staff key to the coordination and implementation of the campaign in
Madagascar had also been undertaken during that period. Aerial control operation started in November
2013, and 250,000 hectares have been treated as of May 2014. The first campaign will end in August 2014
and an assessment will be conducted to determine the impacts on the ground and how the second campaign
will be carried out.

While working on the new Supplies and Related Services Agreement, it became apparent to the team that it
could not become a standard agreement template due to the number of exceptions made in response to the
specific emergency measures necessary in Madagascar. In pa rticular, there is an exceptional approach toward
delivery terms, 100 percent upfront payment of the contract amount and use of the agreement as a one-t ime
supply contract (rather than a framework agreement model that is followed for all UN agencies) . Given its
specificity, the agreement could not be used as a precedent or a model for any other project/country without
prior consultation with the central policy unit, OPCS .




                                              54
LESSONS LEARNED
When working in a crisis mode, all parties need to be focused on the problems at hand and to be divergent
thinkers in order to come up with creative and innovative solutions. In the Madagascar experience, the
participating negotiators from UN agencies, donor institutions, and government had to work together,
dealing with the others' specific procedures and policies.


All parties had to navigate technical and procedural hurdles, both internal and external, and along the way
experienced stress and frustration . Negotiations were often stalled, but a "can do" attitude always prevailed
throughout the process to solve problems. This activity had to break down the barrier of working in a silo
institution and embrace a consensus-building attitude. All parties had to be adaptable and think outside the
traditional box, yet maintain quality. This was an environment where negotiating skills and problem solving
proved invaluable.




                                                              55
CHALLENGE                  13
THE ENVELOPE, PLEASE. BUILDING
TOGETHER, NOT JUST BUILDING
Central African Republic

How does a project team deal with a lag in procuring community recovery
services and building community participation and statebuilding in a constrained
environment of weak suppliers, emergency procedures, a dysfunctional banking
system, no state presence in lagging areas, and damaged social fabric at the
local level?




                                                       The case story from the Central African
                                                       Republic, The Envelope Approach:
                                                       Innovation in Procurement to Deliver

                                                       Community-Recovery Services in Fragile

                                                       and Conflict-Affected Situations, was

                                                       submitted by Paul Bance, Senior Operations
                                                       Officer; and Sophie Grumelard, Operations
                                                       Specialist, World Bank, on behalf of the
                                                       World Bank project team.



SUMMARY
An "Envelope Approach" is an innovative use of the World Bank's procurement procedures as
a means to quickly procure and deliver community recovery services. The envelope approach
consists of three elements: (a) a participatory investment plan, (b) a restricted budget per
investment plan, and (c) a fixed breakdown of expenses covered by the budget.
                                             PROJET DE DEVELOPPEMENT COMMUNAUTAIRE ~
                                             ET D'APPUI AUX GROUPES VULNERABLES ~
                                                                (PDCAGV)
                                 TRAVAUX OE REHAHITATION DES FORAGES DANS LA PREFECTURE
                                              'POKO: Sous·Prefectures de BOSSEMBELE et VALOKE
                                  OE L0MBELLA M
                                         1

                                     MAITRE O  'OUVRAGE : Ml\ISTERE DESAFFAIRESS     OCIALES   .
                                     OELA O  LIOARITE NATION UE ET OE LA PROMOTION OL G E~RE           ...
                                            'OLVRAGE O
                                     MAITRE O          ELEGU  E: AGENCEOlXECUTION DESTRAVAUX
                                     O'INTERET PUBLIC EN CENTRAFRIOUE(AGETIP • CAF )           J ...
                                 1   ENTREPRISE AQUA VIVA "L'eau, c'est la vie'' BOVALI 2




THE CONTEXT
When the need arose in the Central African Republic (CAR) for a new solution to quickly procure and
deliver community recovery services, the innovative "Envelope Approach " for using the World Bank's
procurement procedures was put into practice. The innovative approach was started in the context
of the IDA-funded Support to Vulnerable Groups Community Development Project (PDCAGV) in
CAR. The PDCAGV has been actively in operation since 2009 to improve the supply of basic social
services at the community level in order to raise the living conditions of the people, especially the
vulnerable groups.


The PDCAGV is also designed to achieve measurable benefits by helping to replenish the country's
human capital and developing basic infrastructure. In this regard, the main expected outcomes
include improved access of beneficiaries to drinking water as well as basic health and education
services, an increase in production for smallholder groups, and capacity building for development
activities at the local level.


The IDA-funded PDCAGV relies on three instruments:
a. Local Development Plans (POL) provide a context-specific framework for public investment at the
   local level.



                                                                               57
b. Priority Actions Fund (FAP) is a centrally managed fund that finances the rehabilitation of priority
  public infrastructures in targeted rural areas .
c. Local Development Fund (FOL) works as a social fund to provide block grants for the local
  socio-economic infrastructures that are prioritized in Local Development Plans.


The PDCAGV Steering Committee found the implementation of the Priority Actions Fund to be
lacking in the fostering of community participation and statebuilding. The Envelope Approach-not
a traditional contracting vehicle-was designed in response. The Envelope Approach consists of three
elements: (a) a participatory investment plan, (b) a restricted budget per investment plan, and (c) a
fixed breakdown of expenses covered by the budget.



THE APPROACH
The Envelope Approach was meant to address the weakness of the conventional procurement
strategy used under the Priority Actions Fund by emphasizing community participation and state-
building-building together rather than just building. The PDCAGV is implemented by the CAR
Ministry of Social Affairs (MAS), which has delegated the management of the two infrastructure
components- Priority Actions Fund and Local Development Fund-to the national Agency for
Public Works (AGETIP).


The client worked closely with the task team to design an original procurement framework by
combining methods that are acceptable to the World Bank. Following a market survey and
consultation with the Regional Procurement Management advisor, the new Envelope Approach
to procurement was designed around the following criteria:

a. An open selection process with robust post-qualification criteria .
b. The use of the Fixed Budget Selection method (as per paragraph 3.5 of the Consultant
   Procurement Guidelines) to neutralize the privileges of UN agencies and NGOs, which may
   participate in the competitive process as service providers: technical scores are allocated before
   opening financial proposals, and the entity that submits the highest-ranked technical proposal
   is selected, provided its financial proposal is within the fixed budget.
c. The use of simplified community participation in procurement procedures, which were found
   acceptable by the World Bank (as per paragraph 3.19 of the Goods and Works Procurement
   Guidelines) and were allowed for the execution of the program .
d. The establishment of two bank accounts per service provider: one for their remuneration and
  the other to be used as a revolving fund for paying activities to execute the program .
e. The establishment of a performance-based scheme whereby service providers are paid based
   on efficiency.




                                                58
f. An independent technical and financial audit to ensure that funds are used for the intended
   purposes for the duration of the service provider's assignment (i .e., different from an a
   posteriori audit at the end).



THE RESULTS
As a result, a US$1 .5 mi llion envelope contract was successfully awarded on November 22, 2012,
to an association of two international NGOs (ACTED and COOPI) and is under execution .


The Envelope Approach has all owed the Local Development Fund to procure the construction of
49 social infrastructures all agreed upon by the targeted communities through the PDL process. It
has been used to procure community mobilization activities in four essential sectors-education,
agriculture, hea lth, and sanitation-all in critical condition in CAR. The geographic scope of the
PD CAGV project has expanded to another 7 communities (which were not serviced origina lly
under the Priority Actions Fund) and 4 additional prefectures, 3 of which are located in rebel-ruled
southeast CAR.

Using the Envelope Approach, community-recovery services have been competitively procured in
less than four months, a record time in fragile and conflict-affected situations. The new procurement
method has also allowed lowering the cost of infrastructure and improving budget transparency,
construction planning, and project accountabi lity.


Once completed, the infrastructure projects financed through the Local Development Fund are
expected to benefit more than 262,000 inhabitants in the 10 targeted communities. Also, the
Envelope Approach will be scaled up to 26 add itional communities with financing from the African
Development Bank, the parallel co-financier of the PDCAGV.

The Envelope Approach has improved the participation of the beneficiaries and increased the
capacity of the Ministry of Social Affairs ' decentralized staff and other technical ministries. The
multi -stakeholder approach adopted by the task team has fostered col laboration not only within the
World Bank (Procurement Specialist in Bangui, Regional Procurement Manager in Washington, D.C.,
and other operational team members) but also among all external partners.




                                                               59
LESSONS LEARNED
The Envelope Approach has overcome the challenge of implementing a performance-based approach
in a fragile and conflict-affected situation (FCS), an approach that encourages quality of service,
efficient delivery, and maximizes return on investment.


Furthermore, the short implementation time-the Envelope Approach was designed and procured in
less than four months-is an excellent illustration of how strategic procurement can help task teams
operating in FCS environments to be responsive to the client. Implementation effectiveness partly
resulted from the client's and task team's ability to mobilize expertise, experience, and support from
the humanitarian and development communities in CAR through the UN Early-Recovery Cluster and
the World Bank's Regional Procurement Management.


Collaboration between the Agency for Public Works, the World Bank's country office procurement
specialist. ACTED and COOP!, as well as the team's understanding of the market were also
essential to the success of the Envelope Approach, which could easily be replicated in CAR
through the expansion of the geographic scope or in other fragile and conflict-affected situations.
In fact, the Regional Procurement Manager has asked for a good practice note from the team to
be used by other Bank teams that face similar procurement challenges .




                                           . " ~Tl<. be:   t.a
                                            L~ll~L .&~ ~
                                               ... ,
              C..-• .. m0< &......
                                 ,....-'

                     """'"' .. -··
                       ,   .
                           ,




                                                                 60
[9
CHALLENGE                 14
SOURCING FOR EMERGENCY RELIEF
Indonesia

Is there a procurement strategy that will help a confused market, following
a major natural disaster, to use financial resources in rebuilding the local
economy and provide products that are already culturally acceptable and
practical in the local context?




                              This case story from Indonesia, Establishing a Three-Tier Supply

                              Line for Relief and Development in Northern Sumatra, addresses
                              this challenge.

                              It was submitted by Keith Neroutsos, Director of Procurement, PATH,

                              on behalf of the NGO, World Vision Indonesia.




SUMMARY
In a confused market place after the 2004 tsunami that hit Indonesia the hardest, a three-tiered
procurement strategy was created to improve the supply line performance for loca lly procured
goods and build the capacity of an Indonesian Procurement Team.
THE CONTEXT
On December 26, 2004, a large Indian Ocean earthquake occurred off the west coast of Sumatra, Indonesia.
The earthquake triggered a series of devastating tsunamis along the coasts of most landmasses bordering
the Indian Ocean, killing over 230,000 people in 14 countries, and inundating coastal communities with
waves up to 98 feet high . It was one of the deadliest natural disasters in recorded history. Indonesia was
the hardest-hit country, and the city of Banda Aceh marked the epicenter of the destruction and life loss.
The plight of the affected people and countries prompted a worldwide humanitarian response. In all, the
worldwide community donated more than US$14 billion (2004 USD) in humanitarian aid.

Within a week, NGOs specializing in relief and development, including World Vision, a major international
NGO, arrived on site and began serving the needs of the communities . One of World Vision's disaster relief
managers was sent to Banda Aceh to improve the supply line performance for locally procured goods and
build the capacity of an Indonesian procurement team . Why locally procured? World Vision believed a core
tenant of development in a relief setting was to use donor financial resources to help rebuild the local
economy and also to provide products that were already culturally acceptable and practical for the context.
This created a very challenging situation in Banda Aceh where 225,000 were killed, many of them owners
and workers of the businesses for which local supplies needed to be procured to fulfill the local
development objectives.


Developing country supply lines are often based on a multi-level distribution system where several retailers
obtain their supplies from the same primary and secondary wholesale sources. There is little in the way of
traditional corporate structures, rather the system is based on individual business leaders for specific com-
modity groups. In many settings, retail outlets selling the same commodity are located next to each other.



                                                                63
On one street in Banda Aceh, for example, most of the retailers for tools were found doing business
side by side. In some commodity groups, this stable supply system was put in jeopardy when
individuals who had been the main supplier at the wholesale level perished in the tsunami .
Secondary distributors and retailers were scrambling to move up the ladder of distribution
and fill the higher-level position voids created by the tsunami .


There was also sustained damage at many warehouse and retail facilities that the suppliers were
struggling to get back online. While many businesses were far from the tsunami flooding, the power-
ful earthquake caused considerable damage inland. These situations combined to create overarching
instability and market confusion in Banda Aceh.



THE APPROACH
World Vision was working across multiple sectors-nutrition, water/sanitation, shelter, education,
and health-each requiring specific and different commodities. Each sector was led by program
officers who coordinated their activities with other NGOs working in the region.


World Vision decided to design a three-tiered approach to the sourcing of products needed for the
relief and development program work. Tier one sourced products in Banda Aceh; tier two sourced
products in Sumatra; and tier three sourced products from Jakarta, Singapore, and other interna-
tional sites. The objectives in this approach were (a) source the products rapidly, (b) keep as much
business in Banda Aceh or at least Northern Sumatra, and (c) control the cost of major items .

World Vision set up the main procurement office in Medan, Indonesia, on the east coast of Sumatra
near the ocean port of Belawan . Two procurement officers were assigned to Banda Aceh; additional
support was provided by a regional logistics hub in Singapore, which also provided support to the
relief work in Thailand and Sri Lanka.


Procurement requisitions were initiated by program staff in each of the sectors and approved by
sector leads . Requisitions were screened in Medan to determine if the procurements should bypass
Banda Aceh sourcing. For example, a large generator would likely not be available in Banda Aceh so
there would have been no use in trying to source it there first. If it was determined that the products
might be available from sources in Banda Aceh, the two procurement officers in that city would
first attempt to procure the items. They were given up to three business days to confirm source or
pass the requisition to the team in Medan . Procurement in Medan was able to source the balance of
the products from Sumatra, Jakarta, or Singapore. Products sourced in Banda Aceh were delivered
directly to projects. Products sourced in Medan were consolidated, and bi-weekly shipments were
made on caravans operated by the International Organization for Migration (IOM). World Vision
utilized IOM since there were several cases of commercial trucks being hijacked along the rural roads.
IOM caravans were provided support from military escorts and traveled in greater numbers.




                                               64
THE RESULTS
The three-tiered sourcing/procurement process proved to be successful in providing the needed
goods in a reasonable amount of time while serving to build the local economy and ensuring
culturally acceptable products. The creation of a local Indonesian procurement team was critical
to the intermediate and long-term sustainability of the project ensuring that procurement strategies
and processes were maintained by local professional staff after the international relief team
departed Indonesia.


Many NGOs did not follow this development approach, and the products they attempted to bring
into the country were not practical for local use and their imports competed with the local businesses
struggling to recover by selling their wares to the remaining citizens of Banda Aceh . Those NG Os
that did not follow this strategy were viewed by some as causing further damage to the rebuilding
economy and causing harm to the environment. While the strategy did not always generate the
lowest costs for procured products, the benefits to a struggling local economy outweighed the extra
work and the minor impact to program financial resources.

While agreement was reached among the larger and more experienced NGOs on how to coordinate
activities to meet overall commodity needs, there were many small NGOs operating in the region that
did not understand the important role of coordination . As a result, some products were over-supplied
due to t he lack of coordination among all NGOs. This situation caused additional pressure on the
supply chains since available cash was greater than available commodities . Local suppliers reacted by
raising costs and making commitments to sell products that they did not currently have .


Over 200 NG Os were attempting to operate in Aceh Province, and many were getting in the
way due to inexperience or lack of scale. There were many cases of inappropriate products being
imported into the country and black market activities such as illegal timber supply within the country.
The Government of Indonesia eventually registered NGOs and staff and required 90 percent of the
less-resourced NGOs to conclude their activities and leave the country.




                                                               65
LESSONS LEARNED
Under a " do no harm" approach, disaster response efforts should always consider a multiple-tiered
sourcing strategy that prioritizes local sourcing and the considerable ancillary benefits it provides.

There were some bumps in implementation of the approach . The procurement team learned that
customer expectations had to be managed on deliveries originating outside of Banda Aceh . Avoiding
black-market products was a long-term benefit.

Some commodities needed to be modified for the local context, but it was important that products
be sourced locally to be cult urally appropriate and economically strengthening to the community.


And coordination of supplies with other NGOs was critical.




                                                                                                         ,




                                               66
Local marble fabrication in Pakistan, from Challenge #11
LESSONS AND TAKE-AWAYS FOR PROCUREMENT
IN COMPLEX SITUATIONS

The case stories in the Challenge describe various approaches, policies, proced ures, tools, and
mechanisms th at practitio ners used in the attempt to improve the performa nce of procurement
and contribute to development results in various complex situations. The idea of sharing these
experiences is not to offer solid solutions but to sow t he seeds of ideas th at may just lead to new
solutions to many of t he chal lenges that crop up in situations of fragility, capacity constraints,
conflict and emergencies caused by natu ral or ma nmade disasters.

Follow ing are some lessons and " ta ke-aways" , in no particular order, from a review of the
published 14 case stories of the Procurement for Complex Situations Challenge:

• One size doesn't fit all. Every country's complex situation manifests in a different way.
  Therefore the procurement approach/strategy should be formulated to take into
  consideration the uniqueness, context, and natu re of the conflict and or fragility
  specific to the country.
• Th ink local. Procurement in complex situations should never overlook local solutions.
  Educate and organize communities into take-action groups.
• The scope for application of technology is vast. At considerably affordable costs, smart
  phones; global positioning systems; and open source, freely available solutions on the
  Internet can be combined to resolve inaccessibil ity of project sites by collecting data vital
  to both potential bidders and supervision teams, including dat a for verifying invoices
  before payment.
                                                                                                        ,
• Regional solutions may be the best approach with several countries pooling resources,
  collaborating with broader reforms, harmonizing procedures, or mobilizing expertise
  and experience.
• In order to complete the cycle of improving procurement performance, support to the
  private sector through small investments in a supplier directory and a central repository
  of advertisements and bidding documents can go a long way.
• Human capacity building is vital on all levels: community, government, and practitioners.
  Any new programs and technolog ies should include a training segment for stakeholders
  and staff.
• Legislative reform is not equal to enactment of a procurement law or its
  amendment. Adopting gradual fixes through prioritized interventions that
  build on small opportunities for success may be the most effective approach.



                                          68
• Adequate dialogue between the public and private sectors and between the
  government and the communities will pay off.
• Complexity of bidding documents works against competition and quality.
• Regional project implementation units can enhance capacity of individual countries
  participating in a common project and reduce both transaction and input costs.
• Look for success stories in other projects. No need to reinvent the wheel.




                                                     69
I
  Supply Chain Management System for AIDS relief in Haiti, from Chal lenge #3
  photo by Jean-Jacques Augustin




http://bit.ly/Proc4ComplexSituations




Back Cover Photo.·
Father and son await consultation in a local Afghan health cl inic, from Challenge #4
