 ~
..
 y
             CONNECT
             COLLECT
                                                            99013
t\.          f~~~~A~~
FEBRUARY 2C·28, 2014, Wuhln11on, DC




PROJECT EXPO




                                      Science of Delivery
                                       AT WORK
                                                               http://sod
Introduction
What does it take to deliver results, measurable improvements in quality of life,
every time in every country?

We all know that sound technical knowledge is important. But we also know that to
deliver outcomes for citizens we need to combine that technical expertise with on the
ground delivery know-how.

Relentlessly focusing on the outcomes, deliberately taking multi-stakeholder and multi-
sectoral perspectives, systematically using and collecting evidence, developing a deep
understanding of the political context and individual incentives, consciously building in
feedback loops and course correction mechanisms - those are some of the approaches
that teams use to get the delivery right.

By capturing the learning from those approaches, we are building a collective and
cumulative body of operational knowledge and know-how that can help development
practitioners deliver better results. That is the science of delivery at work.

Relentless focus on citizen outcomes

    a. Identify the nature of the problem based on a thorough understanding of citizens'
       demands and the local context.

    b. Design a context-sensitive strategy to relentlessly focus on outcomes, defined as
       measurable welfare gains of citizens .

    c. Pay attention to other factors , beyond the project, that influence citizen
       outcomes.

Multi-dimensional response

    a. Facilitate multi-stakeholder coalitions and multisectoral perspectives to identify
       problems and solutions.

    b. Convene development partners and build on their comparative advantages.



2
Evidence to achieve results

    a. Use the best available evidence to identify the nature of problems and to develop
       solutions.

    b. Develop local evidence, through experimentation and other strategies, to refine
       solutions.

    c.   Collect, throughout the project cycle, evidence of results to enable course
         correction.

   d. Contribute to the global body of knowledge with the evidence accumulated during
      implementation.

Leadership for change

   a. Identify the incentives that motivate individual behavior change and integrate
      them in solution design .

   b. Understand the political economy and drivers of change to determine how and
      when to best engage with the client.

   c.    Ensure leadership support and facilitate coalition building among different
         stakeholders.

Adaptive implementing

   a. Develop an adaptive implementation strategy that allows for iterative
      experimentation, feedback loops, and course correction .

   b. Build a committed multidisciplinary team with the right skills, experience, and
      muscle memory.

   c.    Maintain the capacity for reflection and a diagnostic mindset. Take action , step
         back, and assess the results of the action .



The projects featured in this brochure represent a small sample of projects that illustrate
the use of the approaches listed above. Some have drawn on one main approach ,
others on some, and others on all of them .




                                                                                             3
Argentina: Road Safety
Contact: Veronica Raffo, E-mail: vraffo@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Road crash fatalities are an epidemic in the developing world , the number one killer of
the young, with huge economic and social costs. These fatalities can only be stabilized
and then reduced if all actors work together to strengthen institutions, ensuring strong
and sustainable multi-sectoral coordination and action .

While past projects have attempted to lower the mortality rate in Argentina, these have
historically been implemented as fragmented single-sector initiatives with outcomes too
small to be measured, and were often one-off projects with no follow-up activities. The
Road Safety Project supported the newly created Argentina Road Safety Lead Agency
(ANSV) to unify safety efforts and combat road crash fatalities.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

To attack this epidemic of road crash fatalities, the Road Safety Project provided
constant support to the ANSV, enabling it to deliver its institutional management
functions and build partnerships to save lives. The project gathered evidence to
continuously retrofit project design and implementation, using expertise, methodologies,
and systems developed by countries that perform well at ensuring road safety. Since
credible, accessible performance data and related crash analyses are crucial to lowering
road crash fatalities, the Road Safety Project made connections across sectors to gather
this information and ensure that all relevant analysis was being brought to bear on the
problem. It also leveraged strong partnerships with police agencies, the health sector,
and the OECD's International Road Traffic and Accident Database (IRTAD) Group to
push forward life-saving initiatives, ranging from highway improvements in high-risk
corridors, to innovative safety education campaigns.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

In a key lesson for how to generate better citizen outcomes, this project demonstrated
that well-focused national leadership and supporting resources can catalyze effective


4
partnership engagement with provincial and local governments, NGOs and the
private sector to achieve consensus on desired results and the measures to achieve
them . Another crucial innovation has been the Incentive Fund (with output-based
disbursements), which has enabled the ANSV to engage in a purposeful way with a wide
body of partners, bringing them together to focus on road safety.

An additional lesson is that South-South dialogue and action on a regional basis can
be stimulated when best practice measures are taken and given high visibility. The
Argentina Road Safety Project has created interest in other Latin American countries
facing the challenges of creating a lead agency to manage their national road safety
effort. It has also spurred action to create a Regional Road Safety Observatory.
Argentina's work in partnership with the IRTAD Group and its Spanish counterparts is
serving as a model to assist the related development of regional protocols - offering its
neighbors access to a useful lens for relentless focus on citizens' outcomes.




Source: World Ban k Group.




                                                                                            5
Tanzania: Productive Safety Net Project
Contact: Ida Manjolo, Email : imanjolo@worldbank.org
         Manuel Salazar, Email: msalazar2@worldbank.org




What was the development challenge?

In Tanzania, despite compulsory education for children from 5-12 years, those from poor
households often either drop out of school or are not enrolled in school because their
parents cannot afford to pay for tuition fees and other required school materials and
contributions. In such instances, children are forced to engage in petty trading or work as
laborers so that they can bring food to their families. Those who continue schooling, do so
in difficult conditions, without proper school uniforms or books, let alone proper nutrition.

The Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF) sought to alleviate these conditions by piloting
a safety net program through a community based conditional cash transfer project which
supported the elderly and children from poor households.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

Given the substantial detrimental effects that low incomes had on children's education,
the TASAF project focused on providing modest cash transfers to selected poor
households with children of school age, and the elderly. In addressing the root of the
education problem, the program transferred cash conditional on the pupils from cash-
transfer-beneficiary-households actually attending school , as well as requiring that the
elderly attended clinics for check-ups. Once a month, special sessions were organized
on capacity building , health, and effective use of the cash received.

After three years of the pilot, results showed that households initially identified as poor
had improved their situations substantially, both in terms of increased asset ownership
and empowerment. Impact assessment results showed that before the program, poor
households could afford one meal per day at most, but after being enrolled in the
program could afford three meals a day. Children from these households recorded good
performance in school and truancy was reduced . Children who were going to school


6
barefoot with inadequate school materials and tattered uniforms are now proud to report
that those days are long gone and they have a sense of belonging in the community.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

By addressing the root of the education problem in Tanzania, the project was able to
achieve positive outcomes not only for children's education, but also in terms of income,
health and community based safety nets, so that the CCT had a wide-ranging set of
cross-cutting positive effects. The CCT, and community training sessions and expert
facilitation enabled beneficiaries to become enterprising. Some used part of the transfer
to pay for their community health fund insurance. Others started small businesses
to generate more income so as to become self-sufficient and less dependent on the
cash transfers. This project has provided input to the design of the current Productive
Social Safety Net Project, and the cash transfers are being rolled out to all 161 districts
nationwide to over 900,000 households.




Source: Tanzan ia Social Action Fund (TASAF).




                                                                                          7
Bangladesh: Partnership for Clean
Textile {PaCT)
Contact: S. Akhtar Mahmood , Email : smahmood@ifc.org


What was the development challenge?

While Bangladesh 's textile industry is an important driver of the national economy,
it is also a heavy consumer of water, and a major polluter of water bodies around
it. Suboptimal use of chemicals and inadequate effluent treatment is contaminating
surface waters, negatively affecting the lives of nearly 12 million people.
Competitiveness and further growth in Bangladesh 's apparel industry will critically
depend on achieving efficiencies in water use and reducing discharge .

In the PaCT project, firm-level advice from I FC is complemented by multi-stakeholder
engagement leading to policy and regulatory interventions , and collective action
by industry. The target is to induce change in 200 factories and lay the ground for
changes in the rest of the industry after the project closes.

What strategies did this project use to deliver solutions?

A multipronged approach is needed to induce adoption of good practices. In this
project, the IFC used its convening power to bring together many actors around a
shared agenda. PaCT embodies a multi-stakeholder approach by working to link
buyers, factories, financial institutions, sector associations, and local communities
and governments for coordinated action on water sustainability. Through PaCT, global
apparel buyers develop and apply harmonized procurement guidelines that integrate
water sustainability criteria. The leading industry association, Bangladesh Garment
Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA), is partnering with PaCT to
establish a Textile Technology Business Center, to support adoption of CP measures
by sharing technology case studies and associated technical and financial information.
A Textile Sustainability Platform is being formed to reach out to national and sector-
level stakeholders to address water sustainability challenges in the sector. And in
partnership with leading factories, PaCT will work with business, government, and


8
communities in selected textile manufacturing clusters, to develop and put in practice a
vision for Clean Clusters.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project shows that in transforming a sector, relationships - among governments,
communities, and business - must also be transformed . World Bank Group
leadership brings together multiple stakeholders to change incentives and behavior
of diverse actors to move forward a change agenda . PaCT faces major challenges
in implementation , but in addressing these challenges is working on a number of
different tools to address these, including survey instruments, awareness building
materials, assessment methodologies and guidance notes for clients . These , and other
knowledge products such as case studies, can also be shared with others.




Source: PaCT Project Team , World Bank Group.




                                                                                      9
Indonesia: National Program for
Community Empowerment in Rural
Areas
Contact: Sonya Woo, Email: swoo1@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

The government of Indonesia needed to cost-effectively deliver basic services and
assistance to the rural poor across its vast territory.

The government, with World Bank funding and technical assistance, put in place a
community-driven development (COD) system, operating via direct transfer of grants
from the national treasury to collective community bank accounts, to enable communities
to undertake development activities. Government subsequently scaled up the program
- first called Kecamatan Development Program (KDP) and later the National Program
for Community Empowerment, or PNPM-Rural - nationally and adapted it to deliver a
broader range of services in line with evolving local priorities.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

Following a series of mixed methods diagnostics, called the Local Level Institutions
studies, which uncovered latent capacity possessed by communities to solve problems
collectively, the government implemented the COD. This drew on community problem-
solving capacity, with facilitation support, to cost-effectively deliver services in rural
communities across Indonesia.

The Bank led in establishing the PNPM Support Facility (PSF) to convene multiple
government and international development stakeholders, enabling the Bank to maintain
a strong, continuous presence locally. The Bank drew on deep relationships from
its sustained presence on the ground, which was indispensable in supporting the
implementation and scale-up of a national COD program in a country as large and diverse
as Indonesia, and it allowed the Bank to engage deeply with reform-minded policymakers
during windows of opportunity. The compilation of a large body of evidence support also
helped to build crucial sustained commitment among World Bank management.

10
The use of rigorous evidence was vital throughout the program. Randomized control
trials were used , such as for the differential impacts of incentivized versus non-
incentivized versions of PNPM Generasi , a community cash transfer program delivered
through PNPM-Rural aimed at improving access to priority health and education
services. Findings led to the mainstreaming and scale-up of PNPM Generasi. A study
of the participation of marginalized groups in PNPM led to the design and roll-out of a
special program of support to national NGOs active in engaging sex workers, ethnic and
religious minorities, prisoners, and other marginalized groups in development activities.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project shows the importance of drawing on rigorous evidence to inform program
decisions. The KDP, now PNPM-Rural, prioritized the use of rigorous mixed-methods
research to design the program and measure impacts, allowing for successful scale-up.
Impact evaluations have provided rigorous evidence of PNPM-Rural's impacts on increases
in consumption among the poorest, and improvements in access to basic services.




Source: Curt Carnemark, World Bank Group Flickr.



                                                                                       11
Afghanistan: Rural Enterprise
Development Program
Contact: Kamran Akbar, Email: kakbar1@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

About 80 percent of Afghanistan's population depends on agriculture and livestock for
a living. This project sought to improve the incomes of rural men and women working
in the agricultural sector by helping them access financing and develop sustainable
enterprises. However, the project's progress was initially delayed, as it had ambitious
goals with limited capacity and experience. High levels of bureaucracy and slow
disbursement also contributed to the delay.

To address this, the project underwent a mid-term restructuring that enabled the
project to reach goals more effectively. The result was increased access to village level
financing , reaching more than 51 ,000 rural poor in 22 districts, surpassing $US1 .5
million. The project also helped establish nearly 200 small and medium enterprises
across the country. Over half the savings group members are women , and the number of
female borrowers surpasses that of men .

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

In May 2013, the project was restructured through reduction of the project's scope and
revision of targets, given Afghanistan's prior lack of experience in implementing such
a livelihood project. The organizational structure and staffing was transferred from
public institutions to private providers. In adapting to the local challenges, the project
incorporating Pasto-speaking facilitators to work with local communities, and included
migrant and disabled people in the enterprise development pilots. Local consultants
were recruited and tra ined in order to build local capacity, as well as to have a pool of
resources for future similar projects.




12
What lessons does this project offer for others?

Since the restructuring mission of May 2013 , the project has shown considerable
progress. The pace of activities has increased and the project is moving towards
realizing most of its revised targets . Substantial progress in enterprise development
among pastoral nomads has been made, transformational actions with regard to fixed-
salaries staff have been undertaken , and training of facilitators - of whom about half
are women - has been completed . The successful adaptation of this project was made
possible by identifying problems early on and discussing them candidly, and making
appropriate adjustments to the local context. It was also critical to put in place incentive
mechanisms to ensure that performance in implementation met expectations, with
improved monitoring systems playing a key role.




Source: Kamran Akbar, World Bank Group.




                                                                                           13
Nigeria: ICT for Social Accountability
Contact: Paula Rossiasco, Email : prossiasco@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

The development challenge was to ensure better service provision in health and
agriculture by effectively collecting feedback from World Bank project beneficiaries in
Nigeria. The project had to avoid a common pitfall : tools for collecting feedback from
project beneficiaries often fail to represent citizens' voices and are disconnected from
decision making processes.

The system, called MyVoice, will enable decision makers to make accurate, timely,
and efficient programmatic decisions based on real-time beneficiary feedback via SMS
messages to a publicly advertised short code . Creating mechanisms for using ICT to
transmit information in real time up the management stream - to both World Bank staff
and government counterparts - allows for immediate and timely aggregation of voice
and facilitates the use of this information to improve service delivery.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The MyVoice system relied on evidence from user experiences to ensure that the
desired result - citizen use of the ICT to enhance social accountability - occurred .
Since many tools fail due to poor understanding of social context, a significant portion
of project design time was dedicated to gathering evidence of user needs via an
ethnographic approach. Citizens were interviewed and user experiences documented
to inform program design. Other stakeholders were canvassed to understand their
incentives for using information captured by the feedback mechanism, including local
government and traditional authorities, local NGOs and CSOs, and service providers.
The system was designed and implemented adaptively, iteratively, and experimentally,
utilizing agile software development methodologies to allow for continuous prototyping
and testing. The end product was a system that drew on extensive evidence of citizen
needs to design the ICT.
What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project showed the importance of gathering extensive, multi-disciplinary forms
of evidence to inform ICT design these tools often fail. The central role given to
understanding the political economy of service delivery and the social context in which
projects take place provides an insight into the importance of locally-gathered , multi-
disciplinary evidence to unchain the potential of ICTs to aggregate voice meaningfully.

At the same time, effective citizen engagement in development projects is a multisectoral
issue. It requires a deep understanding of the technical design, the decision making
mechanisms for service delivery, the incentives of the different stakeholders involved ,
the social context, and the potential that ICTs can offer to bring these different aspects
together in a concise, user- friendly, and timely manner. The tool was conceived in
a modular way, so it could be adapted to other operations in the Nigeria World Bank
portfolio once the project context is fully understood .




Source: Reboot.




                                                                                           15
Global Scaling Up Rural Sanitation
Contact: Eduardo Perez, Email: eperez1@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Worldwide, 2.5 billion people lack access to improved sanitation, and three quarters of
these people live in rural areas.

Seeking to respond to this development challenge , in 2007, the World Bank initiated
a partnership with the governments of India, Tanzania, and Indonesia to start at scale
projects that served as learning laboratories to provide lessons for policy changes; this
was then scaled up in 10 additional countries. From base-line to 2013, WSP helped
governments to scale up access to improved sanitation for 22 million and encouraged 19
million people to stop practicing open defecation in the 13 focus countries.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The Scaling up Rural Sanitation program includes an iterative process to help
governments develop at scale solutions, as shown in the figure. The initial countries
served as learning laboratories, with lessons learned in India, Tanzania, and Indonesia
being informed by real-time data collection and monitoring. This resulted in a theory
of change that is now
being replicated in 1O                               • Chent· and problem-driven engagement
                                                     • Shated diagnostics
additional countries.                                • Prog1ammatic, multi-seaor approach
                                                     • Results focused deaslOfl makmg
It allows TTLs in all
13 countries to apply
                            • Capture and
                              shanngof
                                                               I Problem Identification I    • MobiliZation of best
                                                                                               global knowledge and
                              operation                                                        talent
lessons learned while         ~wledge
also adapting and           • Synthesis of
                              lessons learned,
                                                    I
                                               Evaluation and
                                                 Leaming
                                                                   I     Help
                                                                   Governments
                                                                                             • Best evidence based,
                                                                                               globaHocal ~
                                                                 Develop At Scale I Design I • Integrated rrulb-sector/
correcting course as          leammgtrom                                                       multi-stakeholder
                               atlure                                 Solutlona                 nnovanve solutions
they scale up, collecting • New products
their own evidence            and learning
                              tools                                    I
                                                                     Implementation
                                                                      and Iteration
                                                                                    I
locally to target effective
                                                     • Technical aSSIStanee
behavior changes and                                 • Capaaty building
                                                     • lteranve feedback loops, mid-course
interventions.
                                  I                     001Tecoons, operatK>nal learning



16
What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project showed the key importance of learning from projects that serve as
"laboratories," and using these lessons learned to inform both changes in policy choices ,
and changes to the project when it scales up. Data collection and monitoring should
be designed so that they can be used by governments in real time to make programs
more effective. Moreover, it is vital to make global knowledge connections through
enabling South-South government exchanges, sharing state-of the art information with
government partners and promoting global capacity building through e-learning and
other training products.




Source: WSP, World Bank Group.




                                                                                       17
Cambodia: Second Education Sector
Support Project {SESSP)
Contact: Simeth Beng, Email : sbeng@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Drop-out rates due to economic reasons in upper primary and secondary schools have
been very high in Cambodia.

This program focused on the design, scaling-up and mainstreaming of scholarship
programs. As a result, scholarship programs have contributed to significant increases in
school enrollment and attendance (approximately 20 percentage points) and pointing the
way to increased learning.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The projects used systematic feedback of lessons from delivery to ensure that they were
flexible, adapting to meet the needs of beneficiaries. Two rigorous impact evaluation
programs shed light on the factors that maximize the impact of the scholarships on
schooling and learning outcomes. The first impact evaluation program indicated that
the program had large positive impacts on school enrolment and attendance rates.
At the same time, the evaluation also showed that the provision of scholarships alone
was insufficient to significantly improve the learning outcomes of students from poor
households. The second impact evaluation studied not only program's impacts on
school participation but also on achievement, a domain in which there had been a dearth
of analysis. The evaluation then recommended scaling up the program by targeting
students with high academic potential, while ensuring that the poorest students also
continue to be included. In this way, continuous adaptation based on rigorous evidence
allowed the project to address the real needs of students (and their families) .

What lessons does this project offer for others?

Close collaboration with the Ministry of Education from the design stage was crucial , as
implementation status was regularly discussed as a result of joint field visits in order to


18
jointly identify bottlenecks and adjust implementation strategies in response to evaluation
results . Regular implementation support activities also helped build the Ministry team's
capacity.




Source: World Bank Group Flickr.




                                                                                        19
Avian and Human Influenza (AHi)
Contact: Olga Jonas, Email : ojonas@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Avian and human flu raises the specter of a global pandemic that could kill hundreds of
millions, make billions ill, and cost trillions of dollars. Uncoordinated actions in response
to a future outbreak could be very costly.

The World Bank committed substantial senior management and staff resources to
develop and gain acceptance for an evidence-based, results-oriented framework with
the standard-setting international organizations and other expert partners. The sectors
engaged were animal health , human health, disaster risk management (whole-of-society
preparedness), and communications . The Bank also provided financing of $1 .3 billion
($1 .2 billion from IBRD/IDA) for 72 operations in 60 countries, in the largest multisectoral
global health program ever.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The threat of pandemics is inherently multidimensional: it spans sectors while also
being multisectoral as well as global and transborder, meaning that this represents a
need for rapid engagement in all sectors, and for support to pandemic prevention and
preparedness in developing countries. The Bank contributed pivotal knowledge on
economic impact and compensation schemes , fostering alignment in the international
partnership. The common framework included many stakeholders, including developed
countries, developing countries, the United Nations and other international agencies,
veterinary services , public health agencies, disaster risk management authorities, and
others. Meanwhile, regular consultations at the national and international levels built
partnerships across borders and among sectors, ensuring coherence of the global
program . Because of its implementation experience in all countries, the Bank brokered
pragmatic solutions, bringing together animal health , human health , and other sectors
as well as donors and international agencies, increasing the overall effectiveness and
efficiency of the global response .



20
What lessons does this project offer for others?

Agreement on a common framework is vital to make complex endeavors succeed,
especially in an emergency and where there are multiple partners, professions, and
stakeholders. Also, coordination on multidimensional solutions is not spontaneous. It
costs money, takes time, and requires high-level attention, but it can make the difference
between success and failure. The Bank is well-placed to play the requisite integrating
role by financing and supporting coordination and implementation of multisectoral
programs.




      Source: Gerardo Bravo Garcia, Avian Flu Series, 2006, Oil & Gold Leaf on Canvas.




                                                                                         21
Morocco: National Initiative for
Human Development
Contact: Mohamed Medouar, Email: mmedouar@worldbank.org
       Andrea Liverani, Email: aliverani@worldbank.org



What was the development challenge?

The main development challenge was a lack of participatory mechanisms to
identify peoples' needs for programs to alleviate poverty and social exclusion. The
Moroccan government's approach to dealing with poverty and social exclusion has
tended to be centrally-driven , with little room for participation , weak coordination
among line ministries, and inadequate targeting , and although the Government
of Morocco (GoM) dedicates 50 percent of public expenditures to social sectors,
results have been below expectations.

This project focused on strengthening participatory local governance and social
accountability to ensure that basic infrastructure and socio-economic services
meet the basic needs of excluded and vulnerable groups, particularly women
and youth . Result indicators and activities of the Program Action Plan (PAP) were
chosen to track this outcome, including percentage of the population involved
in the participatory approach , overall satisfaction w ith the participatory process ,
percentage of women and youth in the local governance committees , increasing
grassroots ownership of local development plans, and transparency in the
identification and selection process.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The project leveraged the power of participation to produce better evidence
on how basic services were meeting , or not meeting, peoples' needs . This
approach included activities to strengthen participatory local governance and
social accountability, develop bottom up integrated strategic planning , and
improve targeting. For each of these aspects, the program laid the groundwork


22
to gather rigorous evidence by developing result indicators and disbursement-
linked indicators in order to measure results. In tandem with strategies to increase
participation , this led to increased engagement of the target population in
participatory programming and evaluation of benefits, reflecting the demand and
community driven development objective of the program . In addition , the result of
the impact evaluation will provide information on the impact of INDH .

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project shows the importance of engaging the target population as part of
the monitoring process, with beneficiaries providing feedback, together with more
traditional methods of monitoring, such as impact evaluations. Thus, participatory
and inclusive models of service delivery, together with capacity building and
facilitation support for communities, can themselves provide the necessary feedback
to inform adjustments. This, in turn , relies on flexibility in project design and
implementation to allow course correction. This project also found that the use of
poverty maps was very useful in enabling the targeting of resources to poor areas.




  Source: World Bank Group Flickr.



                                                                                   23
Latvia: Who is Unemployed, Inactive
or Needy?
Contact: Emily Sinnott, Email: esinnott@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

The central challenge was a lack of information about Latvia 's poor and unemployed,
which was needed to develop anti-poverty programs and effectively target beneficiaries.
While Latvia has among the highest rates of people at-risk of poverty in the European
Union, stereotypes of benefit dependency and low work ethic of the poor have hindered
discussions on how to tackle social exclusion in the country.

As Latvia recovered from the 2009 crisis, the World Bank partnered with the government
to investigate tax, benefit, and training policies to combat long-term unemployment and
draw people into the workforce. The study provides background evidence to motivate
government reforms to the tax and benefit system and for the development of labor
market programs. The results of the study were widely reported in the media, and the
Government of Latvia has stated publicly that they are being used as background to
inform future policy reforms.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The study fundamentally depended on gathering strong evidence to inform a sensitive
debate; this effort involved numerous sectors, namely social protection, fiscal policy,
education and training , and health. While the work was carried out at the request of
the Ministry of Welfare and the State Employment Agency, the team worked closely
with a steering committee made up of technical staff from other agencies, and working
together to gather the widest possible datasets to support findings and inform policy
recommendations . Indeed , big data-gathering it and sharing it for better policy-was at
the heart of this effort.

To examine the role of taxes, benefits and employment programs, a large panel
database was created for individuals linking various government administrative datasets.
This linked data on individuals in the social security, social assistance, employment
                                                                                           I\_

24
services, population registry and health insurance databases. The data was for 91
monthly waves from 1/2006 to 7/2012 and covered 43 percent of the total population .
The rich data allowed the team to investigate benefit dependency and look at the impact
of employment programs with a strong evidence base. The study contributed with strong
evidence on the lack of benefit dependency in Latvia , which was widely reported in
the media and used by the Government of Latvia to argue for the need for anti-poverty
programs (a new development).

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project showed the possibility of using big data to inform the very difficult policy
debate on benefit dependency. In addition, by involving a large number of stakeholders
in the study from inception to completion (with numerous presentations of initial results
etc.), and making all the analysis available online and at public conferences, the project
was seen as an objective study of the situation in Latvia without a political agenda .




Source: iStockphoto.




                                                                                         25
Ghana: Disaster Preparedness and
Watershed Management
Contact: Carl Dingel, E-mail: cdingel@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Recurring floods in the north of Ghana called for an improved flood forecasting system
to better manage the situation, and find long-term solutions for mitigation . However,
in working towards this there was no clear "institutional home" to take the lead in
establishing such a system , nor was there reliable hydrological data set up to support it.

This project focused on building a robust forecasting system that would be easy to
operate and flexible enough to incorporate new information as it was made available.
This required building trust among all relevant agencies, including developing an
understanding and agreement of shared responsibilities .

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

This project focused on a rigorous analysis and validation of the existing data and
information . To adapt to changes in the program, it was crucial that the technical design
of the White Volta Flood Hazard Assessment was flexible enough to accommodate a
broad range of data and information to produce the most accurate flood forecasting
information possible. With a flexible technical design that can constantly be re-evaluated ,
the available information allowed the project to adapt to new information, be more
accurate, and remain state of the art. The project steering committee was anchored
in the involved national organizations and allowed the project to have a forum and to
address upcoming challenges and changes in the system design.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project offers multiple lessons for delivering solutions in situations characterized
by a need for adaptation and coordination among multiple agencies. Anchoring the
project locally, and the establishment of a well-functioning steering committee to address
upcoming challenges and adapt the project design as necessary, was vital. The project


26
showed that technical designs should be built on a rigorous analysis of the available
information, and should allow enough time for validation of information. It was crucial to
get technical experts on the task team who could stay up to date on the state of the art
technology while also focusing on knowledge transfer.




Source: Water Resources Comm ission , Ghana; HKV Consultants, The Netherlands.




                                                                                         27
Nicaragua: The ECOM Monitoring
Pilot
Contact: Miguel Angel Rebolledo Dellepiane, Email: mrebolledo@ifc.org


What was the development challenge?

The development challenge was low productivity, and therefore low income, among coffee
farmers. A significant demand existed for services to improve productivity, such as market
information, financing, and agricultural extension (visits to farms and agricultural inputs).

This project focused on trying to understand which services were appropriate to the local
context. The IFC identified services that company ECOM could contribute that would
lead to increasing income by increasing productivity. The project also found that certain
tools could increase farmer yield , share of crop sold , and income; bring new farmers into
the supply chain; and strengthen the feedback that farmers provide to its staff in the field
across regions. All this contributed to increased income and self-reported empowerment
by these farmers.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

In looking to identify what specific services could be appropriate to helping improve
Nicaraguan ECOM farmers ' incomes, the project tested for the first time a combination
of tools including the Simple Poverty Scorecard , "Constituent Voice ," and a database
of farmers collected and managed by the IFC client. The combination of tools targeted
the local context on several different levels. The scorecard estimates the likelihood that
a household has an income lower than a reference value. The Constituency Voice is an
adaptation of consumer-insight research to farmers that looks into service relevance and
quality; as well as into the client's relationship characteristics with farmers , both tangible
(e.g. , increased income) and intangible (e.g ., confidence, empowerment).

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project suggests that there can be a set of indicators that align incentives of
farmers, the IFC client, and the IFC. These should focus on actual and perceived


28
impacts on farmers' income, and help the client to strategically deliver services with
the potential to expand its business and improve quality of reporting to investors with
a development focus . They should also provide IFC better insight on progress towards
achieving expected impacts. This is a trend that companies in the agribusiness space
are currently exploring both individually and through their associations.




Source: Miguel Dellepiane, World Bank Group Flickr.




                                                                                          29
India: DSCL Sugar - Increasing
Productivity
Contact: Bradford Roberts, Email: broberts@ifc.org
         Harsh Vivek, Email : hvivek@ifc.org



What was the development challenge?

DCM Shriram Consolidated Limited (DSCL), an IFC investment client, is one of the
major sugar producers in the state of Uttar Pradesh , India, providing the 150,000
sugar farmers in its catchment area with vital sources of income. However, both farmer
productivity and plant productivity were low (67 percent of sugarcane crushing capacity
was used at one plant, for example), which in turn lowered farmer incomes. The
company tried in-house measures to enhance farm productivity, but had limited success
as its programs were isolated , piece-meal , and not well managed.

To strengthen farmer outreach , IFC partnered with DSCL to increase productivity, and
incomes, of sugarcane farmers via an integrated advisory services project. IFC worked
to help the company and farmers through three tracks. First, it worked to create a more
user friendly and practical agricultural extension manual, giving extension agents detailed
understanding of training needs in a practical format with extensive use of photos and
examples. Second, IFC worked to improve the farmer training materials, producing a farmer
flipchart, a 12 month calendar of farm level activities with photos to demonstrate the practice
and the content in simple "directive" statements. Finally, IFC helped DSCL improve extension
agents' training. All this contributed to increasing farmer productivity and income.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

On the training delivery side, IFC noted during the 1st year evaluation that while
farmers were changing their practices and improving their productivity, they were not
satisfied with the training delivery from the extension agents. Taking into consideration
the evaluation results, the IFC sugar expert then worked with the extension agents
to improve their training delivery, conducting mock training exercises to evaluate the



30                                                                                                \
agents' approach and give
guidance on how to improve.

Additionally, early on in the
M&E, one issue noted was
that during the baseline
collection of data, productivity
estimates as provided by
farmers seemed higher than
the company believed . To
more accurately measure
productivity at farm level ,
the project used in-field crop
cutting to measure the "true"
productivity of the farmer's
output. The project then
used crop cutting for each
of the follow-on surveys,
to measure the production
of the surveyed farmers,
thereby ensuring accurate
measures of productivity.

What lessons does this
project offer for others?

This project identified
key lessons. First, project
managers may need to adjust
during the course of a project
to ensure impact, and should
assume that things won't go
as planned at project start-up.
Moreover, rigorous monitoring
and evaluation throughout the
course of a project is needed
to allow the IFC to credibly
attribute good results to
project impact.                    Source: Bradford Roberts , World Bank Group.


                                                                                  31
Morocco: Ouarzazate Concentrated
Solar Power Project Phase I
Contact: Sameh Mobarek, Email: smobarek@worldbank.org
         Fanny Missfeldt-Ringius, Email : fmissfeldt@worldbank .org



What was the development challenge?

Morocco is the largest energy importer in the MENA region , but it is also seeking to
reduce its dependence on imported fossil fuels , as well as its carbon footprint.

In 2010, Morocco adopted a 'National Plan Against Climate Change' that sought to decouple
its economic growth and its greenhouse gas emissions by developing a progressive
renewable energy agenda. Morocco thus recognized the twin-benefits of adopting climate-
friendly policies to enhance its energy security and adapt the country's development trajectory
to reduce its global carbon footprint. Ouarzazate I Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) Project
was the first step in realizing these objectives by developing and implementing the first 160-
MW phase of the 500-MW Ouarzazate (now called 'Noor') Complex.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

There were five key elements to the project's successful development, which involved
a wide range of actors forming connections and partnerships to move forward a mu lti-
dimensional response . First, the project enjoyed strong public support from the highest
levels of government. The government of Morocco established and funded the Moroccan
Agency for Solar Energy (MASEN) and staffed it with skilled , highly motivated personnel.
Second, the Project enjoyed extensive support from the donor community because of
its potential to model new, clean technology. Third , early coordination and agreements
with donors demonstrated the commitment of the donor community behind the project,
stimulating private sector interest and contributing to the success of its procurement
process. Fourth , MASEN's choice to use a well-designed public-private partnership
(PPP) model and sophisticated international financial , legal, and technical experts to
advise it during the design and procurement process allowed for optimal alignment of


32
risks between public and private players. Fifth, the project built on past lessons learned
from other CSP developments worldwide, which helped reduce the project's costs and
increase its efficiency.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

At the country level , national support and government backing for Bank engagement
across sectors was key. The capacity and motivations of government counterparts, as
well as a clear implementation timeline that is tied to a well-defined public deliverable,
are critical. Engagement of well-qualified, well-funded technical , legal, and financial
advisors to guide the design and implementation of the project are an essential element
of the development process.

At the Bank level, it was important to secure strong internal engagement from a Bank with
the right skills mix. Good coordination and communication between the Bank team and
different internal stakeholders should ensure that information is shared in the most efficient
and clear manner, with issues discussed and resolved quickly. Staff should focus on the fact
that the Bank exists to serve the client's needs and objectives - not the other way around.




Source: Sameh Mobarek, World Bank Group.



                                                                                           33
Uganda: Reproductive Health Voucher
Contact: Peter Okwero, Email: pokwero@worldbank.org
         Leslie Villegas, Email : lvillegas@worldbank.org




What was the development challenge?

In Uganda, poor, rural women often lack professional medical attendance during
childbirth , leading to elevated risk of maternal mortality.

The project created a system to ensure that private partners effectively delivered
professional care during childbirth . The project used a voucher scheme embedded within
an Output-Based Aid (OBA) structure, allowing for verification of outputs and payments
for services against outputs. The project exceeded its initial target (136,000 women),
resulting in 137,964 women receiving skilled birth assistance. This was a first for the
majority of them , and 92 percent reported being satisfied with the treatment.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The Bank worked to change incentive structures in order to improve the provision of
services by private partners. The voucher scheme provided potent incentives to change
partner behavior, as subsidy disbursements can easily be linked to output verification.
The feedback provided by this process tells project managers not only what is working ,
but also what is not working , and encourages adaptation when measures are not
working . The resulting acceleration of service utilization over time allows for informed
decision making and illustrates behavioral shifts toward more adaptive learning and
efficient provision of services.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

The experience gained from the Uganda Reproductive Healthcare Project-both as a
pilot project and at national scale up-has entered the project management literature
as a powerful example of the flexibility and precision of Output-Based Aid as a tool to
change behaviors and enable adaptive management. Output and outcome indicators,
being both the results metrics and the check of contractual quality, allow managers to


34
adapt and learn what is working and not working based on verifiable evidence. The use
of outputs not only incentivizes partners, but in addition burnishes the financial integrity
of a project - if stakeholders are confident that a project is efficient, transparent, and free
of corruption , project benefits can spill over into civil society as well. Overall , one of the
major advantages of Output-Based Aid is that project managers adapt and learn what is
working and not working based on objective and verifiable evidence across sectors.




Source: GBOPA.




                                                                                             35
Indonesia: Partnership for
Knowledge-Based Poverty Reduction
Contact: Vivi Alatas, Email: valatas@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Partners in the Government of Indonesia face challenges in producing rigorous
evidence and applying it to develop policy and program responses to reduce poverty
and vulnerability, tackle inequality, and stimulate job creation. The local supply of
research and analytical services in Indonesia is extremely limited and can be difficult for
policymakers to access.

This program was established in response to a request in 201 O from the Vice-
President of the Republic of Indonesia and his Deputy for Social Welfare for technical
assistance and capacity building to support national efforts to coordinate and integrate
national poverty reduction policies and programs. The initial request focused on
supporting reforms for the country's array of household-based poverty reduction
programs that target poor households. Increasingly, they are seeking analytical service
and technical assistance . The program is directed toward fulfilling the immediate needs
of government partners that are shifting towards an evidence-based approach to policy
making.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The program supports the Government of Indonesia by improving evidence-based
policy making for poverty reduction programs and policies. To carry this out, the program
adopts a three-pronged strategy, providing assistance at each stage of the knowledge-
to-policy cycle . First, the program works on providing poverty analytics and building
analytical capacity to inform poverty reduction policies, programs (with a focus on
household-based poverty reduction programs) and poverty reduction strategies. It also
supports the government in the design , implementation , and evaluation of key poverty
reduction programs. Finally, it works to improve the quality and accessibility of data
required for poverty analysis and policymaking.


36
What lessons does this project offer for others?

This program has contributed to the shift towards evidence-based policy making in
the poverty and social protection sectors in Indonesia. In 2010, the President elevated
oversight of the poverty strategy to the National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty
Reduction (TNP2K), which is chaired by the Vice-President. The National Team is
supported by a Secretariat that is responsible for drafting policies (with a priority on
social assistance reform), establishing a national targeting system, and integrating
monitoring and evaluation activities. The Secretariat includes six working groups that
function as internal "think tanks" to develop evidence-based policies. TNP2K and the
World Bank have contributed to creating an environment where evidence is the basis
for policy recommendations and government decisions on poverty and social protection
sectors.




Source: Anne Cecil Esteve, Matahati Productions, World Bank.




                                                                                       37
Kuwait: Enhancing Labor Market
Information Systems
Contact: Ghassan N. Alkhoja , Email : galkhoja@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Mismatches in the labor market negatively impacted employment opportunities, and
policymakers in Kuwait were unable to make evidence-based decisions to correct these
distortions. Information crucial for human resource development, and ultimately for
enabling the public to make good decisions on job-seeking choices , was fragmented and
scattered across agencies.

The World Bank supported the development of the Labor Market Information System
(LMIS) to consolidate labor market information and make it accessible and available

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

This project focused on ensuring that policymakers and citizens had the information that
they needed to make better decisions. During the course of implementation , the World
Bank team utilized international experience in labor market information development,
while contextualizing the solutions provided to the Government of Kuwait (GoK). The use
of local language was extensive; everything was localized to Arabic, leading to better
traction and acceptance by the client. All this was coupled with a process of sustained
engagement and continuous focus on accomplishing goals, with Bank staff and
resources on the ground to assist the client every step of the way.

The World Bank team reached out to stakeholders extensively through a series of focus
groups, where it heard firsthand from government officials, members of the private
sector, students, and civil society groups about their needs, the challenges they face ,
and the solutions and ideas they offered . In addition , the World Bank team sought
out partnerships, as much-needed labor market information is scattered across many
agencies. The Bank brought these agencies to one table, explained the challenges,
inquired about solutions, and sought buy-in from all. This process of extensive
consultation has ensured that LMIS incorporates information needed by multiple

38
stakeholders. Now, accurate statistics can help policy makers formulate effective policy,
while projections of future labor market needs can help students make the school-to-
work transition.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

Localization in terms of language, local presence, and utilizing local resources were
direct contributors to success; to ensure positive impact on citizens on the ground, this
localization should be a main feature of engagements. Undertaking a rigorous diagnostic
to identify problems, and verify what citizens needed, enabled a structured approach
to address the needs of the client. Sustained engagement, through almost continuous
presence of Bank staff and resources on the ground to assist the client every step of
the way, was also crucial. Moreover, since lack of information had engendered some
suspicion toward institutions, the World Bank focused on rebuilding trust for improved
decision making ; it accomplished this by being context sensitive and used its convening
power, as well as leveraging Open Data principles.




Source: Ghalia Al Refaei , Kuwait Central Statistical Bureau.


                                                                                       39
India: Improving Rural Livelihoods in
Bihar
Contact: Parmesh Shah, Email : pshah@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

The state of Bihar has some of the worst social and economic indicators in India, with
significant challenges of social exclusion, lack of access to finance, landlessness, low
food security, and indebtedness of rural households.

The project facilitated a unique institutional model for the development of rural
livelihoods in the state, using a professional support architecture of service delivery to
develop commun ity institutions of the poor, build social , financial and economic capital ,
and support the poor in their interactions with state and market. In seven years of
operation, the project has mobilized 1.4 million poor households into Self Help Groups
(SHGs) to access finance for farm modernization , training , and to start enterprises; some
70 percent of these households have retired their high-value debts. A recent independent
impact evaluation has also observed that the participant households have higher
savings, lower high-cost debts, higher food security, more assets, and empowered
women .

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The World Bank, returning to Bihar after a gap of 25 years , used four main approaches
to improve outcomes in a difficult environment. First, the task team engaged intensively
with a broad range of stakeholders to understand political and social realities on the
ground before determining the project design. The team stayed in Bihar for three months
at a stretch , holding 12 major consultations; in addition , potential beneficiaries in over
1,000 villages were consulted to ascertain their needs.

Second, the task team made concerted efforts to get buy-in from the major political
players at the highest levels of government. Furthermore, senior bureaucrats and
officials were taken on study tours of successful projects in Andhra Pradesh . This peer-to
peer learning proved to be extremely effective.

40
Third, the project invested in a dedicated cadre of 160 skilled young professionals,
almost half women , who could support village communities, and regularly engage
with the task team to keep them updated about the situation on the ground. Fourth,
an experienced project consultant was placed on the ground in Bihar, making Bank
expertise constantly available to project officials.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project showcases four key lessons that helped staff meet their goals in Bihar. First,
to ensure better outcomes for citizens, it is important to spend time on the ground to
understand social and political realities. Second, the project should ensure presence of
quality human resources on the ground. Third, building trust with political leadership and
wider circles of influence is irreplaceable. Last, the Bihar experience suggests that, to
deliver solutions for citizens in difficult socio-economic contexts, it may be advisable to
emphasize geographical expertise rather than sector specialization.




Source: Vinay Vutukuru , World Bank Group.




                                                                                        41
FYR Macedonia: Public Expenditure
Policy Based Guarantee
Contact: Birgit Hansl , Email : bhansl@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

The Euro Zone turmoil during 2011-2012 created strong headwinds for Macedonia's
economy, leaving it facing a complex tangle of problems with negative impact on
citizens: low revenues, unpaid government obligations, and a weakening private
sector, while access to financing from virtually closed international financial markets
exacerbated the issue.

The World Bank worked with the government to obtain a large commercial loan
leveraged by a World Bank guarantee, creating a fiscal buffer which allowed for the fast
repayment of arrears and installing measures to prevent the reoccurrence of such an
economical harmful problem . As a result, a tremendous pick-up in economic activity was
observed in Macedonia, resulting in one of the best growth outcomes in 2013 among the
Western Balkan countries . The policy-program also supported measures which helped
realize major public expenditure savings by introducing public procurement of drugs
and other medical devices, and better targeted public social expenditures to the poor
and vulnerable . Most of all, the extended maturity of the guaranteed loan significantly
reduced the costs of borrowing , saving Macedonia over EUR50 million in interest costs
over a 7 year period .

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The reform program was multi-dimensional in nature, spanning several sectors, and          !
included World Bank team members from macroeconomic, fiscal and public financia l
management, health and social protection , mirrored by a diverse team of ministry
counterparts. The World Bank also initiated a multi-stakeholder process, as the team
helped to explain to other stakeholders, such as the opposition and the press, why there
was a short-term need for higher borrowing and a higher deficit in order to address
the arrears problem . The World Bank team was also able to strengthen essential


42
partnerships with other multilaterals and commercial lenders, and provide authorities
with the opportunity to gain experience working with a sovereign lender.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project offers a key lesson for the construction of multi-dimensional spaces and
responses: it is important to remember that the World Bank can play an important
role in creating for counterparts the space to debate and identify jointly with other
country stakeholders solutions to problems which are everybody's concern. The crucial
opportunity lies in reaching out to various stakeholders and helping to facilitate needed
dialogue on a difficult topic, such as increasing the debt level or short-term fiscal deficit,
as the World Bank is often regarded as a neutral mediator. As an already trusted
counterpart, the Bank also has the responsibility to create new partnerships for them
with other multilaterals or bilaterals, private international grant-making foundations or the
private sector.




Source: Bojan Shimbov, World Bank Group Flickr.



                                                                                           43
Yemen: Social Fund for Development
Phase IV
Contact: Mira Hong, Email: mhong@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

In Yemen, a high proportion of the population lives in poverty, with low access to health,
education , water, and other basic services. This falls particularly heavily upon vulnerable
populations , such as women, youth , children , and special needs groups.

The Social Fund for Development (SFD) , currently in its fourth phase, aims to enhance
economic opportunities and reduce the vulnerability of the poor. It targets villages in
the poorest sub-districts, with the aim of improving living conditions. The program is
implemented through SFD Branch Offices and has proved successful in responding to
urgent development needs as well as improving access to basic services.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

To improve living conditions, SFD focuses on multiple sectors including economic and
agricultural activities, water, roads , health and education, according to community
plans based on priority needs. One representative example of SFD's activities, and
its approach , is its Rural Girls' Education program. To increase the number of girls in
school , the program draws on a menu of complementary, multi-dimensional interventions
to strengthen the overall outcome, including water supply, school infrastructure and
equipment, awareness campaigns, training and capacity building at the school , community
and local government levels, and non-formal community classes for girls and women . The
required combination of intersecting interventions for a targeted community is based on
prior identification of the particular factors constraining girls' enrollment in that community.
For example, SFD has found that, to change deeply engrained traditional attitudes, the
engagement of stakeholders over a period of several years is needed. In each targeted
community, an initial community assessment is carried out to determine the particular
constraints and the types of engagement that are needed . Often, the key is to engage
religious and other community leaders and , when they are resistant to promoting girls'
schooling, to enlist a respected peer to encourage a change of view.

44
Additionally, SFD is adaptable: during crisis in Yemen in 2011-2012, project activities
were threatened by national disruption of fuel supplies and severe security constraints.
The SFD responded quickly and innovatively, switching to the use of local materials for
construction , and using camels to transport them. In addition, the SFD quickly scaled up
and adapted its Labor-intensive Works program to help meet the increased needs of the
poor and vulnerable.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

Four factors are identified as being crucial for SFD to produce innovative multi-
dimensional solutions while also remaining flexible. First, operational autonomy is key
- SFD is an autonomous institution under the Prime Minister's Office, with a Board
of Directors drawn from government, civil society, the private sector, and the financial
sector, bringing together representatives of many sectors. Second , SFD adopts a
decentralized structure, with strong capacity in Branch Offices. Third , SFD focuses
strongly on partnerships and capacity building at local government level. And finally, SFD
is committed to transparent procedures with emphasis on monitoring and evaluation.




Source: Yemen Social Fund for Development.



                                                                                       45
Colombia: Cartagena Water Supply
and Sewerage
Contact: Greg Browder, Email : gbrowder@worldbank.org
         Carmen Yee, Email : cyeebatista@worldbank.org



What was the development challenge?

Cartagena is a coastal city in Colombia, and tourism is a main pillar of the economy. In
2000 , pollution from domestic wastewater was contaminating tourist beaches, degrading
the environment, and producing a public health crisis. Sewerage coverage in 2000 was
only about 60 percent, and domestic wastewater flowed untreated through the streets
and into Cartagena Bay and an ecologically sensitive estuary.

Cartagena entered into a public private partnership with a Spanish water company
to provide professional management to expand water and sewerage services , and to
adopt a low-cost submarine outfall rather than an expensive conventional wastewater
treatment plant. In 2013, Cartagena has achieved 90 percent sewerage coverage and
dramatically improved water quality in its bay, coastal waters , and estuary. The World
Bank provided US$90 million to the Cartagena water company (ACUACAR) to help
finance the wastewater investments, and also provided technical assistance and politica l
support for the public-private water utility model.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The starting point for the submarine outfall , wh ich discharges partially treated sewage,
was located in an isolated Afro-Caribbean fish ing village, whose inhabitants were
concerned that the outfall would undermine their fishing livelihood. The community
originally opposed the submarine outfall solution and in 2004 filed a complaint with the
Inspection Panel, which ultimately was satisfactorily concluded. After a long process of
socialization with the community, including field visits to other outfall projects, education
on the nature and impacts of the outfall, and infrastructure investments in the community,
the Cartagena water company was able to obtain the trust and confidence of the village.


46
Today, many of the villagers work in the treatment plant, the village water supply,
sewerage, and road infrastructure has been upgraded , and there are no discernible
environmental impacts from the submarine outfall.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project exhibits some key lessons for sustainable sanitation solutions. For example,
the type of outfall solution employed here requires extensive consultations with local
communities, and extra attention must be paid to poor, indigenous, or otherwise
disadvantaged groups.

While this low-cost system outfall is an attractive option, it must be based on extensive
water quality monitoring , planning , design, and execution to ensure that it is an
appropriate environmental solution. It also shows that a public-private water utility model,
where the municipal government provides financing and oversight, and a professional
private operator ensures efficiency and continuity, may be a viable alternative in
situations with sufficient public sector financial capacity, but weak municipal governance.




Source: ACUACAR.

                                                                                         47
The World Bank
Sciehce of Delivery
 AT WORK
Introduction
What does it take to deliver results, measurable improvements in quality of life,
every time in every country?

We all know that sound technical knowledge is important. But we also know that to
deliver outcomes for citizens we need to combine that technical expertise with on the
ground delivery know-how.

Relentlessly focusing on the outcomes, deliberately taking multi-stakeholder and multi-
sectoral perspectives, systematically using and collecting evidence, developing a deep
understanding of the political context and individual incentives, consciously building in
feedback loops and course correction mechanisms - those are some of the approaches
that teams use to get the delivery right.

By capturing the learning from those approaches, we are building a collective and
cumulative body of operational knowledge and know-how that can help development
practitioners deliver better results. That is the science of delivery at work.

Relentless focus on citizen outcomes

    a. Identify the nature of the problem based on a thorough understanding of citizens'
       demands and the local context.

    b. Design a con~ext-sensitive strategy to relentlessly focus on outcomes, defined as
       measurable welfare gains of citizens.

    c. Pay attention to other factors, beyond the project, that influence citizen
       outcomes.

Multi-dimensional response

    a. Facilitate multi-stakeholder coalitions and multisectoral perspectives to identify
       problems and solutions.

    b. Convene development partners and build on their comparative advantages.



2
Evidence to achieve results

    a. Use the best available evidence to identify the nature of problems and to develop
       solutions.

    b. Develop local evidence, through experimentation and other strategies, to refine
       solutions.

    c. Collect, throughout the project cycle, evidence of results to enable course
       correction .

    d. Contribute to the global body of knowledge with the evidence accumulated during
       implementation .

Leadership for change

    a. Identify the incentives that motivate individual behavior change and integrate
       them in solution design .

    b. Understand the political economy and drivers of change to determine how and
       when to best engage with the client.

    c.   Ensure leadership support and facilitate coalition building among different
         stakeholders.

Adaptive implementing

   a. Develop an adaptive implementation strategy that allows for iterative
      experimentation, feedback loops, and course correction .

    b. Build a committed multidisciplinary team with the right skills, experience, and
       muscle memory.

   c. Maintain the capacity for reflection and a diagnostic mindset. Take action, step
      back, and assess the results of the action.



The projects featured in this brochure represent a small sample of projects that illustrate
the use of the approaches listed above. Some have drawn on one main approach ,
others on some, and others on all of them .

For more information, go to intranet: http:\\sod


                                                                                          3
Argentina: Road Safety
Contact: Veronica Raffo, E-mail: vraffo@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Road crash fatalities are an epidemic in the developing world , the number one killer of
the young, with huge economic and social costs. These fatalities can only be stabilized
and then reduced if all actors work together to strengthen institutions, ensuring strong
and sustainable multi-sectoral coordination and action.

While past projects have attempted to lower the mortality rate in Argentina, these have
historically been implemented as fragmented single-sector initiatives with outcomes too
small to be measured, and were often one-off projects with no follow-up activities. The
Road Safety Project supported the newly created Argentina Road Safety Lead Agency
(ANSV) to unify safety efforts and combat road crash fatalities.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

To attack this epidemic of road crash fatalities, the Road Safety Project provided
constant support to the ANSV, enabling it to deliver its institutional management
functions and build partnerships to save lives. The project gathered evidence to
continuously retrofit project design and implementation, using expertise, methodologies,
and systems developed by countries that perform well at ensuring road safety. Since
credible, accessible performance data and related crash analyses are crucial to lowering
road crash fatalities, the Road Safety Project made connections across sectors to gather
this information and ensure that all relevant analysis was being brought to bear on the
problem. It also leveraged strong partnerships with police agencies, the health sector,
and the OECD's International Road Traffic and Accident Database (IRTAD) Group to
push forward life-saving initiatives, ranging from highway improvements in high-risk
corridors, to innovative safety education campaigns.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

In a key lesson for how to generate better citizen outcomes, this project demonstrated
that well-focused national leadership and supporting resources can catalyze effective


4
partnership engagement with provincial and local governments, NGOs and the
private sector to achieve consensus on desired results and the measures to achieve
them. Another crucial innovation has been the Incentive Fund (with output-based
disbursements), which has enabled the ANSV to engage in a purposeful way with a wide
body of partners, bringing them together to focus on road safety.

An additional lesson is that South-South dialogue and action on a regional basis can
be stimulated when best practice measures are taken and given high visibility. The
Argentina Road Safety Project has created interest in other Latin American countries
facing the challenges of creating a lead agency to manage their national road safety
effort. It has also spurred action to create a Regional Road Safety Observatory.
Argentina's work in partnership with the IRTAD Group and its Spanish counterparts is
serving as a model to assist the related development of regional protocols - offering its
neighbors access to a useful lens for relentless focus on citizens' outcomes.




Source: World Bank Group.




                                                                                            5
Tanzania: Productive Safety Net Project
Contact: Ida Manjolo, Email: imanjolo@worldbank.org
         Manuel Salazar, Email: msalazar2@worldbank.org




What was the development challenge?

In Tanzania , despite compulsory education for children from 5-12 years, those from poor
households often either drop out of school or are not enrolled in school because their
parents cannot afford to pay for tuition fees and other required school materials and
contributions. In such instances, children are forced to engage in petty trading or work as
laborers so that they can bring food to their families. Those who continue schooling, do so
in difficult conditions, without proper school uniforms or books, let alone proper nutrition.

The Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF) sought to alleviate these conditions by piloting
a safety net program through a community based conditional cash transfer project which
supported the elderly and children from poor households.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

Given the substantial detrimental effects that low incomes had on children's education,
the TASAF project focused on providing modest cash transfers to selected poor
households with children of school age, and the elderly. In addressing the root of the
education problem, the program transferred cash conditional on the pupils from cash-
transfer-beneficiary-households actually attending school , as well as requiring that the
elderly attended clinics for check-ups. Once a month, special sessions were organized
on capacity building, health , and effective use of the cash received .

After three years of the pilot, results showed that households initially identified as poor
had improved their situations substantially, both in terms of increased asset ownership
and empowerment. Impact assessment results showed that before the program, poor
households could afford one meal per day at most, but after being enrolled in the
program could afford three meals a day. Children from these households recorded good
performance in school and truancy was reduced. Children who were going to school


6
barefoot with inadequate school materials and tattered uniforms are now proud to report
that those days are long gone and they have a sense of belonging in the community.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

By addressing the root of the education problem in Tanzania , the project was able to
achieve positive outcomes not only for children's education, but also in terms of income,
health and commun ity based safety nets, so that the CCT had a wide-ranging set of
cross-cutting positive effects. The CCT, and community training sessions and expert
facilitation enabled beneficiaries to become enterprising . Some used part of the transfer
to pay for their community health fund insurance. Others started small businesses
to generate more income so as to become self-sufficient and less dependent on the
cash transfers. This project has provided input to the design of the current Productive
Social Safety Net Project, and the cash transfers are being rolled out to all 161 districts
nationwide to over 900,000 households.




Source: Tanzania Social Action Fund (TASAF).




                                                                                          7
Bangladesh: Partnership for Clean
Textile (PaCT)
Contact: S. Akhtar Mahmood , Email : smahmood@ifc.org


What was the development challenge?

While Bangladesh 's textile industry is an important driver of the national economy,
it is also a heavy consumer of water, and a major polluter of water bodies around
it. Suboptimal use of chemicals and inadequate effluent treatment is contaminating
surface waters , negatively affecting the lives of nearly 12 million people.
Competitiveness and further growth in Bangladesh's apparel industry will critically
depend on achieving efficiencies in water use and reducing discharge.

In the PaCT project, firm-level advice from IFC is complemented by multi-stakeholder
engagement leading to policy and regulatory interventions, and collective action
by industry. The target is to induce change in 200 factories and lay the ground for
changes in the rest of the industry after the project closes.

What strategies did this project use to deliver solutions?

A multipronged approach is needed to induce adoption of good practices. In this
project, the I FC used its convening power to bring together many actors around a
shared agenda. PaCT embodies a multi-stakeholder approach by working to link
buyers, factories, financial institutions, sector associations, and local communities
and governments for coordinated action on water sustainability. Through PaCT, global
apparel buyers develop and apply harmonized procurement guidelines that integrate
water sustainability criteria . The leading industry association, Bangladesh Garment
Manufacturers and Exporters Association (BGMEA), is partnering with PaCT to
establish a Textile Technology Business Center, to support adoption of CP measures
by sharing technology case studies and associated technical and financial information.
A Textile Sustainability Platform is being formed to reach out to national and sector-
level stakeholders to address water sustainability challenges in the sector. And in
partnership with leading factories, PaCT will work with business, government, and


8
communities in selected textile manufacturing clusters, to develop and put in practice a
vision for Clean Clusters.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project shows that in transforming a sector, relationships - among governments,
communities, and business - must also be transformed . World Bank Group
leadership brings together multiple stakeholders to change incentives and behavior
of diverse actors to move forward a change agenda. PaCT faces major challenges
in implementation, but in addressing these challenges is working on a number of
different tools to address these , including survey instruments, awareness bu ilding
materials, assessment methodologies and guidance notes for clients. These , and other
knowledge products such as case studies, can also be shared with others.




Source: PaCT Project Team, World Bank Group.




                                                                                      9
Indonesia: National Program for
Community Empowerment in Rural
Areas
Contact: Sonya Woo, Email : swoo1@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

The government of Indonesia needed to cost-effectively deliver basic services and
assistance to the rural poor across its vast territory.

The government, with World Bank funding and technical assistance, put in place a
community-driven development (COD) system, operating via direct transfer of grants
from the national treasury to collective community bank accounts, to enable commun ities
to undertake development activities. Government subsequently scaled up the prog ram
- first called Kecamatan Development Program (KDP) and later the National Program
for Community Empowerment, or PNPM-Rural - nationally and adapted it to deliver a
oroader range of services in line with evolving local priorities.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

Following a series of mixed methods diagnostics, called the Local Level Institutions
studies, which uncovered latent capacity possessed by communities to solve problems
collectively, the government implemented the COD. This drew on community problem-
solving capacity, with facilitation support, to cost-effectively deliver services in rural
communities across Indonesia.

The Bank led in establishing the PNPM Support Facility (PSF) to convene multiple
government and international development stakeholders, enabling the Bank to maintain
a strong, continuous presence locally. The Bank drew on deep relationships from
its sustained presence on the ground, which was indispensable in supporting the
implementation and scale-up of a national COD program in a country as large and diverse
as Indonesia, and it allowed the Bank to engage deeply with reform-minded policymakers
during windows of opportunity. The compilation of a large body of evidence support also
helped to build crucial sustained commitment among World Bank management.

10
The use of rigorous evidence was vital throughout the program. Randomized control
trials were used, such as for the differential impacts of incentivized versus non-
incentivized versions of PNPM Generasi , a community cash transfer program delivered
through PNPM-Rural aimed at improving access to priority health and education
services. Findings led to the mainstreaming and scale-up of PNPM Generasi. A study
of the participation of marginalized groups in PNPM led to the design and roll-out of a
special program of support to national NGOs active in engaging sex workers, ethnic and
religious minorities, prisoners, and other marginalized groups in development activities.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project shows the importance of drawing on rigorous evidence to inform program
decisions. The KDP, now PNPM-Rural, prioritized the use of rigorous mixed-methods
research to design the program and measure impacts, allowing for successful scale-up.
Impact evaluations have provided rigorous evidence of PNPM-Rural's impacts on increases
in consumption among the poorest, and improvements in access to basic services.




Source: Curt Carnemark, World Bank Group Flickr.



                                                                                       11
Afghanistan: Rural Enterprise
Development Program
Contact: Kamran Akbar, Email: kakbar1@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

About 80 percent of Afghanistan's population depends on agriculture and livestock for
a living. This project sought to improve the incomes of rural men and women working
in the agricultural sector by helping them access financing and develop sustainable
enterprises. However, the project's progress was initially delayed, as it had ambitious
goals with limited capacity and experience. High levels of bureaucracy and slow
disbursement also contributed to the delay.

To address this , the project underwent a mid-term restructuring that enabled the
project to reach goals more effectively. The result was increased access to village level
financing , reaching more than 51 ,000 rural poor in 22 districts, surpassing $US1 .5
million . The project also helped establish nearly 200 small and medium enterprises
across the country. Over half the savings group members are women , and the number of
female borrowers surpasses that of men .

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

In May 2013, the project was restructured through reduction of the project's scope and
revision of targets , given Afghanistan's prior lack of experience in implementing such
a livelihood project. The organizational structure and staffing was transferred from
public institutions to private providers. In adapting to the local challenges, the project
incorporating Pasto-speaking facilitators to work with local communities, and included
migrant and disabled people in the enterprise development pilots. Local consultants
were recruited and trained in order to build local capacity, as well as to have a pool of
resources for future similar projects.




12
What lessons does this project offer for others?

Since the restructuring mission of May 2013, the project has shown considerable
progress. The pace of activities has increased and the project is moving towards
realizing most of its revised targets. Substantial progress in enterprise development
among pastoral nomads has been made, transformational actions with regard to fixed-
salaries staff have been undertaken, and training of facilitators - of whom about half
are women - has been completed . The successful adaptation of this project was made
possible by identifying problems early on and discussing them candidly, and making
appropriate adjustments to the local context. It was also critical to put in place incentive
mechanisms to ensure that performance in implementation met expectations, with
improved monitoring systems playing a key role.




Source: Kamran Akbar, World Bank Group.




                                                                                          13
Nigeria: ICT for Social Accountability
Contact: Paula Rossiasco, Email : prossiasco@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

The development challenge was to ensure better service provision in health and
agriculture by effectively collecting feedback from World Bank project beneficiaries in
Nigeria. The project had to avoid a common pitfall: tools for collecting feedback from
project beneficiaries often fail to represent citizens' voices and are disconnected from
decision making processes.

The system, called MyVoice, will enable decision makers to make accurate, timely,
and efficient programmatic decisions based on real-time beneficiary feedback via SMS
messages to a publicly advertised short code . Creating mechanisms for using ICT to
transmit information in real time up the management stream - to both World Bank staff
and government counterparts - allows for immediate and timely aggregation of voice
and facilitates the use of this information to improve service delivery.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The MyVoice system relied on evidence from user experiences to ensure that the
desired result - citizen use of the ICT to enhance social accountability- occurred.
Since many tools fail due to poor understanding of social context, a significant portion
of project design time was dedicated to gathering evidence of user needs via an
ethnograph ic approach. Citizens were interviewed and user experiences documented
to inform program design. Other stakeholders were canvassed to understand their
incentives for using information captured by the feedback mechanism, including local
government and traditional authorities, local NGOs and CSOs, and service providers.
The system was designed and implemented adaptively, iteratively, and experimentally,
utilizing agile software development methodologies to allow for continuous prototyping
and testing . The end product was a system that drew on extensive evidence of citizen
needs to design the ICT.




14
What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project showed the importance of gathering extensive, multi-disciplinary forms
of evidence to inform ICT design these tools often fail. The central role given to
understanding the political economy of service delivery and the social context in which
projects take place provides an insight into the importance of locally-gathered , multi-
disciplinary evidence to unchain the potential of ICTs to aggregate voice meaningfully.

At the same time , effective citizen engagement in development projects is a multisectoral
issue. It requires a deep understanding of the technical design, the decision making
mechanisms for service delivery, the incentives of the different stakeholders involved ,
the social context, and the potential that ICTs can offer to bring these different aspects
together in a concise , user- friendly, and timely manner. The tool was conceived in
a modular way, so it could be adapted to other operations in the Nigeria World Bank
portfolio once the project context is fully understood.




Source: Reboot.




                                                                                           15
Global Scaling Up Rural Sanitation
Contact: Eduardo Perez, Email: eperez1@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Worldwide, 2.5 billion people lack access to improved san itation, and three quarters of
these people live in rural areas.

Seeking to respond to this development challenge , in 2007, the World Bank initiated
a partnership with the governments of India , Tanzania , and Indonesia to start at scale
projects that served as learning laboratories to provide lessons for policy changes; this
was then scaled up in 10 additional countries . From base-line to 2013, WSP helped
governments to scale up access to improved sanitation for 22 million and encouraged 19
million people to stop practicing open defecation in the 13 focus countries .

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The Scaling up Rural Sanitation program includes an iterative process to help
governments develop at scale solutions, as shown in the figure . The initial countries
served as learning laboratories, with lessons learned in India, Tanzania, and Indonesia
being informed by real-time data collection and monitoring . This resulted in a theory
of change that is now                                                                                             -
being replicated in 1O                            • Chem· and problenHlriven engagement
                                                  • Sh81ed <ialJlC)Slics
additional countries.                             • Programmalic, multi-seaor approach
                                                  • Results focused decision making
It allows TTLs in all
                                                                                           • MobiliZation ot best
13 countries to apply
                            • Capture and
                              sharing of
                                                            I Problem Identification I       global knoviledge and
                              operational                                                    talent
lessons learned while                                                  Help
also adapting and
                              knowledge
                            • Synthesis of
                              ~learned,
                                                   I
                                            Evaluation and
                                              Leaming
                                                                  I
                                                                 Govemmems
                                                                                           • Best evidence~
                                                                                             globaHocal sokJlior1s
                                                               Develop At Scale I Design I • lnlegrared IRllli-seacr/
correcting course as          leaml'IQ from
                              failu re                              Solutions
they scale up, collecting • New products
their own evidence            and learning
                              IDOis                                   I
                                                                   Implementation
                                                                    and Iteration
                                                                                   I
locally to target effective
                                                  • Technical assislllnce
behavior changes and                              • Capacity building
                                                  • lteralive lee<llack loops, mid-alurse
interventions.
                                  I                  CXlfledions, operlllionlll leaming




16
What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project showed the key importance of learning from projects that serve as
"laboratories," and using these lessons learned to inform both changes in policy choices,
and changes to the project when it scales up. Data collection and monitoring should
be designed so that they can be used by governments in real time to make programs
more effective. Moreover, it is vital to make global knowledge connections through
enabling South-South government exchanges, sharing state-of the art information with
government partners and promoting global capacity building through e-learning and
other training products.




Source: WSP, World Ban k Group.




                                                                                      17
Cambodia: Second Education Sector
Support Project {SESSP)
Contact: Simeth Seng, Email: sbeng@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Drop-out rates due to economic reasons in upper primary and secondary schools have
been very high in Cambodia.

This program focused on the design, scaling-up and mainstreaming of scholarship
programs. As a result, scholarship programs have contributed to significant increases in
school enrollment and attendance (approximately 20 percentage points) and pointing the
way to increased learning.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The projects used systematic feedback of lessons from delivery to ensure that they were
flexible, adapting to meet the needs of beneficiaries. Two rigorous impact evaluation
programs shed light on the factors that maximize the impact of the scholarships on
schooling and learning outcomes. The first impact evaluation program indicated that
the program had large positive impacts on school enrolment and attendance rates.
At the same time , the evaluation also showed that the provision of scholarships alone
was insufficient to significantly improve the learning outcomes of students from poor
households. The second impact evaluation studied not only program's impacts on
school participation but also on achievement, a domain in which there had been a dearth
of analysis. The evaluation then recommended scaling up the program by targeting
students with high academic potential, while ensuring that the poorest students also
continue to be included. In this way, continuous adaptation based on rigorous evidence
allowed the project to address the real needs of students (and their families).

What lessons does this project offer for others?

Close collaboration with the Ministry of Education from the design stage was crucial, as
implementation status was regularly discussed as a result of joint field visits in order to


18
jointly identify bottlenecks and adjust implementation strategies in response to evaluation
results . Regular implementation support activities also helped build the Ministry team's
capacity.




Source: World Bank Group Flickr.




                                                                                        19
Avian and Human Influenza (AHi)
Contact: Olga Jonas, Email: ojonas@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Avian and human flu raises the specter of a global pandemic that could kill hundreds of
millions, make billions ill, and cost trillions of dollars. Uncoordinated actions in response
to a future outbreak could be very costly.

The World Bank committed substantial senior management and staff resources to
develop and gain acceptance for an evidence-based, results-oriented framework with
the standard-setting international organizations and other expert partners. The sectors
engaged were animal health, human health, disaster risk management (whole-of-society
preparedness), and communications. The Bank also provided financing of $1.3 billion
($1.2 billion from IBRD/IDA) for 72 operations in 60 countries, in the largest multisectoral
global health program ever.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The threat of pandemics is inherently multidimensional: it spans sectors while also
being multisectoral as well as global and transborder, meaning that this represents a
need for rapid engagement in all sectors, and for support to pandemic prevention and
preparedness in developing countries . The Bank contributed pivotal knowledge on
economic impact and compensation schemes, fostering alignment in the international
partnership. The common framework included many stakeholders, including developed
countries, developing countries, the United Nations and other international agencies,
veterinary services, public health agencies, disaster risk management authorities, and
others. Meanwhile, regular consultations at the national and international levels built
partnerships across borders and among sectors, ensuring coherence of the global
program. Because of its implementation experience in all countries, the Bank brokered
pragmatic solutions, bringing together animal health, human health, and other sectors
as well as donors and international agencies, increasing the overall effectiveness and
efficiency of the global response.



20
What lessons does this project offer for others?

Agreement on a common framework is vital to make complex endeavors succeed ,
especially in an emergency and where there are multiple partners, professions, and
stakeholders. Also , coordination on multidimensional solutions is not spontaneous. It
costs money, takes time, and requires high-level attention , but it can make the difference
between success and failure. The Bank is well-placed to play the requisite integrating
role by financing and supporting coordination and implementation of multisectoral
programs.




      Source: Gerardo Bravo Garcia, Avian Flu Series, 2006, Oil & Gold Leaf on Canvas.




                                                                                         21
Morocco: National Initiative for
Human Development
Contact: Mohamed Medouar, Email: mmedouar@worldbank.org
       Andrea Liverani, Email: aliverani@worldbank.org



What was the development challenge?

The main development challenge was a lack of participatory mechanisms to
identify peoples' needs for programs to alleviate poverty and social exclusion. The
Moroccan government's approach to dealing with poverty and social exclusion has
tended to be centrally-driven, with little room for participation, weak coordination
among line ministries, and inadequate targeting, and although the Government
of Morocco (GoM) dedicates 50 percent of public expenditures to social sectors,
results have been below expectations.

This project focused on strengthening participatory local governance and social
accountability to ensure that basic infrastructure and socio-economic services
meet the basic needs of excluded and vulnerable groups, particularly women
and youth. Result indicators and activities of the Program Action Plan (PAP) were
chosen to track this outcome, including percentage of the population involved
in the participatory approach , overall satisfaction with the participatory process,
percentage of women and youth in the local governance committees , increasing
grassroots ownership of local development plans, and transparency in the
identification and selection process.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The project leveraged the power of participation to produce better evidence
on how basic services were meeting , or not meeting, peoples' needs. This
approach included activities to strengthen participatory local governance and
social accountability, develop bottom up integrated strategic planning, and
improve targeting. For each of these aspects, the program laid the groundwork


22
to gather rigorous evidence by developing result indicators and disbursement-
linked indicators in order to measure results. In tandem with strategies to increase
participation, this led to increased engagement of the target population in
participatory programming and evaluation of benefits, reflecting the demand and
community driven development objective of the program. In addition , the result of
the impact evaluation will provide information on the impact of INDH .

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project shows the importance of engaging the target population as part of
the monitoring process, with beneficiaries providing feedback, together with more
traditional methods of monitoring, such as impact evaluations. Thus, participatory
and inclusive models of service delivery, together with capacity building and
facilitation support for communities, can themselves provide the necessary feedback
to inform adjustments. This, in turn, relies on flexibility in project design and
implementation to allow course correction. This project also found that the use of
poverty maps was very useful in enabling the targeting of resources to poor areas.




  Source: World Bank Group Flickr.



                                                                                  23
Latvia: Who is Unemployed, Inactive
or Needy?
Contact: Emily Sinnott, Email: esinnott@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

The central challenge was a lack of information about Latvia's poor and unemployed,
which was needed to develop anti-poverty programs and effectively target beneficiaries.
While Latvia has among the highest rates of people at-risk of poverty in the European
Union, stereotypes of benefit dependency and low work ethic of the poor have hindered
discussions on how to tackle social exclusion in the country.

As Latvia recovered from the 2009 crisis, the World Bank partnered with the government
to investigate tax, benefit, and training policies to combat long-term unemployment and
draw people into the workforce. The study provides background evidence to motivate
government reforms to the tax and benefit system and for the development of labor
market programs. The results of the study were widely reported in the media, and the
Government of Latvia has stated publicly that they are being used as background to
inform future policy reforms .

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The study fundamentally depended on gathering strong evidence to inform a sensitive
debate; this effort involved numerous sectors, namely social protection, fiscal policy,
education and training , and health. While the work was carried out at the request of
the Ministry of Welfare and the State Employment Agency, the team worked closely
with a steering committee made up of technical staff from other agencies, and working
together to gather the widest possible datasets to support findings and inform policy
recommendations. Indeed , big data-gathering it and sharing it for better policy-was at
the heart of this effort.

To examine the role of taxes, benefits and employment programs, a large panel
database was created for individuals linking various government administrative datasets.
This linked data on individuals in the social security, social assistance, employment

24
services, population registry and health insurance databases. The data was for 91
monthly waves from 1/2006 to 712012 and covered 43 percent of the total population.
The rich data allowed the team to investigate benefit dependency and look at the impact
of employment programs with a strong evidence base. The study contributed with strong
evidence on the lack of benefit dependency in Latvia , which was widely reported in
the media and used by the Government of Latvia to argue for the need for anti-poverty
programs (a new development).

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project showed the possibility of using big data to inform the very difficult policy
debate on benefit dependency. In addition, by involving a large number of stakeholders
in the study from inception to completion (with numerous presentations of initial results
etc.), and making all the analysis available online and at public conferences, the project
was seen as an objective study of the situation in Latvia without a political agenda .




Source: iStockphoto.



                                                                                         25
Ghana: Disaster Preparedness and
Watershed Management
Contact: Carl Dingel, E-mail : cdingel@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Recurring floods in the north of Ghana called for an improved flood forecasting system
to better manage the situation, and find long-term solutions for mitigation. However,
in working towards this there was no clear "institutional home" to take the lead in
establishing such a system, nor was there reliable hydrological data set up to support it.

This project focused on building a robust forecasting system that would be easy to
operate and flexible enough to incorporate new information as it was made available.
This required building trust among all relevant agencies, including developing an
understanding and agreement of shared responsibilities.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

This project focused on a rigorous analysis and validation of the existing data and
information. To adapt to changes in the program, it was crucial that the technical design
of the White Volta Flood Hazard Assessment was flexible enough to accommodate a
broad range of data and information to produce the most accurate flood forecasting
information possible. With a flexible technical design that can constantly be re-evaluated ,
the available information allowed the project to adapt to new information, be more
accurate , and remain state of the art. The project steering committee was anchored
in the involved national organizations and allowed the project to have a forum and to
address upcoming challenges and changes in the system design .

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project offers multiple lessons for delivering solutions in situations characterized
by a need for adaptation and coordination among multiple agencies. Anchoring the
project locally, and the establishment of a well-functioning steering committee to address
upcoming challenges and adapt the project design as necessary, was vital. The project


26
showed that technical designs should be built on a rigorous analysis of the available
information, and should allow enough time for validation of information. It was crucial to
get technical experts on the task team who could stay up to date on the state of the art
technology while also focusing on knowledge transfer.




Source: Water Resources Comm ission , Ghana; HKV Consultants, The Netherlands.




                                                                                         27
Nicaragua: The ECOM Monitoring
Pilot
Contact: Miguel Angel Rebolledo Dellepiane, Email : mrebolledo@ifc.org


What was the development challenge?

The development challenge was low productivity, and therefore low income, among coffee
farmers. A significant demand existed for services to improve productivity, such as market
information, financing, and agricultural extension (visits to farms and agricultural inputs).

This project focused on trying to understand which services were appropriate to the local
context. The IFC identified services that company ECOM could contribute that would
lead to increasing income by increasing productivity. The project also found that certain
tools could increase farmer yield , share of crop sold , and income; bring new farmers into
the supply chain ; and strengthen the feedback that farmers provide to its staff in the field
across regions. All this contributed to increased income and self-reported empowerment
by these farmers.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

In looking to identify what specific services could be appropriate to helping improve
Nicaraguan ECOM farmers' incomes, the project tested for the first time a combination
of tools including the Simple Poverty Scorecard , "Constituent Voice," and a database
of farmers collected and managed by the IFC client. The combination of tools ta rgeted
the local context on several different levels. The scorecard estimates the likelihood that
a household has an income lower than a reference value . The Constituency Voice is an
adaptation of consumer-insight research to farmers that looks into service relevance and
quality; as well as into the client's relationship characteristics with farmers , both tangible
(e.g ., increased income) and intangible (e.g ., confidence, empowerment).

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project suggests that there can be a set of indicators that align incentives of
farmers, the IFC client, and the IFC. These should focus on actual and perceived


28
impacts on farmers' income, and help the client to strategically deliver services with
the potential to expand its business and improve quality of reporting to investors with
a development focus. They should also provide IFC better insight on progress towards
achieving expected impacts. This is a trend that companies in the agribusiness space
are currently exploring both individually and through their associations.




Source: Miguel Dellepiane, World Bank Group Flickr.




                                                                                          29
India: DSCL Sugar - Increasing
Productivity
Contact: Bradford Roberts, Email: broberts@ifc.org
        Harsh Vivek, Email : hvivek@ifc.org



What was the development challenge?

DCM Shriram Consolidated Limited (DSCL), an IFC investment client, is one of the
major sugar producers in the state of Uttar Pradesh , India, providing the 150,000
sugar farmers in its catchment area with vital sources of income. However, both farmer
productivity and plant productivity were low (67 percent of sugarcane crushing capacity
was used at one plant, for example), which in turn lowered farmer incomes. The
company tried in-house measures to enhance farm productivity, but had limited success
as its programs were isolated, piece-meal, and not well managed.

To strengthen farmer outreach, IFC partnered with DSCL to increase productivity, and
incomes, of sugarcane farmers via an integrated advisory services project. IFC worked
to help the company and farmers through three tracks. First, it worked to create a more
user friendly and practical agricultural extension manual, giving extension agents detailed
understanding of training needs in a practical format with extensive use of photos and
examples. Second, IFC worked to improve the farmer training materials, producing a farmer
flipchart, a 12 month calendar of farm level activities with photos to demonstrate the practice
and the content in simple "directive" statements. Finally, IFC helped DSCL improve extension
agents' training. All this contributed to increasing farmer productivity and income.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

On the training delivery side, IFC noted during the 1st year evaluation that while
farmers were changing their practices and improving their productivity, they were not
satisfied with the training delivery from the extension agents. Taking into consideration
the evaluation results, the IFC sugar expert then worked with the extension agents
to improve their training delivery, conducting mock training exercises to evaluate the


30
agents' approach and give
guidance on how to improve.

Additionally, early on in the
 M&E, one issue noted was
that during the baseline
collection of data, productivity
estimates as provided by
farmers seemed higher than
the company believed. To
more accurately measure
productivity at farm level,
the project used in-field crop
cutting to measure the "true"
productivity of the farmer's
output. The project then
used crop cutting for each
of the follow-on surveys,
to measure the production
of the surveyed farmers,
thereby ensuring accurate
measures of productivity.

What lessons does this
project offer for others?

This project identified
key lessons. First, project
managers may need to adjust
during the course of a project
to ensure impact, and should
assume that things won't go
as planned at project start-up.
Moreover, rigorous monitoring
and evaluation throughout the
course of a project is needed
to allow the IFC to credibly
attribute good results to
project impact.                    Source: Bradford Roberts, World Bank Group.


                                                                                 31
Morocco: Ouarzazate Concentrated
Solar Power Project Phase I
Contact: Sameh Mobarek, Email: smobarek@worldbank.org
         Fanny Missfeldt-Ringius, Email: fmissfeldt@worldbank.org



What was the development challenge?

Morocco is the largest energy importer in the MENA region , but it is also seeking to
reduce its dependence on imported fossil fuels , as well as its carbon footprint.

In 2010, Morocco adopted a 'National Plan Against Climate Change' that sought to decouple
its economic growth and its greenhouse gas emissions by developing a progressive
renewable energy agenda. Morocco thus recognized the twin-benefits of adopting climate-
friendly policies to enhance its energy security and adapt the country's development trajectory
to reduce its global carbon footprint. Ouarzazate I Concentrated Solar Power (CSP) Project
was the first step in realizing these objectives by developing and implementing the first 160-
MW phase of the 500-MW Ouarzazate (now called 'Noor') Complex.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

There were five key elements to the project's successful development, which involved
a wide range of actors forming connections and partnerships to move forward a multi-
dimensional response . First, the project enjoyed strong public support from the highest
levels of government. The government of Morocco established and funded the Moroccan
Agency for Solar Energy (MASEN) and staffed it with skilled , highly motivated personnel.
Second, the Project enjoyed extensive support from the donor community because of
its potential to model new, clean technology. Third , early coord ination and agreements
with donors demonstrated the commitment of the donor community behind the project,
stimulating private sector interest and contributing to the success of its procurement
process. Fourth, MASEN's choice to use a well-designed public-private partnership
(PPP) model and sophisticated international financial , legal, and technical experts to
advise it during the design and procurement process allowed for optimal alignment of


32
risks between public and private players. Fifth, the project built on past lessons learned
from other CSP developments worldwide , which helped reduce the project's costs and
increase its efficiency.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

At the country level, national support and government backing for Bank engagement
across sectors was key. The capacity and motivations of government counterparts, as
well as a clear implementation timeline that is tied to a well-defined public deliverable,
are critical. Engagement of well-qualified , well-funded technical, legal , and financial
advisors to guide the design and implementation of the project are an essential element
of the development process.

At the Bank level, it was important to secure strong internal engagement from a Bank with
the right skills mix. Good coordination and communication between the Bank team and
different internal stakeholders should ensure that information is shared in the most efficient
and clear manner, with issues discussed and resolved quickly. Staff should focus on the fact
that the Bank exists to serve the client's needs and objectives - not the other way around .




Source: Sameh Mobarek, World Bank Group.


                                                                                           33
Uganda: Reproductive Health Voucher
Contact: Peter Okwero, Email : pokwero@worldbank.org
         Leslie Villegas, Email : lvillegas@worldbank.org




What was the development challenge?

In Uganda, poor, rural women often lack professional medical attendance during
childbirth , leading to elevated risk of maternal mortality.

The project created a system to ensure that private partners effectively delivered
professional care during childbirth. The project used a voucher scheme embedded within
an Output-Based Aid (OBA) structure, allowing for verification of outputs and payments
for services against outputs. The project exceeded its initial target (136,000 women),
resulting in 137 ,964 women receiving skilled birth assistance. This was a first for the
majority of them , and 92 percent reported being satisfied with the treatment.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The Bank worked to change incentive structures in order to improve the provision of
services by private partners. The voucher scheme provided potent incentives to change
partner behavior, as subsidy disbursements can easily be linked to output verification .
The feedback provided by this process tells project managers not only what is working ,
but also what is not working , and encourages adaptation when measures are not
working. The resulting acceleration of service utilization over time allows for informed
decision making and illustrates behavioral shifts toward more adaptive learning and
efficient provision of services.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

The experience gained from the Uganda Reproductive Healthcare Project-both as a
pilot project and at national scale up-has entered the project management literature
as a powerful example of the flexibility and precision of Output-Based Aid as a tool to
change behaviors and enable adaptive management. Output and outcome indicators,
being both the results metrics and the check of contractual quality, allow managers to


34
adapt and learn what is working and not working based on verifiable evidence. The use
of outputs not only incentivizes partners, but in addition burnishes the financial integrity
of a project - if stakeholders are confident that a project is efficient, transparent, and free
of corruption, project benefits can spill over into civil society as well. Overall, one of the
major advantages of Output-Based Aid is that project managers adapt and learn what is
working and not working based on objective and verifiable evidence across sectors.




Source: GBOPA.




                                                                                            35
Indonesia: Partnership for
Knowledge-Based Poverty Reduction
Contact: Vivi Alatas, Email: valatas@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Partners in the Government of Indonesia face challenges in producing rigorous
evidence and applying it to develop policy and program responses to reduce poverty
and vulnerability, tackle inequality, and stimulate job creation . The local supply of
research and analytical services in Indonesia is extremely limited and can be difficult for
policymakers to access.

This program was established in response to a request in 2010 from the Vice-
President of the Republic of Indonesia and his Deputy for Social Welfare for technical
assistance and capacity building to support national efforts to coordinate and integrate
national poverty reduction policies and programs. The initial request focused on
supporting reforms for the country's array of household-based poverty reduction
programs that target poor households. Increasingly, they are seeking analytical service
and technical assistance. The program is directed toward fulfilling the immediate needs
of government partners that are shifting towards an evidence-based approach to policy
making.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The program supports the Government of Indonesia by improving evidence-based
policy making for poverty reduction programs and policies. To carry this out, the program
adopts a three-pronged strategy, providing assistance at each stage of the knowledge-
to-policy cycle. First, the program works on providing poverty analytics and building
analytical capacity to inform poverty reduction policies, programs (with a focus on
household-based poverty reduction programs) and poverty reduction strategies. It also
supports the government in the design, implementation, and evaluation of key poverty
reduction programs. Finally, it works to improve the quality and accessibility of data
required for poverty analysis and policymaking.


36
What lessons does this project offer for others?

This program has contributed to the shift towards evidence-based policy making in
the poverty and social protection sectors in Indonesia. In 2010, the President elevated
oversight of the poverty strategy to the National Team for the Acceleration of Poverty
Reduction (TNP2K), which is chaired by the Vice-President. The National Team is
supported by a Secretariat that is responsible for drafting policies (with a priority on
social assistance reform), establishing a national targeting system, and integrating
monitoring and evaluation activities. The Secretariat includes six working groups that
function as internal "think tanks" to develop evidence-based policies. TNP2K and the
World Bank have contributed to creating an environment where evidence is the basis
for policy recommendations and government decisions on poverty and social protection
sectors.




Source: Anne Cecil Esteve, Matahati Productions, World Bank.




                                                                                       37
Kuwait: Enhancing Labor Market
Information Systems
Contact: Ghassan N. Alkhoja, Email: galkhoja@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

Mismatches in the labor market negatively impacted employment opportunities, and
policymakers in Kuwait were unable to make evidence-based decisions to correct these
distortions. Information crucial for human resource development, and ultimately for
enabling the public to make good decisions on job-seeking choices, was fragmented and
scattered across agencies.

The World Bank supported the development of the Labor Market Information System
(LMIS) to consolidate labor market information and make it accessible and available

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

This project focused on ensuring that policymakers and citizens had the information that
they needed to make better decisions. During the course of implementation, the World
Bank team utilized international experience in labor market information development,
while contextualizing the solutions provided to the Government of Kuwait (GoK). The use
of local language was extensive; everything was localized to Arabic, leading to better
traction and acceptance by the client. All this was coupled with a process of sustained
engagement and continuous focus on accomplishing goals, with Bank staff and
resources on the ground to assist the client every step of the way.

The World Bank team reached out to stakeholders extensively through a series of focus
groups, where it heard firsthand from government officials, members of the private
sector, students, and civil society groups about their needs, the challenges they face,
and the solutions and ideas they offered. In addition, the World Bank team sought
out partnerships, as much-needed labor market information is scattered across many
agencies. The Bank brought these agencies to one table, explained the challenges,
inquired about solutions, and sought buy-in from all. This process of extensive
consultation has ensured that LMIS incorporates information needed by multiple

38
stakeholders. Now, accurate statistics can help policy makers formulate effective policy,
while projections of future labor market needs can help students make the school-to-
work transition .

What lessons does this project offer for others?

Localization in terms of language, local presence, and utilizing local resources were
direct contributors to success; to ensure positive impact on citizens on the ground , this
localization should be a main feature of engagements. Undertaking a rigorous diagnostic
to identify problems, and verify what citizens needed, enabled a structured approach
to address the needs of the client. Sustained engagement, through almost continuous
presence of Bank staff and resources on the ground to assist the client every step of
the way, was also crucial. Moreover, since lack of information had engendered some
suspicion toward institutions, the World Bank focused on rebuilding trust for improved
decision making ; it accomplished this by being context sensitive and used its convening
power, as well as leveraging Open Data principles.




Source: Ghalia Al Refaei, Kuwait Central Statistical Bureau.


                                                                                        39
India: Improving Rural Livelihoods in
Bihar
Contact: Parmesh Shah, Email: pshah@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

The state of Bihar has some of the worst social and economic indicators in India, with
significant challenges of social exclusion, lack of access to finance, landlessness, low
food security, and indebtedness of rural households.

The project facilitated a unique institutional model for the development of rural
livelihoods in the state, using a professional support architecture of service delivery to
develop community institutions of the poor, build social , financial and economic capital ,
and support the poor in their interactions with state and market. In seven years of
operation , the project has mobilized 1.4 million poor households into Self Help Groups
(SHGs) to access finance for farm modernization , training , and to start enterprises; some
70 percent of these households have retired their high-value debts. A recent independent
impact evaluation has also observed that the participant households have higher
savings, lower high-cost debts, higher food security, more assets, and empowered
women .

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The World Bank, return ing to Bihar after a gap of 25 years, used four main approaches
to improve outcomes in a difficult environment. First, the task team engaged intensively
with a broad range of stakeholders to understand political and social realities on the
ground before determining the project design. The team stayed in Bihar for three months
at a stretch , holding 12 major consultations; in add ition , potential beneficiaries in over
1,000 villages were consulted to ascertain their needs.

Second, the task team made concerted efforts to get buy-in from the major political
players at the highest levels of government. Furthermore, senior bureaucrats and
officials were taken on study tours of successful projects in Andhra Pradesh . This peer-to
peer learning proved to be extremely effective .

40
Third, the project invested in a dedicated cadre of 160 skilled young professionals,
almost half women, who could support village communities, and regularly engage
with the task team to keep them updated about the situation on the ground. Fourth,
an experienced project consultant was placed on the ground in Bihar, making Bank
expertise constantly available to project officials.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project showcases four key lessons that helped staff meet their goals in Bihar. First,
to ensure better outcomes for citizens, it is important to spend time on the ground to
understand social and political realities. Second, the project should ensure presence of
quality human resources on the ground . Third , building trust with political leadership and
wider circles of influence is irreplaceable. Last, the Bihar experience suggests that, to
deliver solutions for citizens in difficult socio-economic contexts, it may be advisable to
emphasize geographical expertise rather than sector specialization.




Source: Vinay Vutukuru , World Bank Group.




                                                                                          41
FYR Macedonia: Public Expenditure
Policy Based Guarantee
Contact: Birgit Hans! , Email: bhansl@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

The Euro Zone turmoil during 2011-2012 created strong headwinds for Macedonia's
economy, leaving it facing a complex tangle of problems with negative impact on
citizens: low revenues, unpaid government obligations, and a weakening private
sector, while access to financing from virtually closed international financial markets
exacerbated the issue.

The World Bank worked with the government to obtain a large commercial loan
leveraged by a World Bank guarantee, creating a fiscal buffer which allowed for the fast
repayment of arrears and installing measures to prevent the reoccurrence of such an
economical harmful problem . As a result, a tremendous pick-up in economic activity was
observed in Macedonia , resulting in one of the best growth outcomes in 2013 among the
Western Balkan countries. The policy-program also supported measures which helped
realize major public expenditure savings by introducing public procurement of drugs
and other medical devices, and better targeted public social expend itures to the poor
and vulnerable. Most of all, the extended maturity of the guaranteed loan significantly
reduced the costs of borrowing , saving Macedonia over EUR50 million in interest costs
over a 7 year period .

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The reform program was multi-dimensional in nature, spanning several sectors, and
included World Bank team members from macroeconomic, fiscal and public financial
management, health and social protection, mirrored by a diverse team of ministry
counterparts. The World Bank also initiated a multi-stakeholder process, as the team
helped to explain to other stakeholders, such as the opposition and the press, why there
was a short-term need for higher borrowing and a higher deficit in order to address
the arrears problem. The World Bank team was also able to strengthen essential


42
partnerships with other multilaterals and commercial lenders, and provide authorities
with the opportunity to gain experience working with a sovereign lender.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project offers a key lesson for the construction of multi-dimensional spaces and
responses: it is important to remember that the World Bank can play an important
role in creating for counterparts the space to debate and identify jointly with other
country stakeholders solutions to problems which are everybody's concern . The crucial
opportunity lies in reaching out to various stakeholders and helping to facilitate needed
dialogue on a difficult topic, such as increasing the debt level or short-term fiscal deficit,
as the World Bank is often regarded as a neutral mediator. As an already trusted
counterpart, the Bank also has the responsibility to create new partnerships for them
with other multilaterals or bilaterals, private international grant-making foundations or the
private sector.




Source: Bojan Shimbov, World Bank Group Flickr.



                                                                                            43
Yemen: Social Fund for Development
Phase IV
Contact: Mira Hong, Email: mhong@worldbank.org


What was the development challenge?

In Yemen , a high proportion of the population lives in poverty, with low access to health,
education , water, and other basic services. This falls particularly heavily upon vulnerable
populations, such as women , youth , children, and special needs groups.

The Social Fund for Development (SFD) , currently in its fourth phase, aims to enhance
economic opportunities and reduce the vulnerability of the poor. It targets villages in
the poorest sub-districts, with the aim of improving living conditions. The program is
implemented through SFD Branch Offices and has proved successful in responding to
urgent development needs as well as improving access to basic services.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

To improve living conditions, SFD focuses on multiple sectors including economic and
agricultural activities, water, roads, health and education , according to community
plans based on priority needs. One representative example of SFD's activities, and
its approach , is its Rural Girls' Education program. To increase the number of girls in
school , the program draws on a menu of complementary, multi-dimensional interventions
to strengthen the overall outcome, including water supply, school infrastructure and
equipment, awareness campaigns, training and capacity building at the school , community
and local government levels, and non-formal community classes for girls and women. The
required combination of intersecting interventions for a targeted community is based on
prior identification of the particular factors constraining girls' enrollment in that community.
For example, SFD has found that, to change deeply engrained traditional attitudes, the
engagement of stakeholders over a period of several years is needed. In each targeted
community, an initial community assessment is carried out to determine the particular
constraints and the types of engagement that are needed. Often, the key is to engage
religious and other community leaders and , when they are resistant to promoting girls'
schooling , to enlist a respected peer to encourage a change of view.

44
Additionally, SFD is adaptable: during crisis in Yemen in 2011-2012, project activities
were threatened by national disruption of fuel supplies and severe security constraints.
The SFD responded quickly and innovatively, switching to the use of local materials for
construction , and using camels to transport them . In addition, the SFD quickly scaled up
and adapted its Labor-intensive Works program to help meet the increased needs of the
poor and vulnerable.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

Four factors are identified as being crucial for SFD to produce innovative multi-
dimensional solutions while also remaining flexible. First, operational autonomy is key
- SFD is an autonomous institution under the Prime Minister's Office, with a Board
of Directors drawn from government, civil society, the private sector, and the financial
sector, bringing together representatives of many sectors. Second, SFD adopts a
decentralized structure, with strong capacity in Branch Offices. Third, SFD focuses
strongly on partnerships and capacity building at local government level. And finally, SFD
is committed to transparent procedures with emphasis on monitoring and evaluation.




Source: Yemen Social Fund for Development.


                                                                                        45
Colombia: Cartagena Water Supply
and Sewerage
Contact: Greg Browder, Email : gbrowder@worldbank.org
        Carmen Yee, Email : cyeebatista@worldba nk.org



What was the development challenge?

Cartagena is a coastal city in Colombia, and tourism is a main pillar of the economy. In
2000, pollution from domestic wastewater was contaminating tourist beaches, degrading
the environment, and producing a public health crisis . Sewerage coverage in 2000 was
only about 60 percent, and domestic wastewater flowed untreated through the streets
and into Cartagena Bay and an ecologically sensitive estuary.

Cartagena entered into a public private partnership with a Spanish water company
to provide professional management to expand water and sewerage services , and to
adopt a low-cost submarine outfall rather than an expensive conventional wastewater
treatment plant. In 2013, Cartagena has ach ieved 90 percent sewerage coverage and
dramatically improved water quality in its bay, coastal waters, and estuary. The World
Bank provided US$90 million to the Cartagena water company (ACUACAR) to help
finance the wastewater investments, and also provided technical assistance and political
support for the public-private water utility model.

What approaches did this project use to deliver solutions?

The starting point for the submarine outfall , wh ich discharges partially treated sewage,
was located in an isolated Afro-Caribbean fishing village, whose inhabitants were
concerned that the outfall would undermine their fishing livelihood . The community
originally opposed the submarine outfall solution and in 2004 filed a complaint with the
Inspection Panel, which ultimately was satisfactorily concluded. After a long process of
socialization with the community, including field visits to other outfall projects, education
on the nature and impacts of the outfall, and infrastructure investments in the community,
the Cartagena water company was able to obtain the trust and confidence of the village.


46
Today, many of the villagers work in the treatment plant, the village water supply,
sewerage, and road infrastructure has been upgraded , and there are no discernible
environmental impacts from the submarine outfall.

What lessons does this project offer for others?

This project exhibits some key lessons for sustainable sanitation solutions. For example,
the type of outfall solution employed here requires extensive consultations with local
communities, and extra attention must be paid to poor, indigenous, or otherwise
disadvantaged groups.

While this low-cost system outfall is an attractive option, it must be based on extensive
water quality monitoring, planning, design, and execution to ensure that it is an
appropriate environmental solution. It also shows that a public-private water utility model ,
where the municipal government provides financing and oversight, and a professional
private operator ensures efficiency and continuity, may be a viable alternative in
situations with sufficient public sector financial capacity, but weak municipal governance.




Source: ACUACAR.

                                                                                          47
The World Bank
