                                                                       99060 v1




                    Searching for the “Grail”:
Can Uganda’s Land Support its Prosperity Drive?
    Uganda Economic Update | Sixth Edition, september 2015 | Report no. 99060




                                                                                  a
b
               Searching for the “Grail”:
Can Uganda’s Land Support its Prosperity Drive?
  Uganda Economic Update | Sixth Edition, september 2015 | Report no. 99060
     This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
     expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments
     they represent.

     The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
     other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank Group concerning the
     legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

     Rights and Permissions

     The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank Group encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this
     work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

     Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank,
     1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

     Cover photos: Great Lakes Film Production Ltd and Digital Media Network Ltd
     Cover design : Artfield Graphics Ltd
     Design and Layout: Artfield Graphics Ltd.
     Printed in Uganda by Artfield Graphics Ltd, www.info@artifield.com


     Additional material relating to this report can be found on the World Bank Uganda website (www.worldbank.org/uganda). The
     material includes a fact sheet, documentary video and a number of blogs relating to issues in the report.

     © 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / International Development Association or

     The World Bank Group
     1818 H Street NW
     Washington DC 20433
     Telephone: 202-473-1000
     www.worldbankgroup.org




ii
    C ON TENTS

                                                       Abbreviations and Acronyms........................................................................................ v
                                                       Foreword................................................................................................................... vii
                                                       Acknowledgements..................................................................................................... viii
                                                       Key Messages.............................................................................................................. ix
                 T h e Stat e o f t h e Ec o n o m y
PART 1



                                                       1. RECENT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENTS.......................................................................... 2
                                                         1.1 Modest recovery in economic growth ..................................................................................... 4
                                                         1.2 Before recent volatilities, inflation remained stable, allowing monetary policy to remain
                                                         neutral, both of which stimulated private sector credit ............................................................... 6
                                                1




                                                         1.3 A weak external position, provided ground for a depreciating local currency...................... 8
                                                         1.4 Slow pace of public investment results in lower fiscal deficit and a greater proportion of
                                                         the budget being utilized for recurrent expenditure.................................................................... 10
                                                       2. ECONOMIC OUTLOOK............................................................................................... 13
                                                         2.1 Public investment to underpin economic growth in near term as uncertainties increase.. 14
                                                         2.2 Internal risks are the most significant, but external risks also exist..................................... 20
                                                         2.3 Accelerating growth requires drilling deeper for productivity improvements .................... 21
     Proper l and admi ni s trati on and manag ement




                                                       3. FASTER ECONOMIC TRANSFORMATION CALLS FOR BETTER LAND MANAGEMENT?.......... 26
                                                         3.1 Rights to land ownership in Uganda remain insecure........................................................... 29
                                                         3.Faster economic transformation calls for better land management?...................................... 29
                                                         3.2 Land markets exist, but are still narrow, segmented, and inefficient .................................. 32
PART 2




                                                         3.3 What is the cost of land tenure insecurity and inefficient land markets? ............................ 36
                                     27




                                                       4. WHAT SHOULD UGANDA DO TO ENSURE LAND CONTRIBUTES RATHER THAN CONSTRAINS
                                                       PRODUCTIVITY IMPROVEMENTS?.................................................................................. 38
                                                         4.1 Accelerating the process of land registration.......................................................................... 42
                                                         4.2 Redesigning the Land Fund...................................................................................................... 46
                                                         4.3 Strengthening institutions for land administration............................................................... 49
                                                         4.4 Prioritizing and closing gaps in policy commitments for effective implementation ........... 52




                                                       LIST OF BOXES
                                                       Box 1: China’s devaluation – Can Uganda’s fortunes offset the misfortunes? ............................. 15
                                                       Box 2: Strengthening Public Investment Management in Uganda for Improved Efficiency.......... 18
boxes




                                                       Box 3: Uganda Public Financial Management (PFM) Act, 2015....................................................... 19
                                                       Box 4: Firms do not use bank credit to finance investments........................................................... 39
                                                       Box 5: Registering Land Rights fast and cheaply: Experience from Rwanda.................................. 43
                                                       Box 6: Land Rental Markets in Communally Owned Land: Experiences in Mexico,
                                                       Fiji and Ghana..................................................................................................................................... 45
                                                       Box 7: State land inventories: Ghana’s experience......................................................................... 46
                                                       Box 8: Uganda Land Fund to address historical injustices and landlessness................................ 47
                                                       Box 9: Land acquisition and development for the poor: Experience from Malawi and Brazil...... 48
                                                       Box 10: How technology is improving land administration in Uganda - The Uganda Land Information
                                                       System ............................................................................................................................................... 51




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   iii
        C ON TENTS
     tables

               LIST OF TABLES
               Table 1: Central Government Revenue and Expenditure Framework(% of GDP, unless otherwise
               specified)............................................................................................................................................ 12
               Table 2: Summary Assumptions for the Medium Term Outlook, (groth rate % unless otherwise
               indicated) Baseline Scenario............................................................................................................. 16
               Table 3: Improving land management can contribute to productivity growth.............................. 43




               LIST OF FIGURES
               Figure 1: Gradual Recovery in Uganda’s Economy through FY 2014/15........................................... 4
               Figure 2: Uganda’s Economic Growth is the lowest in the East African region................................ 4
               Figure 3: Manufacturing recovered, but construction decelerated during FY 2014/15................... 5
     figures




               Figure 4: Inflation remained low through FY 2014/15, but upward pressure started towards
               end of year.......................................................................................................................................... 6
               Figure 5: Market rates were not as stable as the Central Bank Rate during FY 2014/15.................. 7
               Figure 6: Domestic credit picked up strongly, led by government................................................... 8
               Figure 7: Credit to agriculture and manufacturing picking, albeit from a small base..................... 8
               Figure 8: The external position deteriorated as current account worsened.................................... 9
               Figure 9: Foreign direct investment was for the mining and quarrying sector................................ 9
               Figure 10: Uganda shilling depreciated more than regional currencies during FY 2014/15........... 10
               Figure 11: Infrastructure sectors getting the largest allocation of the budget............................... 17
               Figure 12: Uganda’s diverse systems of land tenure with that in the central region even
               more complex..................................................................................................................................... 30
               Figure 13: Steady progress in improving land information system................................................. 49




iv
A bb reviat ion s and Ac r onyms




  BoU		       Bank of Uganda                          MLHUD		   Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban 		
  BOP		       Balance of Payments                     		        Development
  BRT		       Bus Rapid Transport                     MoLG		    Ministry of Local Government and Economic 	
  CBR		       Central Bank Rate                       		        Development
  CEDP		      Competiveness and Enterprise            MZO		     Ministry Zonal Office
  		          Development Project                     NDP 		    National Development Plan
  CLAs		      Community Land Associations             NLP		     National Land Policy
  DSA		       Debt Sustainability Analysis            NEER		    Nominal Effective Exchange Rate
  EAC		       East African Community                  ODA		     Official Development Assistance
  EU		        European Union                          OECD		    Organization of Economic
  FDI		       Foreign Direct Investment               		        Cooperation and Development
  DRC		       Democratic Republic of Congo            PIMS		    Public Investment Management
  GDP		       Gross Domestic Product                  		        System
  HIPC		      Highly Indebted Poor Countries          REER		    Real Effective Exchange Rate
  ICT		       Information and Communications          SMEs		    Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
  		          Technology                              SSA		     Sub-Saharan Africa
  1DA		       International Development Association   SSATP		   Sub-Saharan Africa Transport Policy
  IDP		       Internally Displaced People             		        Program
  IFC		       International Finance Corporation       UEU		     Uganda Economic Update
  IFPRI		     International Food Policy Research      UGX		     Uganda Shillings
  		          Institute                               ULC		     Uganda Land Commission
  IMF		       International Monetary Fund             UNHS		    Uganda National Household Survey
  KIIP		      Kampala Institutional and               USA		     United States of America
  		          Infrastructure Project                  URA		     Uganda Revenue Authority
  LF		        Land Fund                               USMID		   Uganda Support to Municipal
  LIBOR		     London Interbank Offered Rate           		        Infrastructure Development
  LIS		       Land Information System                 UWA		     Uganda Wildlife Authority
  MDRI 		     Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative     VAT		     Value Added Tax
  MFPED		     Ministry of Finance, Planning and       WB		      World Bank
  		          Economic Development                    WDI		     World Development Indicators




                                                                                                              v
     Long stretches of land in Karamoja region, (Sheila Gashishiri, 2014)



vi
Fo r ew o rd




I am pleased to introduce the sixth edition of the Uganda Economic Update series. Following the structure of earlier editions, the Sixth Economic
Update discusses recent macroeconomic developments, as well as a special topic – “Can Uganda’s land support its prosperity drive?”

Over the past year, Uganda grew above five percent, continuing the modest recovery started the previous year and benefitting from a stable
macro environment characterized by low inflation and modest interest rates, as well as favorable weather. The authorities continue to pursue
an ambitious public investment program meant to remove the country’s long standing deficiencies in physical infrastructure and to prepare
for the long-awaited extraction of oil. Near term economic growth is glazed with many uncertainties, including from external shocks and from
uncertainties and speculation related to upcoming national elections. Indeed, the Uganda shilling has recently depreciated heavily, helping the
economy to adjust to the shocks, but also generating inflationary pressures that have to be managed. Beyond 2016, the Government will have to
implement its ambitious investment program and raise more domestic revenues to ensure debt and fiscal sustainability, and to avoid crowding
out the domestic private investment.

From a longer term perspective, Uganda’s economic performance has been less stellar, compared to what the country was able to achieve in the
1990s and the first decade of the 2000s. Uganda’s deceleration in the rate of economic growth can primarily be explained by the failure to achieve
productivity improvements. Productivity improvements would drive long-term growth and make the country more resilient to exogenous shocks.
Uganda is already making the right choices to address the key binding constraints in infrastructure and to build human capital. Alongside this,
another fundamental factor of production that must be managed appropriately to raise productivity and promote shared prosperity is land.

Land is a finite asset and as population increases, land becomes scarcer and density increases. Yet, as demonstrated by many prospering countries
around the world, land can be managed appropriately to generate rapid and sustainable growth, even in the context of high population densities.
Good management of land use is fundamental to agricultural transformation and urbanization, two critical processes that could enable the
country to raise its level of productivity

Making Uganda’s land a more productive asset is a big challenge. The vested interests, suspicion, and fear of disruption to livelihoods, sensitivities
related to the location of investment projects and the resulting perverse incentives to local governments, can fuel activism against any form
of land reforms. But the land disputes and conflicts of today are clear indicators of the need for a better process. Ugandan policy makers must
formulate and implement smart policies to ensure that land becomes a more productive asset that facilitates positive economic transformation
and diversification. Such policies should aim to: (i) secure land tenure and reduce the rate of occurrence of conflicts and disputes caused by
overlapping rights; (ii) promote the healthy development of rental markets for land; and (iii) strengthen the capacities of institutions responsible
for land management administration.

I hope that this update will inform the debate on land policy in Uganda, and motivate a comprehensive set of actions so that the country’s land will
facilitate much needed positive transformation and diversification of the economic base.




Diarietou Gaye
Country Director
Eritrea, Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda
Africa Region




                                                                                                                                                  vii
A c k n ow ledg ements


The sixth Edition of the Uganda Economic Update was prepared by Rachel Kaggwa Sebudde and Frank Byamugisha, with contributions from
Martin Onyach-Olaa, Moses Kibirige and Gregory Wilson Myers. The team worked in collaboration with Makerere University School of Economics,
and is also grateful to inputs and comments from Kevin Carey, Apurva Sanghi, Jacques Morisset, Jean-Pascal Nguessa Nganou, Constance
Nekesa-Ouma, Mary Bitekerezo, Franklin Mutahakana, and Willy Kagarura. Damalie Nyanja and Gladys Alupo provided logistical support, while
Sheila Gashishiri managed the communications and dissemination strategy. The Uganda country team provided useful feedback during the
preparation of the report. Albert Zeufack (Practice Manager) and Christina Malmberg Calvo (Country Manager) provided overall guidance on the
project.

This work benefitted from insights of peer reviewers including Meskerem Brhane (Program Leader, Africa Region); and Hardwick Tchale
(Senior Agricultural economist, GFADR). The report is a product of collaboration between the Global Practices of Macroeconomics and Fiscal
Management; Urban, Rural and Social Development; and Trade and Competitiveness.

Close collaboration with external stakeholders informed the content and ensured the relevance of the messages from practitioners’ views. These
included the Private Sector Foundation; Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development; and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and
Urban Development.

Irfan Kortschak provided professional editing services.




viii
K e y M es s ag es



Over the past twenty years, Uganda’s population density has been increasing rapidly,
placing significant pressure on the use of land. Uganda now has a population density of
194 persons per square kilometer of arable land, compared to 80 in Kenya and 116 in Ghana.
At present, the majority of Uganda’s population still lives in rural areas, where the main source
of livelihood is agriculture. However, the proportion of the population living in urban areas has
increased significantly and will continue to increase into the future, with urban centers being
the main driver of economic growth and transformation into higher value added activities. The
highest rates of growth in population density are recorded in Uganda’s central region.

Increasing population density can support accelerated economic growth, if appropriately
managed through the implementation of systems to promote efficient land use. However,
in Uganda, despite the increasing population density, it has remained difficult to facilitate the
transformation of land use to enable the achievement of higher levels of productivity. One
of the main causes of this is the difficulties involved in transferring ownership of land from
one entity to another. On the one hand, the Government has failed to address the issue of
overlapping and conflicting land rights mainly in the central region and the lack of effective
institutions capable of managing land transactions. On the other hand, land markets are either
weak, non-existent, or do not facilitate the transfer of land at the appropriate price.

With these failures, land is failing to optimally support the transformation process in
both rural and urban areas. Land transactions are often highly speculative, especially in
urban areas and in areas with significant public infrastructure developments. In the rural areas,
a large proportion of land transfers involve exploitative transactions, due to lack of information
or unequal power relations between buyers and sellers, especially in post-conflict regions and
in regions with significant oil or other mineral resources. Land rental markets have failed to
develop in a healthy and constructive fashion due to tensions between landlords and tenants
arising from overlapping rights and conflicting interests, especially on mailo land. All these
factors have contributed to an increase in the rate of occurrence of conflicts and disputes. The
result has been increased difficulty in transferring land from one owner to another or from one
type of economic activity to another.                                                                increasing population
It is essential that Uganda changes the manner in which it manages its land if the
                                                                                                     density can support
majority of its population is to achieve a higher level of prosperity through the healthy            accelerated economic
transformation of the agricultural sector and a shift towards higher value, more productive
economic activities more generally. In addition, more efficient land use will drive equitable
                                                                                                     growth, if appropriately
economic growth, with the process of urbanization resulting in functionality in the form of          managed through the
descent housing for urban dwellers; connectivity without congestion; and an improvement in
the quality of infrastructure. Development experiences across the world, especially in countries
                                                                                                     implementation of
with significant densely populated areas, such as China and India, indicate that when land           systems to promote
rights became secure and more readily transferable, more flexible land use opened the
gateway to positive economic transformation. More generally, transformation of land use is a
                                                                                                     efficient land use
key characteristic of economic transformation, with a trend towards an increasing proportion
of the land being used for higher productivity activities and towards an increasing proportion




                                                                                                                            ix
of the labor force moving away from low productivity activities in subsistence agriculture. Within rural areas, economic activity would remain fairly
widely distributed, with productivity differences determined by soil fertility, climate and access to technology and market infrastructure. In urban
areas, the level of economic development is determined by the extent to which land is adaptable to changing market demand. In this context,
Uganda can learn from global patterns of development.

Through the formulation and implementation of smart policies, Uganda can ensure that its land serves as a more productive asset that
facilitates positive transformation and a diversification of the economic base. The achievement of these goals will require a comprehensive
set of actions that will promote security of land tenure and reduce the rate of occurrence of conflicts and disputes caused by overlapping rights;
promote the healthy development of rental markets for land; and strengthen the capacities of institutions responsible for the management of land
administration. Failure to unlock the potential of land may result in a deceleration of growth and lack of progress towards prosperity. In addition,
rather than driving equitable economic growth, the process of urbanization will result in dysfunctionality in the form of the proliferation of slums;
increased congestion; and a deterioration in the quality of, or a failure to develop, infrastructure due to an escalation in the costs of construction
and payment of compensation. Implementation of relevant up to date laws and policies has to be accelerated to make land in Uganda genuinely
secure, transferable, marketable and supportive of economic development.



Part 1: State of the Economy

Since the national elections (including presidential and parliamentary) of 2011, the Ugandan economy has recovered to a significant
extent, but has not been able to come close to realizing the high levels of growth that it had recorded over recent decades. During FY
2014/15, the Ugandan economy grew at the rate of five percent per annum, with this growth driven by an acceleration in public and
private investments. During this year, the value of public investments reached the equivalent of 6.3 percent of GDP. While this was lower than
the targeted level of 8.6 percent of GDP-, it was 0.7 percentage points higher than the figure of 5.6 percent recorded in FY 2013/14. The total value
of private investments also increased significantly during FY 2014/15, largely due to the increased availability of credit. This also compensated for
the declining contribution of net exports resulting from a combination of lower regional and global demand for Uganda’s products and the high
level of demand for imports to support construction. However, for the fifth consecutive year, Uganda’s overall rate of growth remained below that
achieved by Tanzania, Kenya and Rwanda, as the former decelerated.

While the services sector continues to contribute the largest proportion to overall GDP growth, the recent recovery of the manufacturing
and agriculture sectors was nonetheless impressive. The services sector grew at a rate of 4.6 percent, with the financial and insurance services
sub-sector being the most significant contributor to this growth. Starting from a low base, the industrial sector made only a minimal contribution
to overall GDP, despite the fact that it recorded an impressive rate of growth of 6.4 percent. This growth was supported by the strong recovery of
the manufacturing sub-sector, following its contraction three years ago, when it was affected by power shortages and higher electricity prices;
financing constraints resulting from tight liquidity; and decreases in
demand from global markets. These factors recently improved with the
commissioning of Bujagali power dam in 2012, allowing firms to access
electricity with less disruptions, while the cost of credit gradually            through the formulation and
declined as banks gradually reduced their interest rates between FY
                                                                                 implementation of smart
2012/13 and FY 2014/15. The rate of growth of the agricultural sector
stood at 4.4 percent in FY 2014/15, significantly higher than the figure of      policies, Uganda can ensure
1.5 percent recorded in the previous year, driven by strong recovery of
                                                                                 that its land serves as a more
cash crops and fish exports. Construction did not achieve the expected
levels of performance, with this sector’s rate of growth declining to            productive asset that facilitates
2.0 percent, from 5.7 percent in FY 2013/14, and from 10 percent in FY
                                                                                 positive transformation and a
2012/13.
                                                                                 diversification of the economic
The low rate of inflation and neutral monetary policy made a
positive contribution on economic activity during FY 2014/15.
                                                                                 base
The rate of inflation averaged 2.4 percent during FY 2014/15, with




x
this low rate partially resulting from increased domestic supply and reduced external shocks
throughout most of the year. Food inflation was negative for most of the year, with agriculture
output increasing as a result of good weather. Non-food inflation was also subdued on account
of the decline in the cost of imports, particularly due to the decline in the global cost of oil, even
though the spillover effect on domestic prices occurred only gradually. In response to the low
rate of inflation, the Central Bank implemented a neutral monetary policy throughout most of
the year. This resulted in an increase in the availability of credit to private sector, with the total
value of this credit growing at an average rate of 15 percent per annum for the 10 months of FY
2014/15, compared to eight percent in the same period during FY 2013/14.

However, the positive contribution to growth is likely to be negated as inflationary
pressures increase and policy is tightened. Since April 2015, inflationary pressures have
increased, with the most significant factor being the fast depreciation of the exchange rate.
The Central Bank’s response was to raise its policy rate aggressively to the level of 16 percent
per annum by August 2015 and to impede access to funds by commercial banks by increasing
the margin between the Central Bank Rate and rediscount rate from three to four percentage
points. This measure triggered an increase in interest rates on lending, which together with the
strong growth of government borrowing, may curtail further growth in private sector credit.

The external position weakened due to the combined impact of a deterioration in the
values of flows into the current and financial accounts during the FY 2014/15. While the
value of exports to regional markets grew at a slower rate than in previous years due to the
decline in demand from South Sudan, the total value of all exports of goods increased by 3.1
percent, mainly as a result of a growth in the value of non-traditional exports, including metal
and plastic products, bottled water, and rice. This could have been helped by the depreciating
shilling. The traditional export commodities, such as coffee and tea, which still accounted
for 30 percent of the total value of exported goods, did not perform well due to weak global
demand resulting from the relapses in the global economy. However, with the total value of
imports of merchandise goods declining to the equivalent of 18.4 percent of GDP, the trade
balance improved to a value equivalent to 5.7 percent of GDP. The modest improvement to the
trade account was more than fully offset by increases in net outflows for services and income
and the decline in the value of transfers, all of which contributed to an increased deficit on the
current account, from a value equivalent to 7.9 percent of GDP in FY 2013/14 to 8.8 percent in
FY 2014/15.

In the same period, the financial account deteriorated due to a decline in the value of
foreign direct investment of 3.2 percent to US$ 1,186 million. Reserves declined too. In                 since April 2015,
response to the weaker external position, the local currency has steadily depreciated in value
                                                                                                         inflationary
since January 2014. Thus, in FY 2014/15, the value of the shilling declined by 24 percent relative
to the dollar, and by 17 percent in real terms. Overall, this depreciation was faster than that of       pressures have
the Kenyan and Tanzanian currencies during this period. The depreciation continued into the
                                                                                                         increased, with the
first two months of FY 2015/16, with the exchange rate standing at Shs 3500 to the dollar, which
means that the currency has lost 35 percent of its value since August 2014. The shilling also            most significant
suffered due to increases in the value of the US dollar as the American economy strengthened
                                                                                                         factor being the fast
and due to the uncertainties and speculative tendencies in anticipation of the forthcoming
election activities.                                                                                     depreciation of the
In FY 2014/15, the collection of domestic revenues was slightly above target, easing
                                                                                                         exchange rate
pressure on fiscal operations. However, for the third consecutive year, the under-execution




                                                                                                                                 xi
of the budget continued to undermine fiscal objectives. The Government estimated that during FY 2014/15, it had collected tax revenue to a value
equivalent to 12.9 percent of GDP, which is slightly above the target of 12.7 percent for the year. In particular, good performance was recorded in
the area of the collection of corporate and withholding taxes, which are direct domestic taxes. The Government’s total expenditures were lower
than the budgeted target by the equivalent of 2.1 percentage points of GDP. A major factor in this was the slow progress in the construction of the
Karuma dam, which accounted for 25 percent of the approved development budget (excluding donor projects), with negotiations for more than
80 percent of funding for the project not reaching a conclusion during the year. Consequently, the fiscal deficit reached a level equivalent to 4.5
percent of GDP, almost two percentage points lower than planned, but with more than 75 percent being financed through domestic borrowing.

Establishment of supplementary budgets undermined the credibility of the budget in the past. However, during FY 2014/15, this instrument
was mainly used to reallocate resources saved during a clean-up of the government pay and pension system to ensure the validity of the government
payroll. The savings from this clean-up exercise enabled the Government to establish a supplementary budget amounting to a value of Shs 1,122.4
billion, and equivalent to about seven percent of the total value of the approved budget. The bulk of this supplementary budget was indeed a
reallocation to pay pensions and gratuity arrears and to outstanding wages after the payroll clean-up.

Uganda’s economic outlook continues to be characterized by a high level of uncertainty in the context of the upcoming elections in 2016
and with the pressure on the local currency that may be exacerbated by the devaluation of the Chinese currency in August. With little room
to increase its level of revenue collection to offset increased expenditure, which is expected to increase beyond the 2010-11 levels, the authorities
will have to overcome constraints to the management of public investments to ensure that the expansive fiscal policy adopted for FY 2015/16
stimulates growth rather than contributing to instability.

The World Bank forecasts that during FY 2015/16, the Ugandan economy will grow at a rate between five and 5.5 percent, with uncertainties
created by the upcoming elections; the need to tighten monetary policy in response to increasing inflationary pressures; and a weak
external position acting as possible constraints on the growth momentum. The ongoing recovery will depend heavily on the achievement of
macro-stability, with the most significant factor being the achievement of a lower, less volatile rate of inflation. With the increase in inflationary
pressures recently, the tightening of monetary policy may inevitably need to be intensified, possibly resulting in a higher cost of credit and a
decrease in the availability of credit to the private sector. Under these circumstances, sound fiscal policy will remain critical to attaining the growth
forecast. With the bulk of the increase in expenditure during the year intended to finance huge investment projects that have been shifted from one
year to the next over the past three years, both the conclusion of financing arrangements for these projects and their accelerated implementation
will be critically important.

Looking to the medium term future, investments intended to address constraints on growth, particularly constraints related to
energy supply and transport infrastructure, should revive private investments; boost agricultural production; and energize the light
manufacturing sector. The new oil economy will dramatically change Uganda’s economic outlook, enabling significantly increased investment
in productive infrastructure. In future years, when production facilities become active, actual oil revenues could double the value of the country’s
current level of fiscal revenues. The experience of other countries shows that the oil development preparation phase is often characterized by
a high level of foreign investment that significantly impact economic
performance, at least in the regions implementing those investments.
This is another area where the implementation of the Public Finance
Management Act 2015 will play a critically important role in developing
                                                                                  the new oil economy will
institutions that ensure transparency and the prudent management                  dramatically change Uganda’s
of revenue to facilitate the optimal utilization of the country’s oil
resources. The increase in expenditure required to finance investment
                                                                                  economic outlook; when
in infrastructure will result in an expansion of the fiscal deficit, which is     production facilities become
expected to decline by about 2020.
                                                                                  active, actual oil revenues could
The downside risks are significant, particularly in the area of fiscal            double the value of the country’s
management. Closely related to pressures resulting from the elections,
parliament has been considering to create new administrative units                current level of fiscal revenues
including sub-counties, municipalities, and districts. In addition, poor




xii
performance in the area of domestic revenue mobilization; and the uncertainty regarding
the date of commencement of oil production and the subsequent flow of revenues, there
is a considerable degree of risk associated with the financing of investments in the country.
These are exacerbated by a failure to release, sequence and plan infrastructure investments
in accordance with absorptive capacity and the availability of financing. Furthermore, a more
expansionary fiscal policy will also result in higher levels of debt, the sustainability of which
largely depends on whether the public investment program generates a strong private sector
response that in turn results in increased growth and increased domestic revenues. Without
this response, higher deficits may raise the cost of borrowing for the private sector and increase
the build-up of debt, exacerbating debt financing risk.

In addition to these internal risks, Uganda faces a number of exogenous risks. While low
oil prices are beneficial to Uganda’s balance of trade, it has increased the risk to investment
plans in the oil sector. If oil prices take longer to recover from the current levels of US $ 40 per
barrel, compared to the estimated break-even price of US $ 60 per barrel for its production
in Uganda, it may even require different choices with respect to the phasing of refinery and
pipeline investments. A prolonged low economic activity in China will make Uganda’s imports
from there cheaper, but its impact on global demand could increase volatility in global
commodity prices, including oil prices, which may further reduce the value of the country’s
exports; exacerbate pressure on the currency; and increase inflationary pressures. All of these
factors may contribute to a slowdown in economic growth. The country’s trade prospects are
also influenced by the security situation in neighboring countries, Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of Congo (DRC), and South Sudan, although the recently signed peace accord
between Government of South Sudan and the rebel factions, may reduce the threat of conflict
in that part of the region.

Beyond these risks, Uganda’s growth and development is constrained by the low levels
of productivity of both agricultural and non-agricultural sectors; inappropriate urban
development; the slow development of infrastructure; and the limited availability of credit.
This type of growth can neither shield the economy from shocks nor accelerate its rate of
economic growth to higher levels of prosperity. Secure property rights and better functioning
land markets can generate productivity improvements in agriculture, allow better urban
development and overall infrastructure investments, while improving access to finance and
providing a platform for mobilizing more domestic revenues. The second section of this update
addresses these issues in greater detail.



Part 2: Proper land administration and management:
A Key to productivity improvements, but how should it be done?                                         while low oil prices are
                                                                                                       beneficial to Uganda’s
Failure to register a greater proportion of Uganda’s land and the weak institutional
capacities of land administration agencies have resulted in illiquid land markets and                  balance of trade, it has
have acted as constraints on the development of the country’s financial systems, both
                                                                                                       increased the risk to
of which factors are negatively affecting the country’s ability to transform its agricultural
sector; to build efficient cities; and to achieve higher levels of productivity more generally.        investment plans in the
As can be seen from the experience of other countries, the ability of Uganda to leverage land
                                                                                                       oil sector.
use to promote positive economic development will depend greatly on the level of security of
land tenure and the ease with which land rights can be transferred between different entities,




                                                                                                                              xiii
including individuals, households and firms and government, with systems in place to ensure that government acquisitions are conducted in the
public interest and with fair and full compensation. At present, approximately 20 percent of Uganda’s land is registered as mailo, freehold and
leasehold tenure, which is higher than the average level of 10 percent for Sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. Despite these better than average figures,
security of land tenure in Uganda remains weak due to unclear property rights and a high rate of occurrence of disputes and conflicts. A relatively
small proportion of land in Uganda is marketable, which limits the flexibility of its usage. Even where they exist, land markets are highly segmented
and inefficient. According to the Uganda National Household Survey of 2005/06, while approximately 60 percent of households own land, only 39
percent of individually-owned rural land was purchased. Because of the lack of clearly defined land rights, 37 percent of such land cannot be sold;
34 percent cannot be rented; and 44 percent of land cannot be used as security for a loan.

With this state of affairs, both rural and urban transformation has been constrained. Land disputes are estimated to reduce the level of
agricultural growth in Uganda by between 5 and 11 percentage points, with the availability of secure land being a significant factor in
farmers’ decisions to move from subsistence into commercial agriculture. On the other hand, the limited fluidity of land markets, compounded
by the lack of sufficient land for formal development projects and the lack of enabling site and building standards, has contributed to the low
economic density of most urban centers in Uganda. At present, such centers are characterized by inefficient horizontal expansion, rather than
more efficient vertical expansion achieved through the construction of high-rise, multipurpose buildings. Moreover, urban authorities do not have
access to the land required for the necessary public works and social infrastructure and have to purchase it at exorbitant cost. This is a result of
the high compensation rates involved in the acquisition of such land due to highly inflated land prices caused by the lack of available alternative
investment opportunities and the need in many cases to pay compensation not only to registered land owners, but also to bona fide occupants.
The government’s infrastructure program has also faced major challenges related to compensation and inflated costs on account of irregular
transactions and land acquisition.

Ugandan policy makers must formulate and implement smart policies that will ensure that land serves as a more productive asset that
facilitates positive transformation and a diversification of the economic base. These policies should aim to: (i) promote the security of land
tenure and reduce the rate of occurrence of conflicts and disputes caused by overlapping rights; (ii) promote the healthy development of rental
markets for land; and (iii) strengthen the capacities of institutions responsible for management of land administration. Economically, such reforms
would promote the development of a virtuous circle, as they would facilitate the achievement of higher levels of productivity, which in turn would
enable the Government to increase the value of collected revenues, which in turn would provide it with the means to acquire additional land to
promote further development and to compensate those who may have been negatively impacted by the process of economic transformation.
However, vested interests, suspicion, fear of disruption to livelihoods, activism against any form of land reforms, sensitivities related to the location
of investment projects and the resulting perverse incentives to local governments, all need to be taken into account if the tensions that may arise
as a result of land reforms are to be managed appropriately.

The Ugandan authorities have made important strides in creating a policy framework and devising initiatives geared towards achieving
a smart policy framework for land management. In addition to the National Land Use Policy of 2007 and the National Land Policy of 2013,
the Government of Uganda is in the advanced stages of developing the complementary National Resettlement Policy, National Urban Policy and
a National Housing Policy. The Government has also embarked on a
process of rehabilitating and modernizing land institutions, including
through the computerization of the land information systems.
Consistent with the Land Act 1998, the Uganda Land Commission                     the new oil economy will
operates a Land Fund, the objective of which is to provide funds                  dramatically change Uganda’s
to bona fide and lawful occupants to buy out land lords and also to
finance resettlement of those made landless by disasters. There                   economic outlook; when
are also initiatives to organize communal land owners in Northern                 production facilities become
Uganda into legal entities and to register their land, while also
accelerating the systematic registration of individual land rights.               active, actual oil revenues could
Implementation remains crucial in order to ensure that land in Uganda             double the value of the country’s
is secure, transferable, marketable, and plays a constructive role in the
achievement of economic development. Drawing on global lessons,                   current level of fiscal revenues
particularly from those countries in Africa that share many of the same




xiv
characteristics as Uganda, this report recommends four points of action to hasten the process
of implementation. The first two of these actions build on initiatives that have already been
commenced by the Government, while the other two are intended to bridge unaddressed gaps.

The four points of action are:

i.	   Accelerating the Systematic Registration of Land: The first point of action is to
      accelerate processes already in place to systematically register land to significantly
      increase the proportion of land that is registered, including land owned by individuals;
      communally-owned lands; and state-owned land.

ii.	 Redesigning the Land Fund: The second point of action is to redesign the Land Fund
      to enhance its efficiency and equity. This will require the promotion of the principle and
      practice of land sharing between the mailo landlord and tenant (lawful and bona fide),
      with free negotiations between the two parties to enable one party to buy out the rights
      of the other.

iii.	 Strengthening Institutions for Land Administration Management: The third point of
      action is to strengthen the institutions responsible for land administration management,
      including to: (i) improve dispute resolution systems to fill the institutional vacuum in areas
      where such capacities are particularly lacking, especially in northern Uganda and the
      Albertine region, by fully staffing zonal and district land offices; build competent formal
      institutions by providing adequate staff, budget and training to the judiciary throughout
      the country; and strengthen the Local Council Courts and their interface with traditional
      institutions; (ii) further strengthen land administration systems, including through the
      application of new technologies to improve documentation, information storage and
      retrieval, and valuation. The issue of valuation is particularly critical for urban areas, where a
      credible system for documenting and valuing land will go a long way towards streamlining
      transactions and eliminating speculation; and (iii) strengthen the management of local
      urban authorities’ finances to acquire land and pay for infrastructure improvements.

iv.	 Reviewing Policy Commitments to Close Critical Gaps: The fourth point of action
      is to review and prioritize the many existing policy commitments to identify and close
      critical gaps. The key aim of this process should be to: (i) amend the laws to remove
      restrictions on rental markets on mailo and freehold land to improve landlord-tenant
      relations; (ii) create disincentives (including through the imposition of taxes) to discourage
      speculative holding of land unused for extended periods of time; (iii) clarify policies for          increasing population
      the use of urban land, including through the provision of incentives to promote vertical
      expansion and multi-purpose usage of structures to promote density and sustainable
                                                                                                           density can support
      urban development; (iv) adopt innovative instruments for land pooling, financing and                 accelerated economic
      development to achieve economies of scale and equitable urban land development;
      and (v) address the issue of expropriation and compensation, to promote the principle
                                                                                                           growth, if appropriately
      of fairness and equity. The current market-based practice normally underestimates the                managed through the
      value of future income from the investment for which the land is being acquired, and often
      does not provide payment for the movement of people into new areas of settlement and
                                                                                                           implementation of
      the restoration of livelihoods to at least the level that existed before the expropriation.          systems to promote
      This action also requires for the policy framework to strengthen regulations and the
      enforcement of those that already exist.
                                                                                                           efficient land use




                                                                                                                                  xv
xvi
      Part

             1
Transporting goods and people in urban areas requires land for infrastructure
development(Digital Media Network Ltd, 2015)




The State of the Economy:
Ugandan in modest recovery, faces new
risks..




                                                                            1
    Supported by moderate inflationary pressures and a subsequent strengthening of bank lending to the
    private sector, the Ugandan economy grew at the rate of 5.0 percent during FY 2014/15, continuing on
    the path of moderate recovery that began in the previous year. Like it succeeded to create space for
    faster private sector credit growth during FY 2014/15, monetary policy has recently adopted a tighter
    stance aimed at ensuring that the rapidly depreciating local currency, and any increased spending
    pressures during the election year does not fuel inflation further. Fiscal policy has remained almost blunt
    as tax revenues collected remain less than 13 percent of GDP and the public investment program is not
    significantly executed for three consecutive years.


    With the volatile external environment and uncertainties related to the upcoming national elections likely
    to constrain acceleration in private investments, the public sector will need to implement its investment
    program more effectively, in order for the country to sustain a positive economic growth trajectory in the
    near and medium term. This will involve fully implementing the Public Finance Management Act 2015
    and to ‘invest in the capacity to invest’.


    During FY 2015/16, the Ugandan economy is forecasted to grow at a rate in the range of 5 - 5.5 percent,
    with uncertainties created by the upcoming elections; the need to tighten monetary policy in response to
    increasing inflationary pressures; and a weak external position acting as possible constraints on growth.
    However, growth is expected to increase into the medium term as the Government’s infrastructure
    program, including for oil production, materializes and eventually realizes economy-wide efficiency and
    productivity improvements.


    A number of downside risks, particularly those related to fiscal management and a volatile external
    environment threaten sustainability of high growth rates into the medium term. However, a more
    fundamental risk relates to inability of the Ugandan economy to raise productivity of both agricultural and
    non-agricultural sectors; and of rural and urban locations. Secure property rights and better functioning
    land markets and institutions can help land become a more productive factor of production and hence
    generate productivity improvements across the economy. It can also ensure that growth becomes more
    pro-poor as people currently with weak land rights benefit more from growth.




2
      1. Recent Economic
         Developments


At the end of FY 2014/15, Uganda completed its first five-
year development plan and commenced on the second
of such plans. A series of five-year plans are intended to
facilitate the achievement of a vision for the economic
and social transformation of the country by 2040.


During the period of the recently completed plan, Uganda embarked on a number of
projects intended both to address the infrastructure deficit and to prepare for the production
of oil. The commencement of the second five-year plan is taking place in the context of
the upcoming presidential and parliamentary elections, which are held every five years.
According to this schedule, elections are planned to take place during the first quarter of 2016.
During the previous elections, held in 2011, a number of tensions in the area of economic
management arose. In the context of the upcoming elections, it is possible that similar
tensions will recur. In this context and that of a volatile external environment, economic
management will need to be delicately managed to sustain the efforts that have recently
begun to be implemented to address longer term structural issues. Such efforts remain vital
for the achievement of overall growth and economic development.

Over the past five years, a series of internal and external shocks; slippages in fiscal
and monetary policies; disruptions to aid flows due to corruption cases, and a volatile
external environment, have affected Uganda’s macroeconomic performance. From a                      the acceleration
peak of 9.8 percent in FY 2010/11, the rate of growth has declined steadily, reaching a low of
3.3 percent in FY 2012/13. However, as shocks abated and policy stabilized, the economy             in the rate of
begun to recover, growing by 4.6 percent during FY 2013/14. This acceleration in the rate of        growth has been
growth has been supported by a benign economic environment, characterized by low rates
of inflation, good harvests, and favorable global commodity prices. However, the high level
                                                                                                    supported by a
of volatility has negatively impacted living conditions of Ugandans. In addition, Uganda’s          benign economic
economic growth must be viewed in the context of the rapid expansion in the size of its
                                                                                                    environment,
population. With a high rate of population growth, per capita income is estimated to have
grown by only 2.4 percent over the past five years, which is much slower than the rate of 5.2       characterized
percent achieved in the previous two decades. With these lower rates of growth, it may take at      by low rates of
least eight years for Uganda to achieve an increase in its average per capita income from the
current level of US$ 660 to US$ 1000, thus fulfilling its goal of achieving middle income status.   inflation, good
As has been emphasized in our earlier economic updates, the passive acceptance of low               harvests, and
rates of growth is not an option for the country’s policymakers. Rather, policymakers need to
actively address constraints on the achievement of higher rates of growth.
                                                                                                    favorable global
                                                                                                    commodity prices



                                                                                                                       3
1.1 M o de st r e c ov e ry i n e c on omi c g r owt h                                   performance improved significantly during the subsequent quarters,
                                                                                         largely due to the increased availability of private sector credit and
Uganda’s economy is showing modest signs of recovery following                           positive business sentiments. By the end of the second quarter, the
a slump that began in the 2011 post-election period (see Figure                          Business Tendency Indicators1 improved to 53.5; and the Fitch credit
1). In the early period of FY 2014/15, most of the country’s economic                    rating agency upgraded Uganda’s long term rating from B to B+.
sectors contracted, with an overall decrease in the rate of economic                     Overall, the economy is estimated to have grown by 5.0 percent during
growth of 1.4 percent during the first quarter of the year. However,                     FY 2014/15, a higher rate than achieved in the previous year, when the
                                                                                         figure stood at 4.6 percent.



       Figure 1: Gradual Recovery in Uganda’s Economy through FY 2014/15




         Source. Ministry of Finance



With this modest recovery, Uganda’s rate of growth was still                             boom resulting from the large public sector infrastructure program
lower than expected and considerably lower than that recorded                            and from investments made in preparation for the exploitation of the
by neighboring EAC countries. Uganda’s economy had been                                  country’s oil resources. Uganda also recorded lower rates of economic
projected to grow at the rate of 6.1 percent during FY 2014/15, with                     growth than Kenya, Tanzania and Rwanda, recording the lowest rate
this strong rate of growth expected to be driven by a construction                       of growth amongst these countries for the fifth year in a row.


       Figure 2: Uganda’s Economic Growth is the lowest in the East African region




         Source. IMF/World Bank database


The Business Tendency Indicator (BTI) is published by Bank of Uganda. This index collects business community perceptions about the future of the Uganda
1




4
The recovery in the rate of growth achieved over the previous year          in the availability of private credit. As a result, the total value of private
was the result of both exogenous factors and domestic policy. In            investments is estimated to have grown by two percentage points,
line with the investment strategy that has been implemented over the        reaching a level equivalent to 25 percent of GDP. This is a remarkable
past three years, the value of the public sector’s capital investments      improvement, with this increase sustaining the recovery that begun in
continued to increase gradually. During FY 2014/15, the value of public     FY 2013/14.
investments reached the equivalent of 6.3 percent of GDP. While this
was lower than the target of 8.6 percent of GDP, it was 0.7 percentage      During the year, the services sector grew at a rate of 4.6 percent.
points higher than the figure of 5.6 percent recorded in FY 2013/14.        With this growth, the sector contributed 2.3 percentage points of
                                                                            the country’s total annual growth. Within the service sector, the
The total value of private investments also increased significantly         real estate, public administration and education sub-sectors grew
during FY 2014/15, largely due to the increased availability                particularly strongly, with each of these sub-sectors recording rates
of credit and to the increased activities of the services and               of growth in excess of five percent. Most significantly, the financial
manufacturing sectors. The declining regional demand for                    and insurance services sub-sector grew at the rate of 14.5 percent,
exports, combined with increases in the value of imports to support         maintaining the high rate of growth achieved over recent years. In fact,
construction, led to a decline in the contribution of net exports to GDP    this sub-sector alone contributed to approximately 31 percent of the
growth. However, this was partially compensated for by increased            total growth of the services sector.
domestic demand, with monetary conditions facilitating an increase



    Figure 3: Manufacturing recovered, but construction decelerated during FY 2014/15




    Source. Ministry of Finance



The industrial sector grew by 6.4 percent, a significant increase           significantly lower than that of the figure of 10 percent recorded two
over the figure of 4.3 percent recorded in the previous year.               years ago.
The manufacturing sub-sector grew by 9.7 percent in FY 2014/15,
compared to the figure of 2.8 percent recorded in FY 2013/14. These         The rate of growth of the agricultural sector stood at 4.4 percent
figures indicate the ongoing recovery of this critical sector following a   in FY 2014/15, significantly higher than the figure of 1.5 percent
significant contraction three years ago, when this sector was affected      recorded in the previous year. The performance of cash crops
by power shortages and higher electricity prices; financing constraints     recovered strongly, largely due to favorable commodity prices and
resulting from tighter liquidity; and decreases in demand from              overall terms of trade, and particularly strong performance in the
global markets. Growth in this sector was largely driven by increased       vanilla, cotton and flower sub-sectors. The strong performance of
activities related to electricity generation and water supply, processing   these sub-sectors helped offset the relatively weak performance of the
and preservation; pharmaceutical production; and iron and steel             coffee sub-sector, which suffered on account of unfavorable climatic
production. As a result, the contribution of the manufacturing sub-         conditions. With improved regulation and better supervision of Lake
sector to GDP increased to approximately eight percent, up from the         Victoria and other lakes, fish stocks have started to increase. As a
figure of 7.6 percent recorded in the previous year. The rate of growth     result of this and of increases in prices, the fishing sector recovered
of the construction sector decreased to 2.0 percent, down from the          strongly during FY 2014/15, with the volume of exports of fish and fish
figure of 5.7 percent recorded in FY 2013/14. This rate of growth is        products outside the region growing by close to 40 percent.


                                                                                                                                                         5
1 .2 B ef o r e r e c e n t volati l i ti e s, i nf l at io n r e ma ine d s ta bl e , a l l o wing mo ne ta ry policy
to re m a i n n e ut ra l , b oth of w hi c h s ti mul at e d pr ivat e s e ct o r cr e d it

The rate of inflation averaged 2.4 percent during FY 2014/15, with                           policy had to be adjusted to control inflation. The annual rate of food
this low rate partially resulting from increased domestic supply                             crop inflation rose to 6.4 percent, from the negative rate of -0.1 percent
and the reduced impact of external shocks throughout most of                                 recorded in April. The core inflation rate also rose modestly, from 2.7
the year. However, towards the end of the year, the level of volatility                      percent at the beginning of the year to 4.8 percent in April. At the same
began to increase, with this increased volatility continuing into the                        time, by May 2015, the value of the local currency relative to the dollar
first quarter of FY 2015/16. With the level of agricultural production                       had declined by 21 percent compared to its position at the same point
increasing dramatically on account of good weather, the price of                             in the previous year. Therefore, the rise in the core inflation rate was
food declined to levels lower than recorded during the previous year.                        partially driven by the pass-through effects of the depreciation in the
This implies a negative rate of annual food crops inflation through                          value of the shilling on the prices of imported goods. According to
the first nine months of the year. At the same time, the decline in the                      Bank Uganda2, a one percent depreciation in the value of the shilling
cost of imports, particularly due to the decline in the global cost of                       is expected to result in price increases of approximately 0.5 percent
oil, mitigated the impacts of the inflationary pressures during that                         over the next three to six months. Therefore, the annual overall
period, even though the spillover effect on domestic prices occurred                         (headline) inflation rate increased to 4.9 percent, from the average
only gradually. However, starting in April, food prices started to rise                      annual rate of 3.3 percent that had been recorded through the year up
gradually; the value of the shilling began to depreciate; and monetary                       until April (see Figure 4).


           Figure 4: Inflation remained low through FY 2014/15, but upward pressure started towards end of year




           Source: Uganda Bureau of Statistics




Across the region, other countries also recorded low, stable                                 The neutral monetary policy was not sufficient to create
inflation rates during FY 2014/15, but similar upward trends                                 confidence in the market during FY 2014/15. In spite of the
have been recorded during early part of FY 2015/16. For example,                             fluctuating food prices, the sustained depreciation in the value of the
Kenya recorded an average annual inflation rate of 6.6 percent during                        currency and the moderate increase of international oil prices, the
FY 2014/15, with this being the highest recorded rate in the region.                         prospects for further increases in inflation were minimal during most
Tanzania sustained a downward trend throughout most of the year,                             of FY 2014/15. In consideration of these factors, the Bank of Uganda
as a result of which it recorded an average rate of 5.3 percent over the                     took the decision not to ease monetary policy to further stimulate
year. Rwanda continued to record the lowest rate of inflation within                         the economy. By keeping the Central Bank Rate (CBR) at the same
the EAC, with an average rate of 1.3 percent for FY 2014/15.                                 level through the year, the Bank of Uganda maintained a neutral




2
    Okello, A. J. and Brownbridge, M., (2013) Exchange Rate Pass-through and its Implications for Monetary Policy in Uganda. Bank of Uganda Working Paper No. 10/2013.




6
monetary policy stance throughout most of FY 2014/15. In spite of this                       national elections, with investors concerned regarding the possibility
stance, market interest rates were quite volatile: following declines in                     of a surge in public expenditure, as was the case in the period
the previous year, lending rates increased in the first quarter, before                      preceding the 2011 elections. The 91-day Treasury bill rate had risen to
declining again later. The yield on government securities maintained                         13.3 percent by April 2015, up from 9.1 percent at the beginning of the
an upward trend throughout this period. This could have been on                              financial year.
account of market uncertainty in the context of the forthcoming


       Figure 5: Market rates were not as stable as the Central Bank Rate during FY 2014/15




         Source: Bank of Uganda


With all factors pointing to further inflationary pressures, the                             Private sector credit grew at an average rate of 15 percent per annum
Bank of Uganda tightened its monetary policy stance in April                                 during the 10 months to April 2015, up from 8 percent in the same
2015, before implementing even more aggressive measures to                                   period during FY 2013/14. This momentum is expected to have had
tighten this policy in the first quarter of FY 2015/16. This led to                          a positive impact on growth and on the level of private investment,
an increase in market interest rates and to the cost of credit. With                         as lending shifted away from personal and household consumption.
additional indications of higher rates of inflation in the near future,                      The share of lending to the personal and household sector declined
the Bank of Uganda raised the CBR to 12 percent in April 2015. By the                        to 16 percent of the total value of private sector credit, on account
end of August 2015, the Bank of Uganda had raised the CBR three                              of a much slower increase of loans to this sector of only 17 percent
times, to reach 16 percent. It also widened the band around the CBR                          during FY 2014/15, which was half the rate of growth recorded in the
to 3 percentage points and the margin between the CBR and the                                previous year. The agricultural sector’s share stood at 10 percent,
rediscount rate (the cost to commercial banks to access funding from                         with the volume of loans increasing by 37 percent. Lending to the
the Central Bank by selling back their securities). Consequently, at                         manufacturing sector was characterized by low rates of growth for
this point, holders of securities would rediscount them at a rate of 20                      a large part of the year. However, these rates increased significantly
percent, while the rate at which commercial banks could obtain credit                        during the second half of the year, with loans to the sector recording
from the Central Bank (i.e. the Bank rate) had increased to 21 percent3.                     an average annual rate of growth of 33 percent by April 2015. Lending
Commercial banks also raised their lending rates from the beginning                          to the trade sector declined throughout the year. Its year-on-year
of April 2015, a departure from the trend towards a gradual decline                          growth, which peaked at an annual rate of 33 percent in December
from the high point of 23.1 percent in August 2013 to 22.7 percent in                        2014, was down to an annual rate of 3 percent by April 2015. This is
May 2015.                                                                                    in line with the trend towards the depreciation in the value of the
                                                                                             shilling, which makes imports more expensive and, more critically,
The neutral monetary policy implemented throughout most of                                   reflects on the impact of political instability in southern Sudan on the
the year contributed to an increase in economic activity during                              Ugandan economy, as trade in that region comes to a standstill.
FY 2014/15, as the cost of borrowing from banks declined slightly.



3
  The Bank rate and Rediscount rate directly related to the Bank of Uganda’s key policy rate, the Central Bank rate. Until July 2015, the Bank and rediscount rates were automatically
set at 3 and 4 percentage points higher than the Central Bank rate. Since then, this margin has been increased to 4 and 5 percentage points.




                                                                                                                                                                                    7
The share of shilling denominated loans continued to decline               proportion of loans denominated in foreign currencies increased
during FY 2014/15. By contrast, the proportion of loans denominated        significantly in the building, mortgage, construction and real estate
in foreign currencies has expanded at a steady rate since November         sectors; the trade sector; and the manufacturing sector, with these
2012. In the 10 months up until April 2015, loans denominated in           sectors together accounting for more than 69 percent of total credit
foreign currencies averaged 41 percent of the total value of credit,       denominated in foreign currency.
compared to an average of 39 percent during FY 2013/14. The

      Figure 6: Domestic credit picked up strongly, led by government




      Source: Bank of Uganda


The value of public sector credit continued to grow strongly               the same period in FY 2013/14. The strong government demand for
during FY 2014/15, albeit at a slower rate than the rate of growth         credit, combined with relatively high yields for government paper,
for private sector credit. As with the case of private sector credit,      has led to banks holding a relatively higher proportion of assets
growth in the value of Government credit was strong during FY              in government paper, rather than developing long-term financing
2014/15, at the rate of 24 percent for the 10 months to April 2015. This   options. This has contributed to the high cost of credit to private
represents an increase from the figure of 22 percent recorded during       sector.

      Figure 7: Credit to agriculture and manufacturing picking, albeit from a small base




      Source: Bank of Uganda



1.3 A weak external position, provided ground for a depreciating local currency
Uganda’s overall external position deteriorated during FY                  The value of exports of goods increased by 3.1 percent, with this
2014/15 as a result of a decline in the value of transfers and FDI,        increase being mainly due to a growth in the value of non-traditional
despite modest improvements in the trade balance. According                exports, including metal and plastic products, bottled water, and
to IMF, the current account deficit increased from a value equivalent      rice. However, the proportion of such exports to regional markets
to 7.9 percent of GDP in FY 2013/14 to 8.8 percent in FY 2014/15.          grew at a slower rate than in previous years, mainly because of



8
the decline in demand from South Sudan. Despite this increase,                              improvement to the trade balance by the equivalent to 5.7 percent of
traditional commodities, including coffee and tea, are still Uganda’s                       GDP. In the area of services, there was a detrioration in the balance
most significant exports, accounting for 30 percent of the total value                      of trade, with the value of net service imports doubling to reach the
of export earnings during the fiscal year (see Figure 9). However, with                     equivalent of 1.8 percent of GDP. The income account also declined
the slow growth of the global economy, the value of coffee exports                          by 13 percent due to higher income on equity payments, while the
remained almost unchanged in FY 2014/15 compared to the previous                            value of current transfers declined by 5.7 percent. The increase in the
year, with this value reaching US$ 402 million. The total value of                          value of service imports was a result of increased investments by the
import of goods declined by one percentage point to reach the                               government in infrastructure, with these investments requiring the
equivalent of 18.4 percent of GDP. These two factors resulted in an                         increased import of transport and insurance services.


         Figure 8: The external position deteriorated as current account worsened




         Source: IMF Estimates


The financial account deteriorated by 10 percent in FY 2014/15                              further increases in portfolio outflows, with the value of net outflows
as the value of foreign direct investments (FDI) reduced. During                            standing at US$ 45 million in FY 2014/15, compared to a net inflow
FY 2014/15, the value of FDI declined by 3.2 percent, declining from                        to a value of US$ 6 million in FY 2013/14. The increase in the value of
the figure of US$ 1,225 million in FY 2013/14 to US$ 1,186 million in FY                    portfolio outflows, despite the relatively high yields on government
2014/15. With most FDI being allocated for investments in the mining                        securities, reflects the high level of uncertainty in currency markets,
and quarrying sector, the low global price of oil could explain the
                          4
                                                                                            which in turn is partially driven by the depreciation in the value of the
decline in the overall value of FDI. The situation was exacerbated by                       shilling.


         Figure 9: Foreign direct investment was for the mining and quarrying sector




         Source: Bank of Uganda


4
  According to a private sector investment survey conducted by Bank of Uganda (2014), despite the declines in the value of FDI, these investments remain strong and are driven by
investments in the mining, ICT, finance and insurance and manufacturing sectors, among others.




                                                                                                                                                                                    9
The overall balance of payments was in deficit, with the value                since January 2014. Over FY 2014/15, the value of the shilling relative
of the deficit amounting to US$ 475 million. At the same time, the            to the dollar declined by 24 percent. The real effective exchange
value of international reserves declined from US$ 3,394 million to US$        rate also depreciated by 17 percent over the same period. Most of
2,912 million. However, this level of reserves is sufficient to provide for   this depreciation occurred during the second half of the year, with
four months of import cover, which is considered an adequate level to         Uganda’s currency coming under additional pressure from a bullish
provide a cushion against external shocks.                                    US dollar as the USA economy strengthened. Other factors that
                                                                              contributed to the downward trend in the value of the shilling were
In line with the weakened external position, the value of the                 the relatively high cost of imports to support the construction sector;
shilling has depreciated strongly over the recent past. Even with             dividend payments; and uncertainty in the context of the forthcoming
the level of reserves declining in response to the deterioration in the       election. Indeed, as a result of these factors, since January 2015, the
balance of payments, there has been an even stronger impact on the            Ugandan shilling has declined not only against the dollar, but against
value of the local currency, the value of which has reduced steadily          both the Kenyan and Tanzanian currencies.




     Figure 10: Uganda shilling depreciated more than regional currencies during FY 2014/15




1.4 Slow pace of public investment results in lower fiscal deficit and a greater
proportion of the budget being utilized for recurrent expenditure

Between FY 2011/12 and FY 2013/14, there has been a sustained                 increase in total expenditure of 25 percent in nominal terms. As a
effort to increase the relative proportion of the budget allocated            share of GDP, total expenditure was budgeted to increase from a
for capital expenditures, with this increased capital expenditure             value equivalent to 16.7 percent of GDP in FY 2013/14 to 21.5 percent
being intended to address the infrastructure deficit. However,                in FY 2014/15. Of this expenditure, 30 percent was to be allocated for
this goal has not yet been fully achieved. The shortfall in expenditure       the development of transport and energy infrastructure. Intended to
during this period amounted to a value equivalent to three                    develop social and human capital, the allocation to the education and
percentage points of GDP. This shortfall constrained an expansionist          health sectors constituted a large share of Government expenditure,
fiscal policy that had the potential to stimulate growth in the short         at 15 percent and 9 percent respectively. Domestic revenues were
term as construction related to the development of infrastructure             projected to increase from a value equivalent to 11.9 percent of GDP
commenced.                                                                    to 13.3 percent, as a result of the implementation of a series of tax
                                                                              measures intended to simplify the tax regime; to remove distortions;
Similarly, in line with a policy to address the infrastructure                and to broaden the tax base. This increase in revenue would have
deficit and to stimulate growth, the Parliament approved an                   been supplemented with a modest increase in the value of external
expansionary budget for FY 2014/15. This budget projected an                  grants from a value equivalent to 1.0 percent of GDP to that of 1.5




10
percent anticipated in that year. Therefore, in the approved budget,                          At this level of performance, the value of collected revenues
the overall fiscal deficit was projected to increase from a value                             would have increased to a level equivalent to 12.9 percent of
equivalent to 3.8 percent of GDP in FY 2013/14 to 6.9 percent. This was                       GDP, which is slightly above the target of 12.7 percent for the year.
expected to be partially funded by external loans to a value equivalent                       In particular, good performance was recorded in the area of the
to 3.5 percent of GDP and by domestic loans to a value equivalent to                          collection of corporate and withholding taxes, which are direct
3.4 percentage points of GDP.                                                                 domestic taxes, and of import duties. On the other hand, performance
                                                                                              was less impressive in the area of the collection of indirect domestic
With the value of collected revenues coming closer to targeted                                taxes, mainly due to short falls in the collection of excise duty on beer
levels, the implementation of the FY 2014/15 budget was under                                 and on international telephone calls, with the latter being caused by
less pressure than in the previous two years. The collection of                               a reduction in taxes on regional international calls rates. This sluggish
domestic revenues exceeded target, after overcoming several months                            collection of revenues leaves Uganda far worse off than neighbouring
of shortfalls during the first half of the year. The Uganda Revenue                           countries within the EAC. 5
Authority collected revenues, which reached a value of Shs 9.7 trillion.



     Uganda shilling – medium of exchange for
     exchange of goods and services in the
     country (Sheila Gashishiri, 2015)




In terms of expenditure, the under-execution of public                                        oil refinery would commence during the year. However, decisions
investments continued to undermine fiscal policy objectives. For                              related to the public component of the financing for this project
the third consecutive year, the failure to achieve targets was mainly                         also failed to reach a conclusion. Other components of the budget
due to delays in executing infrastructure projects (see Table 1). Total                       involving development expenditure performed well during FY 2014/15.
expenditures were below the budgeted target by the equivalent of 2.1                          In particular, the works and transport sector, which accounts for 33
percentage points of GDP. This was fully reflected in the development                         percent of the domestic development budget, had reached a level of
budget, with the construction of the Karuma dam, which accounted                              execution of 55 percent of its planned expenditure by December 2014.
for 25 percent of the approved development budget (excluding                                  Overall, the development and investment and lending expenditure
donor projects), reached a level of execution of only two percent as                          is expected to have reached a value equivalent to 7.9 percent of GDP,
a result of delays in concluding the financing arrangements for this                          compared to 11.1 percent in the approved budget. The persistent
project. The negotiations between the Exim Bank of China and the                              implementation challenges affecting public investment projects
Government for loans to finance 80 percent of the project progressed,                         continue to indicate the need to ‘invest in the capacity to invest’ if
but these negotiations did not reach a conclusion during the year.                            public expenditures are to have a positive impact on growth and
Therefore, construction progressed only slowly, with financing from                           development.6
domestic funds. It was also expected that the development of an


5
    In FY 2011/12 domestic revenue as a share of GDP stood at 23 percent in Kenya, 17.6 percent in Tanzania, 14.3 percent in Rwanda and 14.8 percent in Burundi.
6
 A better PIM system increases productivity growth and thus should have a continuing impact on growth, in contrast to reforms that yield a one-off increase in the level of output
(Brahmbhatt and Canuto, 2012).



                                                                                                                                                                                11
Recurrent expenditure remained almost as budgeted, in spite                       requested parliamentary approval for a supplementary recurrent
of a huge ‘supplementary’ budget and some pressure due to the                     budget to a value of Shs 1122.4 billion, equivalent to 5.6 percent of
requirement to meet interest payments. At a value equivalent to                   the total value of the approved budget, to pay pensions and gratuity
19 percent of the total value of the budget, expenditure on wages                 arrears (68 percent of the total) and to pay outstanding wages after
remains below the budgeted figure. This was a result of a clean-up                the payroll clean-up. Therefore, rather than increase expenditure, the
of the government pay and pension system to ensure the validity                   supplementary budget reallocated the savings to other areas within
of the government payroll. The savings from this clean-up exercise                the recurrent budget.
allowed for additional expenditure. Hence, the Government had




Table 1: Central Government Revenue and Expenditure Framework(% of GDP, unless otherwise specified)

                                                        Outturn         Outturn   Outturn       Outturn      Approved Projected             Projection
                                                                                                             Budget   Outturn
                                                        2010/11         2011/12   2012/13       2013/14      2014/15        2014/15         2015/16
 REVENUE & GRANTS                                            15.5          13.1        12.9         13.0           14.8            14.1            15.1
 Domestic Revenue                                            13.6          11.2        11.4         11.9           13.3            13.0            13.6
 o/w URA Revenue Collection                                  10.9          10.1        11.0         11.4           12.7            12.9            12.9
  Grants                                                         1.9        1.9         1.5           1.0           1.5              1.1            1.6
 EXPENDITURE                                                 19.1          15.6        16.5         16.7           21.7            18.6            22.1
 Recurrent Expenditure                                       12.7           9.4         9.1           9.8          10.3            10.0            10.4
 Development & Investment                                        6.1        5.8         6.6           7.0          11.1              7.9           11.3
 External                                                        3.1        2.9         3.4           2.4           3.6              2.2            4.0
 Domestic                                                        3.0        3.0         3.2           4.5           7.6              5.8            7.3
 Arrears and contingencies                                       0.4        0.5         0.1           0.0           0.1              0.3            0.2
 OVERALL DEFICIT
 Including grants                                                -3.6      -2.5        -3.6          -3.8           -6.9            -4.5           -7.0
 Excluding grants                                                -5.5      -4.5        -5.0          -4.8           -8.4            -5.6           -8.6
 FINANCING                                                       3.9        2.0         3.3           3.6           6.9              4.5            7.0
 External Financing (net)                                        1.5        2.0         2.2           1.3           3.5              1.1            5.0
 Budget Support Loans                                            0.5        0.2         0.5           0.0           0.0              0.0            0.0
 Project Loans (Concessional)                                    1.4        1.8         2.0           1.6           2.2              1.5            1.6
 Project Loans (non-concess.)                                    0.0        0.3         0.0           0.0           1.5              0.0            3.9
 Amortisation                                                    -0.3      -0.3        -0.3          -0.3           -0.2            -0.3           -0.4
 Domestic financing (net)                                        2.3        0.0         1.0           2.3           3.4              3.4            2.0
 Bank of Uganda                                                    --      -2.0        -0.1          -0.3           1.8              1.5            0.3
 Domestic Borrowing                                                --       2.0         1.2           2.6           1.6              1.8            1.7
 Errors and omissions                                            0.3       -0.5        -0.3          -0.2           0.0              0.0            0.0
 MEMORANDA ITEMS:
 GDP at market prices (U Shs billions)                    47,078         59,420     63,905       68,407         75,183          75,183          83,596
 Public debt stock (% of GDP)                                25.7          22.0        26.2         29.0           31.9            33.8            36.0
 o/w External                                                11.4           8.8        11.0         12.9           13.7            14.9            14.2

Source: Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development




12
As a result of under-execution in the public investment budget,                 to the financing arrangements, this resulted in targeted external
the fiscal deficit was lower than budgeted by a value equivalent                financing to a value equivalent to up to 1.5 percent of GDP not
to almost two percentage points of GDP. The overall deficit is                  materializing. The value of loans from domestic sources amounted
estimated to have reached a value equivalent to 4.5 percent of GDP.             to Shs 2.7 billion, which is a value equivalent to 3.4 percent of GDP.
This would be 1.9 percentage points lower than the approved budget              Hence, the value of these loans remained within the limits established
deficit of 6.4 percent of GDP. However, this level of deficit is still one of   by the approved budget. However, this kind of financing maintained
the largest fiscal deficits in more than a decade.                              the upward trend observed over the past three years. As would be
                                                                                expected with increasing reliance on this form of financing in a thin
The fiscal deficit was mainly financed using resources drawn                    financial market, it comes at a significant cost. Since July 2014, yields
from domestic sources. With a large component of the development                on government paper have maintained an upwards trend, which
budget failing to be implemented due to the delayed conclusion                  eventually has an impact on the cost of credit to the private sector.




                                                                                                   Road works, including in rural areas of
                                                                                                   Nkokonjeru, Mukono, central Uganda,
                                                                                          can boost productivity ((Sheila Gashishiri, 2014)




                                                                                                                                                         13
                                                 2. Economic Outlook


                     2.1 Pu bl ic inv e s t me nt t o und e r pin e co no mic g r o w th in
                     ne a r t e r m a s unce r ta int ie s incr e a s e


                     Uganda’s economic outlook for the near future is
                     characterized by a high level of uncertainty, particularly
                     in the context of the upcoming national elections in 2016,
                     low international oil prices, and increasing pressure on
                     its currency.


                     In this context, the World Bank forecasts that the rate of growth of the Ugandan economy in
                     FY 2015/16 will be in the range of 5.0 to 5.5 percent. With contradictory developments during
                     the first quarter of the year and anticipated election activity, a modest increase in the rate of
                     growth of GDP should be expected to be achieved.

                     The ongoing recovery will depend heavily on the achievement of macro-stability,
                     with the most significant factor being the achievement of a lower, less volatile rate of
                     inflation. With demonstrated limited success to increase its collection of revenue to offset
                     increased expenditure, there is an urgent need for the authorities to address constraints
                     to the management of public investments and thereby to ensure that the expansive fiscal
                     policy adopted for FY 2015/16 stimulates growth rather than contributes to instability. The
                     protracted depreciation in the value of the Ugandan shilling is consistent with the weak
                     external position and should improve Uganda’s competitiveness. However, it has resulted in
                     increased inflationary pressures. Even if international energy prices increase only gradually
 the protracted
                     over the next two years, the pass-through effects may exacerbate these inflationary pressures.
 depreciation in     These pressures may be further exacerbated by unfavorable climatic conditions, especially
 the value of the    poor rainfalls that may affect the supply of food to domestic markets. However, the tightening
                     of monetary policy by the Central Bank is expected to mitigate these inflationary pressures
 Ugandan shilling    to some extent. At the same time, a tightening of the monetary stance will come at a cost, as
 is consistent       shown by the impact of the increase in interest rates at the beginning of this year.

 with the weak       Beyond the high interest rates, uncertainties on account of elections and a bumpy
 external position   external environment, could constrain private sector investments. If intensified, tight
                     money policies will continue to reduce the level of credit available to the private sector. The
 and should          increase in expenditure on large infrastructure projects, such as the Karuma and Isimba dams,
 improve Uganda’s    may also result in lower access to credit by the private sector, if delays in accessing external
                     loans continue and if these delays necessitate further increases in the use of domestic
 competitiveness
                     resources. The total value of government securities issued during FY 2014/15 amounted to
                     Shs 1.4 trillion, which does not exceed targeted levels. However, the total value of credit




14
provided to the public sector is rising faster than that of the value of   percent of GDP, from the figure of 8.8 percent recorded in FY 2014/15.
credit provided to the private sector. If the Government maintains its     In particular, the increase in the value of imports relative to exports
commitment to reducing domestic debt to moderate upward pressure           may be exacerbated unless the situation in South Sudan improves
on the cost of credit, then the crowding out of private investment will    following the signing of the peace accord in August 2015; and boosts
be curbed. Such policies will need to be implemented in the context of     the growth of exports. And while commodity prices are currently
the upcoming 2016 elections. Experience in various parts of the world      forecast to decline throughout much of 2016, which may lower the
demonstrate that these electoral cycles have an impact on economic         inflationary pressures, the overall deterioration of the global economy
performance. Similarly, private investors may be reluctant to make         may lower global demand and hence continue to exert negative
firm commitments in the period prior to the 2016 election.                 pressure on the performance of Uganda’s export sector and on the
                                                                           value of remittances and income flows. Contrasting these will be the
The contrasting developments on the global economy could                   impact of the devaluation of the Chinese Yuan, which could lower
worsen the already weak external position, as the current                  Uganda’s import bill by some points, given that China accounts for 13
account is forecast to deteriorate, reaching a level equivalent to 11      percent of Uganda’s imports (see Box 1).



      Box 1: China’s devaluation – Can Uganda’s fortunes offset the misfortunes?


The Chinese economy has significantly weakened over the past three years. This was a result of reduced industrial production, investment, retail
sales and export growth. In line with the changed fundamentals, on August 11, 2015, China devalued its currency, the Yuan, by 2 percent. This
decision by the Central Bank of China is expected to have some implications to other countries including those in Africa. For Uganda, there could
be three main channels, including trade, investment and debt.


The Trade channel: China has become an increasingly large source of imports of many consumer goods in Uganda. While only about 3
percent of its exports (including leather, coffee, fish and food products) go to China, Uganda’s imports from China have gradually increased
representing about 13 percent of its total imports in the FY 2014/15. Products imported from China include among others light manufacturing
products, farm tools, textiles, pharmaceutical products, garments, and ceramics. It is worth to note that an additional 39 percent of Uganda’s
imports, are sourced from Asia, including India, Japan, and Indonesia. The immediate effect of the recent devaluation of the Yuan could be an
improvement of the trade balance as the value of Uganda’s imports from China reduce as a results of lower price of these imports. Moreover,
Uganda’s total import bill could eventually reduce further if other Asian countries directly or indirectly devalue their currencies in response to
the China’s currency devaluation. However, later, the cheaper imports could in fact outcompete Uganda’s exports in other markets and offset
the improvement in Uganda’s current account balance. Meanwhile, this current account deterioration could be offset by far reaching effects to
Uganda’s economy through its impact on domestic activities, including retail trade, construction and other productive activities (manufacturing
and agriculture), due to favorable input prices.


The investment channel: While it does not appear among the top 10 sources of foreign direct investment in the country, China has gradually
increased its investment in Uganda over the past three years. According to the Uganda Investment Authority data, in 2013 FDI inflows from
advanced economies reached US$857.6 billion, accounting for 60.8 percent of global FDI outflows. This was mainly due to the growth in South-
to-South FDI flows mainly on account of investments from China, Hong Kong, Republic of Korea, Singapore and India into mining, manufacturing
and infrastructure development activities. A weaker Chinese economy and its neighbors, will mean that the recent impetus to South to South,
and starting with China’s investment to Uganda will be dampened. Thus, compromising planned infrastructure development projects and
therefore affecting growth.


The debt channel: As Uganda diversifies sources of financing in recent years, to finance the country’s ambitious infrastructure program, the bulk
of its non-concessional borrowing is coming from China. This has been financing the construction of the Kampala-Entebbe Highway, and two
major power dams (Karuma and Isimba). In 2013, China’s lending to Uganda was estimated at $596 million including a loan of $350 million from
Exim Bank China, repayable over 40 years at 2 percent to finance the Kampala-Entebbe Highway. The Government of Uganda also eyes China
for the upgrade of its railways system into standard gauge and the construction of the 600MW Karuma dam for a loan estimated at $9.7 billion.
The bulk of these loans, especially the recent large ones, are denominated in US $. However, about 50 percent of US $ 499 million worth of the
outstanding debt as of end June 2015, was denominated in Chinese Yuan. A devalued Chinese currency will reduce the amount of US $ required
to service the debt. More than a devalued Chinese currency, a weaker Chinese economy will have far more adverse effects on African economies
including Uganda.
Source: World Bank Staff




                                                                                                                                                     15
In these circumstances, private investment is not expected to                has so far been dampened by the rapid depreciation in the value of
grow to a value significantly in excess of 25 percent of GDP during          the shilling. And yet more critically, low oil prices continue to delay
FY 2015/16, almost the same level recorded during FY 2014/15.                decisions related to investments to facilitate oil production. Thus,
The potentially positive impact of low oil prices on economic activity       public investments are expected to be the main driver of growth.




Table 2: Summary Assumptions for the Medium Term Outlook, (groth rate % unless otherwise indicated) Baseline Scenario

                                                                         2014                 2015                 2016f                  2017f
 GDP, at constant market prices                                             4.5                 5.0                    5.4                   6.2
 Private Consumption                                                        0.3                12.3                    8.0                   6.9
 Government Consumption                                                    13.9                16.3                  15.1                   10.0
 Gross Fixed Capital Investment                                             3.5                  0.0                   8.5                  12.5
 Change in Inventories, % contribution                                      0.0                  0.4                   0.0                   0.0
 Exports, Goods and Services                                                5.6                 -7.5                   6.0                   7.0
 Imports, Goods and Services                                               -3.8                15.5                  18.1                   14.5
 GDP, at constant factor prices                                             4.5                  5.0                   5.4                   6.2
 Agriculture                                                                1.5                  4.4                   4.0                   4.0
 Manufacturing                                                              4.3                  6.4                   7.6                   9.3
 Services                                                                   4.4                  4.6                   7.2                   8.7
 Inflation (GDP Deflator)                                                   2.4                  4.4                   5.1                   4.7
 Inflation (Consumer Price Index)                                           6.7                  2.4                   5.5                   5.8
 Current Account Balance,% of GDP                                          -7.9                 -8.9                -11.0                  -12.4
 Fiscal Balance, % of GDP                                                  -3.8                 -4.5                  -7.0                  -6.5
 Poverty rate ($1.25 a day, PPP terms)                                     28.2                27.6                  27.0                      ..


Source: World Bank




As has been the case over the past several years, the services               FY 2014/15. The annual rate of growth of the agricultural sector is
sector will continue to be a major driver of growth, with this               expected to reach approximately 4 percent in FY13, with long-term
sector growing by approximately 8 percent per annum. Within                  weather forecasts continuing to point to favorable climatic conditions,
this sector, the information and communication sub-sector will               similar to those experienced in FY 2014/15.
continue to be the most significant driver of growth. The contribution
of the tourism sub-sector will most likely increase, benefiting from         Fiscal policy remains critically important for the achievement of
the depreciation in the value of the shilling, which makes Uganda            the growth forecast for FY 2015/16 and subsequent years. Total
a cheaper, more attractive destination. However, this sub-sector             expenditure is envisaged to increase from a value equivalent to 18.6
remains highly sensitive to security developments within the East            percent of GDP in FY 2014/15 to 22.1 percent in FY 2015/16. This figure
Africa and wider Great Lakes region. Within the industrial sector, the       is consistent with the budget that was presented to parliament, but
rate of growth of the construction sub-sector is projected to accelerate     higher than the figure of Shs 18.34 trillion presented in the budget
to approximately 10 percent per annum, as public investments take            strategy, to Shs 24.5 trillion. This increase was a result of adjustments
off and FDI in extractive industries boosts construction activities.         to the budget to capture the planned roll-over of securities, the value
The manufacturing sub-sector is expected to grow at an annual rate           of which amounted to Shs 4.79 trillion, and of external grants, the
of approximately 7.6 percent, an acceleration from that recorded in          value of which amounted to Shs 1.5 trillion.




16
This increase will be the result of net lending and investments            budget allocated for public sector management and for accountability
in hydro projects yet again being shifted to the subsequent year,          sectors has been reduced, with this proportion declining to 11.9
necessitating an increase in the allocation to capital expenditure         percent, down from the figure of 13.3 percent that had been budgeted
from 7.9 percent to 11.3 percent in FY 2015/16. According to the FY        in FY 2013/14. The proportion of the budget allocated to the health
2015/16 National Budget, 30 percent of the budget will be allocated        sector will be 8.4 percent. Even with new measures aimed at widening
for the development of roads and energy structure (see Figure 11),         the revenue base and at improving tax administration, only meager
in line with the Government’s strategy to prioritize measures to           improvements in collections have been recorded, with the total
address Uganda’s infrastructure gap. The Government has increased          domestic revenue forecast to reach a value equivalent to 13.6 percent
the allocation to roads infrastructure by 39 percent and to energy         of GDP. As a result, the fiscal deficit will widen from the equivalent of
infrastructure by 55 percent. At the same time, the proportion of the      4.5 percent of GDP in FY 2014/15 to 7 percent in FY 2015/16.



     Figure 11: Infrastructure sectors getting the largest allocation of the budget

         Sectoral allocation (% of total budget)                                           Sectoral growth rates (% per annum)




     Source. Ministry of Finance



With the Government’s expressed resolve to use external                    “institutionalize a rigorous appraisal system” for screening investment
resources to finance large infrastructure projects, more than              projects to improve their implementation. However, in addition to
80 percent of the fiscal deficit will be funded through external           building capacity in the area of project appraisal, it is also necessary
borrowing. The value of net external financing is projected to reach       to complete work to strengthen the entire public investment
the equivalent of 5 percent of GDP. With the decline in the value of       management system, with this work already having commenced with
concessional donor inflows, the value of loans from commercial             support from World Bank (see Box 2).
sources (non-concessional loans) will reach the equivalent of 3.9
percentage points of GDP. Domestic financing is forecast to reduce
to about 2 percent of GDP, but will be at relatively high cost as
demonstrated by recent auctions                                                      the contribution of the tourism
The increased emphasis on capital expenditure over the past                          sub-sector will most likely
three years has been intended to address existing infrastructure
deficits, which continue to be a major constraint to the
                                                                                     increase, benefiting from the
development of the private sector. Unfortunately, key public                         depreciation in the value of the
investment projects have not been executed on time because of
procedural and financial delays. The construction of two hydro power                 shilling, which makes Uganda
projects (Karuma and Isimba) is two years behind schedule, while the                 a cheaper, more attractive
construction of the infrastructure required to facilitate the production
of oil is yet to commence, making the date for the commencement of                   destination
oil production highly uncertain. The FY 2015/16 Budget Framework
Paper acknowledges that project appraisal is weak and promises to


                                                                                                                                                  17
  Box 2: Strengthening Public Investment Management in Uganda for Improved Efficiency



Uganda ranks 46th out of 71 countries in the                   Public Investment Management Index (PIMI)
IMF’s public investment efficiency index (PIMI).                                PIMI        Appraisal     Selection      Implementation        Evaluation
Its scores are particularly poor with respect
                                                               Uganda           0.36          0.20            0.70                 0.38            0.18
to project appraisal, implementation and
                                                               EAC              0.38          0.30            0.45                 0.53            0.23
evaluation (Box 2). The Country Economic
                                                               SSA              0.38          0.33            0.45                 0.48            0.28
Memorandum (CEM 2015) argues that improved
                                                               LIC              0.47          0.21            0.28                 0.30            0.20
efficiency in public sector spending would lead
                                                               MIC              0.57          0.21            0.30                 0.28            0.22
to higher GDP growth rates. In other words,
higher growth would be achieved using fewer
resources. Public Investment Management (PIM) systems need to improve, in terms of strategic guidance for public projects (alignment to
NDP priorities and adoption of minimum technical and financial standards), project selection, budgeting and implementation (integration
into the budget cycle and medium-term expenditure frameworks), project audit and evaluation. Improving the efficiency of public investment
management (PIM), in terms of project appraisal, selection, implementation and evaluation, would increase the fiscal space available to
developing countries, like Uganda, to invest in vital infrastructure projects much needed for growth and development.

The Government of Uganda has already taken steps to address the shortcomings in the area of PIM. The restructuring of the Ministry of Finance
to create a department in charge of Project Analysis and PPP is already a positive step forward. The World Bank is providing a technical
assistance for strengthening PIM to the Government of Uganda through a DfID trust fund. The aim of this technical assistance is threefold: (a)
developing public investment guidelines and manuals; (b) capacity building; and (c) establishing an institutional organization, framework and
arrangements to improve PIM System. The following activities are being prioritized in the context of the TA: (i) Simplified Manual for Public
Investment Appraisal; (ii) PIM Framework with recommendations on how the Government can improve the public management process to select
better projects; (iii) Training activities in Log Frame Approach, Cost Benefit Analysis and Cost Effectiveness for public officials; and (iv) Action Plan
with recommendations to establish an institutional organization, framework and arrangements to improve PIM System.


Source: World Bank, 2015. Uganda Country Economic Memorandum




If implemented in accordance with its stated aims, the Public                   emergency spending, the need for which may emerge during the
Financial Management (PFM) Act 2015 should result in significant                course of year. Hence, it eliminates the need for supplementary
improvements in the area of fiscal policy management. The PFM                   budgets and in-year budget shifts between sectors. This is a significant
Act covers many aspects of fiscal policy management, ranging from               measure, given that these two factors have negatively impacted the
measures to improve transparency to the development of systems                  credibility of the budget in recent years. In addition, with the PFM Act
for the management of petroleum revenues (See Box 3). Already,                  mandating measures to improve transparency, the budget approved
the realignment of the budget timetable has enabled the budget to               by the Parliament now has to include all securities and expenditures
be passed by Parliament before the beginning of the financial year.             related to external grants.
This has removed uncertainties resulting from government entities
spending on ‘vote on account’, an allowed spending of a portion of              Over the medium term, if the public investment program takes off to
the approved budget, before it is approved by parliament. For the FY            remove constraints to growth; if the new Public Financial Management
2015/16 budget, the preparation, processing and approval processes              Act is implemented in a manner that improves financial management
need to be shifted forward. This enables budget implementation to               systems; and if activities related to oil intensify to drive the level
proceed immediately at the beginning of the financial year, one factor          of private investment, Uganda’s rate of economic growth should
that is expected to improve the absorption and implementation of the            increase gradually, again reaching and perhaps even exceeding
budget. For the first time, the budget has also included a contingency          recent historical average rates of 7-8 percent. With domestic revenues
allocation, with clear conditions on usage. This is meant to facilitate         improving only marginally, the increases required for infrastructure




18
investments will result in an expanding fiscal deficit, which is expected     will largely be driven by the exploitation of the country’s oil resources
to decline by about 2020. The forecast also assumes that inflationary         and associated activities. It may also be driven by the removal of
pressures will be minimal beyond 2016 national elections and that the         constraints affecting land markets to bolster access to credit; by the
ongoing weakness of the global economy will have a disinflationary            development of infrastructure, especially within urban centers; and by
effect into the medium term. This increased rate of private investment        more efficient and effective rural development.




       Box 3: Uganda Public Financial Management (PFM) Act, 2015

The PFM Act was enacted in March 2015. It is a major milestone that consolidates earlier existing laws on the management (collection, allocation
and utilization) of public finances. It also updates existing PFM laws to accommodate emerging challenges. The PFM Act 2015 aims to streamline
and ensure efficient management of public resources. The salient points of the PFM act include:

•	   A Charter of Fiscal Responsibility that is aimed to ensure sound fiscal and macroeconomic management.

This Charter requires that an elected government will, within three months following elections, be required to prepare and submit to Parliament
a Charter of Fiscal Responsibility that will: (i) provide measureable objectives for the fiscal policy for the next 3 years; (ii) explain the methodology
that will be used to measure government against set objectives; (iii) list sources of data; (iv) demonstrate how the fiscal objectives are consistent
with prudent macroeconomic management; and (v) consistently provide an economic and fiscal update on the set objectives.

•	   The Budget calendar should ensure that the budget for each financial year is effective as of the start of that financial year.

This is aimed at ensuring predictability and timely availability of budget resources, thereby reducing budget implementation challenges. The
budget for the subsequent year is required to be approved by Parliament on May 31, before the resumption of the fiscal year. This budget
becomes effective on July 1, at the start of the fiscal year. This replaces the system where budget would be read to parliament in June and
became effective on September 1, allowing spending agents to depend on ‘vote on account’ funding for the first quarter of the year.

•	   Strict alignment of the budget with the National Development Plan.

The annual budget shall be consistent with the NDP, the Charter of Fiscal Responsibility and the Budget Framework paper. As such, the annual
budget shall be accompanied by a certificate of compliance with the annual budget of the previous financial year, with this certificate to be
issued by the National Planning Authority. This is expected to limit in-year budget deviations that are inconsistent with approved budgets and
NDP.

•	   Strict reporting requirements in PFM and budget cycle.

•	   The establishment of a contingency fund to accommodate unforeseen emerging budget priorities. This is intended to limit in year budget
     cuts for ‘weak’ sectors.

•	   Removes flexibility of accounting officers to accumulate budget arrears.

•	   A vote shall not take any credit from a local company or body unless it has unpaid domestic arrears from debt incurred in a previous
     financial year. In addition, it has capacity to pay for expenditure from the approved estimates as appropriated by Parliament for that
     financial year.

•	   Provides legal and regulatory framework for the collection, allocation and management of petroleum revenue

The PFM Act 2015 provides for the establishment of a Petroleum Fund in which all petroleum revenues that accrue to Government will be paid.
Further, the Act provides for guidelines for collection, deposits, withdrawals, and transfers to the consolidated fund of petroleum revenues into
and from the Fund; the reporting and accountability modes, including requiring that reports of the petroleum fund are presented to Parliament
semi-annually by April 1 and December 31 every year. Amongst other matters, these reports should cover flows, volumes and sources of revenues
in the fund. The Act also provides for the establishment of a Petroleum Revenue Investment Reserve under Parliamentary oversight, as well as
guidelines and management for investments under the petroleum revenue investment reserve.


Source: Ministry of Finance




                                                                                                                                                     19
2.2 I n t er n a l r i sks a re the mos t s i gni f ica nt,                 number of hydro projects, oil refineries, oil pipe lines and numerous
b ut e x t er n a l r is ks a ls o e xi s t                                 transport infrastructure projects, the total value of the required
                                                                            investments is significant. Thus, there is a significant potential for
                                                                            financing risks if these investments are not properly managed and
The economic outlook faces a number of risks, with the majority             sequenced 7. In the short to medium term, use of domestic resources
of these risks relating to fiscal management. The immediate risk            will be limited by the shallow capital market, as under subscription of
relates to fiscal management in the context of pressures to increase        auctions for government securities.
spending during the election year. With inflationary pressures already
threatening stability, any unwarranted increases in expenditure may         A more expansionary fiscal policy will also result in higher levels
result in increases to the rate of inflation and to lower than expected     of debt, the sustainability of which largely depends on whether
levels of economic activity. This occurred during the 2011 election         the public investment program generates a strong private sector
period, when inflationary pressures resulting from exogenous causes         response that results in increased growth and increases to the
were exacerbated by the excessive use of government savings to              value of domestic revenues. Even with the anticipated investments,
finance expenditures driven by electoral pressures, pushing the             the risk of debt distress is still low for Uganda. The most recent Joint
rate of inflation to double digit figures. This pressure can come in        IMF-World Bank Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA), conducted in
different modes. For example, in complete disregard of a moratorium         June 2015, indicates that Uganda remains at a low level of risk of
on creation of districts which became effective three years ago,            debt distress. The risk level remains low because the bulk of the
parliament is considering to create four new districts. This move           debt derives from loans made on concessional terms, meaning that
will increase the public administration budget for FY 2016/17 by            the debt will be paid back over a period of at least 30 years and
Shs 236 billion, before consideration is made for the additional 22         at an interest rate not higher than three percent per annum. The
districts planned to be created over the next five years, all of which      Government’s ambitious plan to scale up public investment remains
will increase the total number of districts from the current 111 to 137.    consistent with the achievement of debt sustainability. Nonetheless,
Yet creation of other administration units, including sub-counties,         the debt service-to-revenue ratio is high owing to the relatively low
constituencies, and municipalities, will expand the size of parliament,     revenues and the short maturity of domestic debt. In addition, there
and have major budgetary implications. In addition, the elections           has been a recent shift towards increased domestic borrowing, with
may result in increased anxiety and uncertainty, particularly if the        the share of domestic loans increasing to 50 percent by FY 2014/15.
political climate deteriorates and/or civil unrest occurs. This may have    If this trend continues, it could crowd out private sector investments.
a negative impact on business and economic activity, especially in          While the period of maturity of government securities has been
urban areas, thereby undermining the projected economic recovery.           expanded to 15 years, with shallow capital markets, securities
                                                                            with maturity periods of less than one-year constitute 48 percent
With poor performance in the area of domestic revenue                       of the total. This short term maturation period, together with the
mobilization and considerable uncertainty regarding the                     Government’s low levels of domestic revenue collection, creates a
commencement of oil production and the subsequent flow of                   significant financing risk. Another critical factor affecting sustainability
revenues, there remains considerable risks to the financing of              is the economic viability and appropriate cost recovery of the new
investments in the country. With Government plans to invest in a            projects, which will continue to require a careful sequencing of
                                                                            execution that would be compatible with the economy’s absorptive
                                                                            capacity and the Government’s implementation capacities.


      creation of other administration                                      Uganda remains vulnerable to a number of external shocks,
                                                                            including shocks related to fluctuations in the prices of its main
      units, including sub-counties,                                        exports and imports and to regional security. As has been clearly

      constituencies, and municipalities,                                   demonstrated over the past few years, volatile commodity prices
                                                                            and financial distress in industrialized countries can affect Uganda’s
      will expand the size of parliament,                                   economy to a significant degree. In particular, variations in world
                                                                            food and energy prices can have adverse effects on the country’s
      and have major budgetary                                              external position, and cause or exacerbate domestic inflation,
      implications                                                          as occurred in early 2010. While low oil prices are beneficial to
                                                                            Uganda’s balance of trade, it has increased the risk to investment


7
    See discussion in the Fifth World Bank Economic Update, February 2015




20
plans in the oil sector. If oil prices take longer to recover from the     2.3 A cce l e r at ing g r o wt h r e q uir e s drillin g
current levels of US $ 40 per barrel, compared to the estimated            d e e pe r f o r pr o d uct iv it y impr ov e men ts
break-even price of US $ 60 per barrel for its production in Uganda,
it may even require different choices with respect to the phasing
of refinery and pipeline investments. A prolonged low economic             Uganda’s economic performance in the period from 1992 to 2010
activity in China will make Uganda’s imports from there cheaper,           was very impressive, with high rates of growth of income, poverty
but its impact on global demand could increase volatility in global        reduction and increased consumption levels for the poorest.
commodity prices, including oil prices, may further reduce the value       During those two decades, the annual rate of growth of GDP
of the country’s exports; exacerbate pressure on the currency; and         averaged 7.5 percent. The proportion of households living under the
increased inflationary pressures, all of which may contribute to a         national poverty line stood at 19.5 percent in 2013, from 52 percent
slowdown in economic growth. It could also result in lower capital         in 1992. Consumption by the bottom 40 percent grew at an average
inflows, including inflows from remittances and in the form of aid.        of around 3 percent over the twenty year period from 1993 to 2013,
This might result in significant additional pressures on the balance       which is higher than most countries in the region. Strong performance
of payments, which would require the local currency to depreciate          was driven first by the reconstruction effort, and then by the gradual
further to maintain competitiveness, rather than a depletion of foreign    build-up of human and physical capital, following the wide ranging
currency reserves or reduction in the value of the local currency. While   reforms starting in the 1990s. During that time, per capita income
depreciation in the value of the shilling would ensure that exports        grew at an average annual rate of 3.7 percent. Over the same period,
remain competitive, it could also lead to increased inflationary           the number of new jobs in the formal sector increased by an average
pressures. The country’s trade prospects are also influenced by the        annual rate of 6 percent. If Uganda had continued to grow at that
security situation in neighboring countries, Burundi, the Democratic       same rate, it would currently have a level of per capita income that is
Republic of Congo (DRC), and South Sudan, although the recently            7.7 percent higher in real terms than its actual realized level.
signed peace accord between Government of South Sudan and the
rebel factions, may reduce the threat of conflict in that part of the
region.




                                                                                                          Mukasa’s carpentry workshop in
                                                                                                     Gayaza, outskits of Kampala - keeping
                                                                                                       the informal sector growing (Sheila
                                                                                                                           Gashishiri, 2014)




                                                                                                                                                  21
In the past five years, economic performance has deteriorated                            fundamentally robust enough to sustain long term economic growth.
in terms of a number of indicators. The actual average rate of                           At the aggregate level, the changes to the structure of production from
economic growth since 2010 has been two percentage points lower                          agriculture to services have not been matched by a corresponding
than in the previous period, standing at 5.4 percent. Hence, with the                    change in the structure of the labor force. Consequently, while the
population continuing to grow at a rate in excess of three percent, the                  relative contribution of agriculture to total output has more than
average per capita income has grown by just 2.4 percent per annum.                       halved over the past two decades, sinking to around 25 percent of
With significant FDI inflows; the confirmation of recoverable reserves                   GDP over the past five years, it continues to be the primary source
of oil in 2006; and plans for its production announced soon after,                       of employment for more than 75 percent of the labor force. At the
this period should have been associated with an increase in private                      micro level, growth has been underpinned by a proliferation of small
investment, particularly in the period during which the infrastructure                   low productivity firms, both within agricultural and non-agricultural
for the exploitation of oil resources should have been developed.                        sectors. Uganda’s business growth has primarily involved low value-
Instead, the average annual rate of growth of private investment has                     added products, as households divest away from agriculture and
declined from 11.2 percent in the two decades prior to 2010, to only                     small-scale entrepreneurs occupy themselves in low-value retail
4.7 percent over the past five years. Across sectors, while services                     services. With the bulk of new firms being established in sectors
remained the largest contributor to GDP, the rate of growth for that                     characterized by low value production, the transformation of
sector has decelerated from 7.8 percent to 6.3 percent. Over the same                    production into manufacturing and higher value-added products
periods, the rate of growth of the manufacturing sector decelerated                      has been slow. Businesses that have recorded increased levels of
from 9.8 percent to 3.0 percent. The rate of growth of the previously                    productivity have done so through the deployment of new technology
booming construction sector also declined from 10.3 percent to                           which partially replaced labor, as has been the case in the financial
below 8.4 percent between these two periods. Agriculture grew at the                     services sub-sector. As stated in the Second Uganda Economic
slowest rate of 1.9 percent per annum over, which was also lower than                    Update, the overall shift in production and employment patterns has
the average rate of growth of 3.1 percent reached in the earlier decade.                 not been growth enhancing because resources are shifting away from
                                                                                         high productivity sectors to low productivity sectors. This could at
In spite of the adverse impact of the successive exogenous shocks,                       least partially explain the overall slowdown in the rate of economic
the deceleration in the rate of Uganda’s economic growth can                             growth.
primarily be explained by the failure to achieve productivity
improvements that sustain long term growth. These improvements                           For Uganda to sustain a high rate of economic growth, the country
would not only drive long-term growth, they would also make the                          has to either raise the level of productivity in sectors where
country more resilient to exogenous shocks. Successive shocks,                           the largest proportion of its labor force is employed; to move
both internal and external, including a global economic slowdown,                        people out of low productivity sectors; or both. The approaches
regional disturbances, macroeconomic instability characterized by                        adopted to identify the most binding constraints to the productivity
double digit inflation, and disruption in aid due to corruption cases,                   improvements in both rural and urban areas, and to implement
have all affected Uganda’s macroeconomic performance. These                              policies that can address these constraints, are commendable.
shocks occurred in the context of the form of growth that is not                         Indeed, efforts to build both physical and human capital by investing
                                                                                         in infrastructure and social services can yield impressive results, if
                                                                                         appropriately implemented. However, if other fundamental factors of
                                                                                         production, such as land, are not managed appropriately, increases
      while the period of maturity of                                                    to productivity either within agriculture or within the non-agricultural
      government securities has been                                                     sectors will be limited. Across space, this will apply to activities in rural
                                                                                         areas, and within urban areas, which have and will continue to be the
      expanded to 15 years, shallow                                                      main platform for raising productivity across the country 8 . At present,
                                                                                         current investments in infrastructure, particularly those involving road
      capital markets and securities with
                                                                                         construction, face a number of challenges, including persistent delays
      maturity periods of less than one-                                                 and high costs resulting from issues related to land acquisition.

      year constitute 48 percent of the                                                  Land is a vitally important factor in any country’s production

      total                                                                              functions. Land is a vital prerequisite for the implementation of
                                                                                         almost all economic activities, except the most sophisticated of


8
    World Bank 2015, Uganda Economic Update, 5th Edition. “The Growth Challenge: Can Ugandan Cities Get to Work?” Washington DC.




22
virtual services. In particular, land is required as the geographical      in the central region, where the country’s major urban centers are
base for agricultural and manufacturing activities. Land serves as one     located. These areas have also been the sources of growth and off-
of the most significant forms of collateral for access to finance. Land    farm job creation.
provides stability for its owners, who can leverage land ownership to
facilitate involvement in productive economic activities. Combined         As global experience demonstrates, Uganda can raise productivity
with labor and capital, land forms one of the most significant factors     even with rising densities if a significant proportion of the
of production. Land usage determines how economic activities are           increasingly large labor force is engaged in higher value economic
re-structured as demographic patterns evolve; how urban areas              activities. While countries such as Belgium, the United Kingdom,
develop; how governments source revenues for their operations; and         and Switzerland have population densities comparable to or indeed
how people live and interact. With its fundamental importance in all       far greater than those of Uganda, their economic output, both
these areas, land use has a significant impact on a country’s economic     in per capita and absolute terms, is many times greater. With its
output; on its level of productivity; and on the degree of inclusiveness   population density of 194 persons per square kilometer, the total
of its growth processes.                                                   value of Uganda’s economic output in 2014 amounted to US $ 26
                                                                           billion. By contrast, Belgium, with a population density of 371 persons
Uganda’s rapidly expanding population is placing increasing                per square kilometer, generated an economic output equivalent
pressure on land usage. This has significant implications for              to a value of US $ 533 billion of GDP in the same year. Similarly, the
the country’s productivity. The Uganda Bureau of Statistics has            United Kingdom, with a density of 267 persons per square kilometer,
estimated that by August 2014, Uganda’s population had reached             generated an economic output equivalent to a value of US $ 2,941
34.7 million, with an average annual rate of population growth of 3.0      billion of GDP. Similar experiences across the world demonstrate that
percent. Based on these figures, Uganda has a population density of        land can be managed appropriately to generate rapid and sustainable
194 persons per square kilometer. This compares to the figure of 80        growth, even in the context of high population densities.
persons per square kilometer in Kenya, and 116 in Ghana. With the
majority of the population still living in rural areas, where the main     The Government’s focus on agricultural transformation is
source of livelihood is agriculture, land has been absorbing the rapidly   intended to raise productivity in rural areas. However, for this
expanding labor force without corresponding increases to the level         transformation to occur, land must be utilized appropriately.
of productivity. As the population continues to increase, patterns of      Currently, Uganda is a low income country whose labor force is
land use and ownership are expected to change. If the appropriate          predominantly employed in the agricultural sector. With the bulk
policies are not implemented and the appropriate institutions are          of those involved in agriculture operating in subsistence farming
not developed, then these changes may result in a decline in the           operations, the agricultural sector has not responded effectively
overall productivity of the land, and possibly the increased occurrence    to changes in the terms of trade. The persistently low rates of
of social conflict. At the same time, a significant and increasing         growth achieved by the agricultural sector are largely due to low
proportion of the population now lives in urban areas. These areas         productivity growth. With 58 percent of agricultural output being
will continue to be the drivers of growth, facilitating economic           derived from small farms of less than one hectare, and another 38
transformation through a shift towards higher value added activities.      percent from farms of not more than five hectares, achievement of
So far, the highest rates of growth in population density are recorded     a structural transformation involving the smooth implementation of




     Organizing agricultural land in
     Mbarara, South west Uganda (Great
     Lakes Film Production Ltd, 2013)




                                                                                                                                                    23
smallholder agricultural commercialization makes good economic                          activities and the labor force moves away from low productivity
sense. For these farms to thrive, land rights must be secure and                        activities in subsistence agriculture, the more rapid the rate of
further fragmentation of farmland avoided to ascertain availability                     economic transformation. Within rural areas, economic activity
of minimum sizes that can support commercialization 9, in addition                      will remain fairly widely distributed with productivity differences
to provision of rural connectivity, rural finance accessibility, and                    determined by soil fertility, climate and access to technology
agricultural services. Larger scale agricultural investments, on the                    and market infrastructure. In urban areas, the level of economic
other hand, require access to a secure land market which can provide                    development is determined by the extent to which land is adaptable
the land in appropriate size and no encumbrances.                                       to changing market demand. This raises two questions:

For the process of urbanization to take place rapidly and                               1.	 Is the manner in which land is managed in Uganda promoting
efficiently, proper land use is critically important to ensuring                             productivity improvement and supportive of the transformation
that these areas drive growth in productivity and productive                                 process?
employment. The economic benefits of urban growth come from                             2.	 What can Uganda do to ensure that this fundamental factor of
exploiting economies of scale; from agglomeration effects; and from                          production supports economic transformation?
effective substitution between land and non-land inputs. One of the
most important pillars of an efficient city is appropriate land use,
which in turn is determined by land policies and institutions that
support urban efficiency. Increasing the density of economic activities
is one of the key features of successful urbanization, enabled by using
land for higher value activities over time.

The Government’s ambitious program to develop infrastructure
has faced major implementation challenges. The bulk of these
challenges relate to lack of proper land use policy; weak land
administration and management systems (including for valuation,
information storage and retrieval); and corruption. In a country where
most land is privately owned, public projects that require land face
major costs related to compensation, especially where new roads are                         as can be seen from the experience
being constructed or existing ones are extended. By June 2015, 18
major road upgrading projects, with a total budget of Shs 4.65 trillion,
                                                                                            of other countries, the ability
required payment of compensation for land estimated to reach a                              of Uganda to leverage land use
value equivalent to between 3 to 24 percent of the budget, depending
on the location of the road. In addition to the cost of compensation,
                                                                                            to promote positive economic
these projects face major delays caused by the need to resolve issues                       development will depend
related to land acquisition, with these delays further increasing the
cost of construction. As a result of these factors, all but one of the
                                                                                            greatly on the level of security
Government’s major road construction projects have been subject to                          of land tenure and the ease
significant delays 10.
                                                                                            with which land rights can be
If land is used efficiently, it can support the processes of
                                                                                            transferred between different
agricultural transformation and urbanization, enabling the
country to raise its level of productivity and achieve the economic                         entities, including individuals,
transformation to which it aspires. As in many other successfully
                                                                                            households and firms and
developing regions around the world, transformation of land use is
a key characteristic of economic transformation. As a general rule,                         government.
the greater the extent to which land is used for higher productivity




9
     World Bank 2012, Uganda Promoting Inclusive Growth: Transforming Farms, Human Capital and Economic Geography, Washington DC.
10
     Uganda National Roads Authority, June 2015, Status report on Road Development Projects, Kampala, Uganda



24
Kampalas’ sprawling slums alongside
skyscrapers due to unplanned
urbanization Great Lakes Film
Production Ltd, 2014)



                                      25
26
     Part

            2
                           Simplifying registration with technology – Kampala’s aerial map
                           of cadastral data to support land registration (Ministry of Lands,
                           Housing and Urban Development, 2015)




Proper land administration and management :
A Key to productivity improvements, but how can it be done?




                                                                                          27
     Uganda is characterized by a high level of land tenure insecurity, with weak institutions for land
     management and administration, which factors are constraining the country from exploiting land to
     accelerate the pace of agricultural transformation; to plan and build effective cities; and to generally
     shift the economy to higher productivity levels. The cost of insecurity is high. For instance, It is estimated
     that land related disputes result in a loss of agricultural productivity of at least 5 to 11 percent of the total
     value of agricultural output. In addition, failure to manage land appropriately means that urban areas
     are failing to reach the level of density necessary to exploit economies of agglomeration.


      Improving the land tenure security and developing land markets requires a multipronged approach.
     On one hand Government can adopt measures to accelerate the registration of individually owned
     land, including use of innovative, cost efficient technology such as that used in Rwanda. On the other
     the institutions responsible for land administration, including its valuation as well as dispute resolution,
     must be strengthened. Yet in spite of the many policies pertaining, there are critical policy gaps to close
     to promote security and marketability of land.


     Only 20 percent of land in Uganda is registered, the bulk of which under the mailo land tenure system.
     Special attention ought to be given to the remaining 80 percent which, apart from holding a huge
     potential, is also more complicated to register as it includes land in northern and north-eastern Uganda
     that is predominantly communally owned. In addition to establishing communal land owning groups
     as legal entities whose land can be registered, linkages between communally owned land groups and
     investors should be established to negotiate legally binding stakes in promising investments.


     Improving land use should not be restricted to private land, which could be taxed to discourage the
     practice of the acquisition of land as a non-productive investment, but also make better use of land
     owned by Government by registering the land and rectifying processes for its allocation. In addition,
     development of the National Urban Policy and National Housing Policy must be accelerated to guide the
     use of land in urban areas to promote more efficient and effective urbanization.




28
         3.Faster economic transformation
         calls for better land management?

The extent to which the use of land supports economic
growth and overall development depends to a significant
degree on the level of security of land rights.

It also depends on the degree to which these rights can be transferred between individuals,
households, and firms and/or acquired by government institutions acting in the public
interest, with fair and full compensation paid to the owners of the land in such cases.
While Sub-Saharan Africa is endowed with half of the world’s uncultivated usable land, it is
vulnerable to land grabbing and expropriation without adequate compensation, as about
90 percent of its rural land is undocumented.11 In fact, in the last 10 years, investors have
claimed millions of hectares of agricultural land in violation of the principles of responsible
agro-investment in an environment that neither protects the land rights of local communities
nor secures long term interests of investors.12 Thus, despite the extent of the land available
for agriculture, a large proportion of Africa’s population is affected by food insecurity and
productivity gaps;13 land degradation; and the proliferation of slums. It is no coincidence that
much of the continent remains mired in poverty. Is Uganda much different from comparable
countries on the continent? The next section attempts to address this question by exploring
the state of tenure security and the state of land markets that enable or constrain the transfer
of land rights from one entity or individual to another in Uganda. It then attempts to analyze
how these factors affect productivity, investments and growth.

                                                                                                                           the 1995
3.1 Rights to land ownership in Uganda remain insecure                                                                     Constitution vests
                                                                                                                           radical title, the
The three most important factors determining the level of land tenure security are: (i)                                    ultimate ownership
the existence of legally binding rights to an area of land; (ii) the existence of a system
                                                                                                                           of land, in the
to document, store and retrieve information regarding this land and the nature of the
rights to it; and (iii) the degree of efficiency and integrity of a system or mechanism                                    people of Uganda,
for resolving disputes related to those rights. In terms of the first of these factors, the                                enabling rights to a
legal rights to an area of land are ordinarily established by a formal system of tenure, the
nature of which is determined by the existing laws and regulations in the country. In terms                                particular piece of
of the second and third of these factors, the management of information and the resolution                                 land to be held in
of disputes are determined by the existence of institutions with a legal mandate and the
capacities to enable them to manage these issues.
                                                                                                                           accordance with the
                                                                                                                           freehold, leasehold,
                                                                                                                           mailo land and
                                                                                                                           customary land
11
  Byamugisha, F. F. K. 2013. “Securing Africa’s Land for Shared Prosperity: A program to Scale up Reforms and
Investments”. Africa Development Forum Series. Washington DC. World Bank.
                                                                                                                           tenure system
12
  Cotula, L. 2013. “The Great African Land Grab? Agricultural Investments and the Global Food System”. African
Arguments.

 Deininger, K., D. Byerlee, J. Lindsay, A. Norton, H. Selod, and M. Stickler. 2011. “Rising global interest in farmland:
13

Can it yield sustainable and equitable benefits?” Washington, D.C.: World Bank.




                                                                                                                                              29
The current land tenure system in Uganda has evolved over                with evolving government policies, the Government may regulate
a long period, with good progress being made in terms of                 the use of land in the public interest. Uganda’s land tenure system is
formulating and promulgating legislation to form a basis for             characterized by three positive aspects that conform to good practice.
security of land tenure. However, additional progress needs              Firstly, unlike in many other countries, where radical title is vested in
to be made to improve this legislation and to ensure that it is          the state, in Uganda, radical title is vested in the people. Secondly,
actually implemented appropriately. A number of acts of legislation      customary tenure is legally recognized. Thirdly, the residual interest
were promulgated and implemented during the colonial period              of the state to control land use in public interest is tightly defined in
to establish the foundations for a system for the management of          law to ensure that public interest does not include investment for
land and land rights. However, in the postcolonial period, the most      private gain. These characteristics give Uganda’s land tenure system
significant act of legislation in these terms has been Uganda’s 1995     a solid legal foundation for the efficient and effective management of
Constitution (see Annex 1). The 1995 Constitution vests radical title,   land. However, its mailo land tenure system, which is a specific form
the ultimate ownership of land, in the people of Uganda, enabling        of freehold tenure with strong historical roots, results in overlapping
rights to a particular piece of land to be held in accordance with the   land rights between the landlord and the tenants of the land, with
freehold, leasehold, mailo land and customary land tenure system.        the latter being legally recognized as lawful or bona fide occupants
It is estimated that 2 percent of land is held under freehold, 4 under   with inheritable and transactable rights similar to those of landlords.
leasehold, 14 percent under mailo, and 80 percent under customary        In addition, while the legal framework for the management of land is
ownership, and (see Figure 12). However, in all these cases, the         relatively strong, its implementation has often been uneven.
Government has residual authority to control land use in public
interest. Thus, under laws enacted by parliament and in accordance



         Figure 12: Uganda’s diverse systems of land tenure with that in the central region even more complex

                                                                                       Central region tenure system




  Source: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development




At least until recently, Uganda’s system for the documentation of        only approximately 20 percent of Uganda’s land is formally registered.
land rights and the management of related information has been           While this is in fact significantly higher than the average for Sub-
extremely dysfunctional. This dysfunctionality often resulted in         Saharan Africa, which stands at only around 10 percent, it still means
inefficiencies and created opportunities for corruption, with the land   that approximately 80 percent of Uganda’s land is undocumented
rights of many landowners undocumented and access to information         and informally administered. This compares poorly to Western
even for the documented owners being severely constrained. In total,     European countries, where on average more than 95 percent of land




30
is documented.14 With the limited extent of registration in Uganda,                           matters are taken into account.17 In Ethiopia, one-third to one-half
a significant proportion of land remains vulnerable to land grabbing                          of all cases within the formal judicial system are related to land
and expropriation without compensation. The recent initiatives
                                                      15
                                                                                              disputes,18 while in Uganda, the proportion reaches more than 50
to accelerate registration of land; to store related information in                           percent of cases.
an easily accessible electronic format; and to improve access to
this information, are highly commendable. These initiatives aim to                            Land disputes have historically been concentrated in the densely
register one million rural land parcels (out of a total of approximately                      populated central region, an area which has been characterized
7 million rural parcels) within five years. If achieved, this will increase                   by relatively unclear land rights. However, increasingly, such
the proportion of registered land to more than 30 percent. This will                          disputes are also taking place in areas experiencing speculative
bring Uganda close to the level achieved by Kenya, where the figure                           economic booms and where institutions have been weakened
stands at approximately 40 percent. However, even greater efforts                             by prolonged conflict. The hot spots for land-related disputes have
will be needed if Uganda is to reach the level achieved by the top                            mainly been located in the central region and in Kibaale, with many
performers within Sub-Saharan Africa. For example, in Ethiopia, more                          of these disputes involving mailo land.19 In recent years, the number
than 50 percent of land is titled. Similarly, Rwanda has increased                            of disputes between investors and local communities in the Albertine
the proportion of land with formal titles from less than 10 percent to                        region, West Nile, Acholi, Karamoja and other oil and mineral-rich
more than 60 percent over a period of five years and fully digitalized                        regions has escalated due to frictions arising from conflict of interest
information related to land records.16                                                        and speculative land buying.20 In the northern region and Teso sub-
                                                                                              region, where a significant proportion of land is communally owned,
Given the overlapping land rights and the poor state of                                       demand for land has increased dramatically as a large number of
documentation related to these rights in Uganda, cases of conflict                            internally displaced people have returned to their natal districts at the
related to land have been common, particularly in cases of land                               same time as investor interest has also increased significantly due to
involving mailo tenure and in post-conflict and oil exploration                               the cessation of conflict.21 Similarly, in a number of areas in the Acholi,
areas. The frequent occurrence of such conflicts has heightened the                           Elgon and Karamoja sub-regions, members of local communities
state of insecurity of land tenure, with frequent illegal displacement of                     have contested the gazetting of land by the Uganda Wildlife Authority
tenants and stalled investments, all of which have significant negative                       (UWA), especially where they have not been effectively engaged in the
implications for the economy. According to the Uganda National                                policy change processes.22 Regions with a significant proportion of
Household Survey of 2005/06, it is estimated that land disputes affect                        immigrants, especially in Bunyoro, have also faced conflicts as a result
6.5 percent of agricultural landholdings. It must be acknowledged                             of the influx of non-indigenous people, with this influx weakening and
that this situation is not unique to Uganda, with a similar situation                         challenging traditional systems of land administration.23
prevailing in other countries in the region. While there are no accurate
data to assess and compare the prevalence of land disputes in Africa,                         The lack of effective institutions and resolution mechanisms has
anecdotal evidence from caseloads in judicial systems indicates that                          exacerbated land disputes, particularly in the areas where long
land disputes are common throughout the region. For example, in                               periods of conflict have eroded or even erased the authority of
Ghana, it is estimated that 50 percent of all new civil cases relate to                       the responsible institutions. Formal institutions with a mandate
land disputes, with this proportion increasing if land-related criminal                       to resolve land disputes are supervised by the Land Division of the


14
  BSchmid, H. C. U and C. Hertel, 2005. Real Property Law and Procedure in the European Union: General Report, Final Version. European University Institute Florence/European
Private Law Forum Deutsches Notarinstitut Wurzburg.
 Byamugisha, F. F. K. 2013. Securing Africa’s Land for Shared Prosperity: A program to Scale up Reforms and Investments. Africa Development Forum Series. Washington DC.
15

World Bank.
16
     World Bank 2015, Logistics Performance Index, Washington DC (forthcoming)
17
     Ghana Judicial Service, 2010. “Impact analysis of the automated Land Courts in Accra.” Draft Working Paper
18
     Deininger, Selod and Burns 2012. “The Land Governance Assessment Framework: Identifying and Monitoring Good Practice in the Land Sector.” World Bank, Washington, DC
19
  Deininger, K and D. A. Ali, 2008. “Do Overlapping Land Rights Reduce Agricultural Investment? Evidence from Uganda”. American Journal of Agricultural Economics, Vol. 90, No.
4, pp. 869-882, November 2008
 Otim and Mugisa 2014. “Beyond the Reach of the Hoe: The struggle for land and minerals in Northern Uganda”, A Report for Safer World, Preventing Violent Conflict, Building
20

Safer Lives, UK Aid, April 2014
 Human Rights Focus 2013. “Land Conflict Monitoring and Mapping Tool for the Acholi Sub-Region”, Final Report, March 2013. Research conducted under the United Nations
21

Peacebuilding Programme in Uganda. World Bank 2009. Uganda: Post-Conflict Land Policy and Administration Options. The World Bank, AFTAR Report 46110-UG, Washington,
D.C.
 Rugadya, Nsamba-Gayiiya and Kamusiime 2014. “Tenure in Mystery: The Status of Land under Wildlife, Forestry and Mining Concessions in Karamoja Region, Uganda”, Paper
22

prepared for presentation at the “2014 World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty”. The World Bank - Washington DC, March 24-27, 2014.
 Mwesigye and Matsumoto 2014. “Rural-rural Migration and Land Conflicts: Implications on Agricultural Productivity in Uganda”, Paper prepared for presentation at the “2014
23

World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty”. The World Bank - Washington DC, March 24-27, 2014.




                                                                                                                                                                               31
High Court. As with many other areas of the judiciary, this division is     land, and using that land to move out of poverty by achieving higher
seriously understaffed and under-budgeted. Before 2006, the division        levels of productivity and/or consumption. However, when credit
was supported in the implementation of its duties by District Land          markets are underdeveloped, the ability of the poor to access credit to
Tribunals, which though recognized under the law, have ceased               purchase land is limited.
to exist. The system was also intended to incorporate sub-county
land tribunals, which would have eased the pressure on higher               To some extent, Uganda does have active land markets, with
level entities by operating at the sub-county level. However, these         these markets operating at various levels of efficiency and
sub-county land tribunals were abolished by the Land Amendment              effectiveness in different regions and serving different clientele
Act of 2004, which aimed at among other things, to streamline the           across the various sectors. However, as in the case of financial
institutional arrangements for implementation of the Land Act. Their        markets, the level of effectiveness of land markets in Uganda varies
duties were assumed by the magistrates’ courts. The Local Council           considerably both between rural and urban areas, and between
Courts, at the bottom of the hierarchy, are the institutions with which     different regions. In the central region, where a system of individual
members of the public generally have the most frequent contact.             land ownership predominates, land markets function very differently
Given that they are supposed to handle cases without imposing costs         from the north and north east, where a significant proportion of
on litigants, they are the court of choice for most ordinary members of     land is collectively owned. Indeed, with formal titles existing for
the community. However, the very lack of formal remuneration which          most land in central Uganda, this region is characterized by a
is their main attraction creates perverse incentives and opportunities      significantly more active market, without the constraints resulting
for corruption.                                                             from overlapping rights on mailo land. According to the Uganda
                                                                            National Household survey for 2005/06, up to 59 percent of cases
Thus, the formal institutions with a mandate for the resolution of          of acquisition of agricultural land in the central region involved
land disputes are generally weak, under-resourced, and lacking              purchases through formal markets, compared to 47 percent in the
in credibility. At the same time, traditional institutions, which used to   western regions; 39 percent in the eastern region; and 6 percent in
play a significant role in areas of northern and north eastern Uganda       the northern regions. Except for the central region, where it accounts
where communal land ownership systems dominate, have been                   for 40 percent of the land acquisitions, the most dominant mode
weakened by many years of conflict, especially in the Acholi and            of acquisition is inheritance, which accounts for 49 percent of the
Lango sub-regions. Recent efforts by the Government to improve and          acquisitions in western region; 60 percent in eastern region; and
modernize both the formal institutions responsible for land dispute         91 percent in northern region. The low level of participation in the
resolution and their interface with the informal customary institutions     market in the Northern region is mainly because the majority of
that administer undocumented land, are commended and should be              land in this region is communally owned. The Human Rights Watch
accelerated and expanded upon.                                              Report of 2013 states that more than 90 percent of land in the Acholi
                                                                            sub-region is communally owned. There are considerable defects
                                                                            in the land markets in these regions. For example, according to the

3.2 Land markets exist, but are still narrow,                               National Household Survey of 2005/06, due to the lack of clear and
                                                                            secure rights to land, 37 percent of the land cannot be sold; 34 percent
segmented, and inefficient
                                                                            cannot be rented; and 44 percent cannot be used as security for a
                                                                            loan.
As is the case with all forms of assets, the market plays a
                                                                            Even when land markets exist, the acquisition of land for public
significant role in facilitating the achievement of efficiency,
                                                                            investment has been problematic due to the weakness of
enabling the transfer of land from less efficient users to more
                                                                            institutions involved in the valuation of land and to the related
efficient users. In essence, the market provides a means to facilitate
                                                                            high levels of corruption. As most land used for such investments is
a transformation from low to higher productivity activities and to
                                                                            privately owned, the public sector is normally required to compensate
narrow the productivity gap between farms and among firms. To a
                                                                            land owners for the development of public projects such as the
large extent, the level of access to land for households and investors
                                                                            construction of roads and other infrastructure. This requires an
is determined by the existence and operations of land markets on
                                                                            assessment of the required compensation and the raising of funds
the one hand, and that of credit markets to supply funds to facilitate
                                                                            for this compensation. Unless there is a strong capacity and clear
land market transactions on the other. If financial markets are
                                                                            processes for land valuation to determine the appropriate level of
developed and work efficiently, even residents of rural areas engaged
                                                                            compensation, it will not be possible to acquire land for public projects
in agriculture will be able to access finance, using loans to buy or rent




32
in a timely manner, even if a budget for the payment of compensation                           with transferring land, measures to improve the functioning of land
is available. The limited level of capacity to conduct assessments                             markets must include actions to reduce these costs. This is necessary
of the value of land and the limited availability of funds to pay the                          to ensure that land transfers from less efficient producers to more
appropriate level of compensation for the acquisition of this land have                        efficient producers take place fast and at minimum cost, thereby
been major constraints to the implementation of public investments,                            enhancing productivity.
as shown by the case of the construction of the Kampala-Entebbe
Expressway.25                                                                                  In addition to markets for the sale of land, Uganda has historically
                                                                                               had rental markets, with these markets providing access to land
Land markets in Uganda are also characterized by high transaction                              for those who cannot directly buy it. However, the efficiency and
costs. For projects to be attractive or even feasible for investors, the                       effectiveness of these markets has been declining in recent times.
process of acquiring and registering land must be cost efficient and                           Contrary to popular belief, Uganda has historically had active land
time efficient. In Uganda, it takes an average of 43 days to facilitate the                    rental markets. In a cross-country comparative study30 of land markets
transfer of land titles, with the average financial cost amounting to 2.6                      in Sub-Saharan Africa, with a specific focus on Eastern and Southern
percent of the value of the property. This is still better than some other                     Africa, it was found that land markets, particularly informal land rental
countries in the region, with it taking an average of 190 days to facilitate                   markets, are more widely spread and active than had generally been
the transfer of land titles in Angola and with the associated financial                        believed. The study found that land rental markets played a significant
costs of facilitating such a transfer in Lagos, Nigeria, amounting to up to                    role in improving the level of access to land for the land poor and
21 percent of the value of the property. However, the figures in Uganda                        provided rent income for those with land that they could not use
compare unfavorably to the average time for transferring property in                           productively. This finding mitigated fears raised earlier by a number
OECD countries.        26
                                                                                               of researchers that the development of land markets could cause
                                                                                               landlessness and an unhealthy concentration of land ownership.31
Costs associated with corruption also raise the overall transaction
costs for the transfer of land in Uganda. In Uganda, the average
recorded financial cost for transferring property is far lower than the
average of 4 percent of the value of the property in OECD countries.
However, in reality, in Uganda, the actual cost is far higher due to the
requirement to pay bribes to land administration services to facilitate
transactions. In some cases, these costs may be even higher than
the formal costs. In fact, according to Transparency International’s
2013 Global Corruption report, land administration services were
regarded as the third most corrupt public institution, after the police
and the judiciary, with one in five people involved in transactions with
                                                                                                   Similarly, the East African Bribery
institutions responsible for the provision of these services reporting
that they had paid a bribe.27 Similarly, the East African Bribery Index                            Index states that in Uganda, in 2013,
states that in Uganda, in 2013, the average value of a bribe paid                                  the average value of a bribe paid by
by households for land administration services was about US$ 90
(equivalent to UGX 218,722).28 The value of such bribes was the third                              households for land administration
highest in a list of the average value of bribes paid to a total of 10                             services was about US$ 90 (equivalent
institutions, being slightly less than the value of similar bribes in
Kenya, where the value stood at slightly more than US$100 in 2012,
                                                                                                   to UGX 218,722).
or KShs 9,842.29 Given the high formal and hidden costs associated




25
     Uganda Daily Monitor Newspaper, July 11, 2015. “Pending claims holding works on Entebbe Expressway – UNRA”.
26
     World Bank 2014., Doing Business 2015: Going beyond efficiency. Washington, DC: World Bank.
27
     Transparency International 2013. Global Corruption Barometer 2013
28
     Transparency International 2013. Global Corruption Barometer 2013.
29
     Transparency International Kenya 2012. East Africa Bribery Index 2012
 Holden, S. T., K. Otsuka and F. Place (eds.). 2008. The emergence of land markets in Africa: Impacts on poverty, equity and efficiency. Resources for the Future Press,
30

Washington DC.
31
     Sjaastad, E. 2003. “Trends in the emergence of agricultural land markets in Sub-Saharan Africa”. Forum Development Studies 30 (1), 5-28.




                                                                                                                                                                           33
The benefits that could accrue from the efficient functioning of                               markets to facilitate the transfer of land from less efficient producers
rental markets have been corroborated by experiences in other                                  to more efficient producers was higher in land scarce Malawi than in
countries. The ability of such markets to enhance efficiency and                               land abundant Zambia, despite the significant transaction costs which
equity has also been noted in West Africa, where land rental markets                           may hamper efficiency gains from the transactions.35
have a long history and often provide a means to facilitate access
to land for commercial crop production, such as for cocoa farming                              Despite the benefits derived from efficient rental markets,
in Ghana,32 and to provide improved opportunities and better                                   recent acts of legislation intended to streamline the relationship
access to resources for farming activities across gender and level of                          between landlords and tenants under the mailo land system
education.33 Evidence from the Republic of Sudan indicates that land                           may have adversely affected these markets. The 1998 Land Act
rental markets facilitate the transfer of land to smaller producers,                           and its amendment in 2010 introduced legislation that aimed to
thereby promoting a more equitable distribution of land.34 In Malawi                           protect tenants from the obligation to pay excessive rent for the land
and Zambia, participation in the rural land rental market is strongly                          and from eviction. This legislation granted tenants fully transactable
conditioned by the degree of land scarcity. Thus, the ability of rental                        and inheritable land use rights while maintaining nominal rents at



32
     Sjaastad, E. 2003. “Trends in the emergence of agricultural land markets in Sub-Saharan Africa”. Forum Development Studies 30 (1), 5-28.
Amanor, K. S., and M. K. Diderutuah. 2001. “Share contracts in the oil palm and citrus Belt of Ghana.” London: International Institute for Environment and Development
 Estudillo, J. P., A. R. Quisumbing, and K. Otsuka. 2001. “Gender differences in land inheritance and schooling investments in the rural Philippines.” London Economics
33

77 (1): 130-43.
34
     Kevane, M. 1996. “Agrarian structure and agricultural practice: Typology and application to Western Sudan.” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 78 (1): 236-45.
 Chamberlin, J. and J. Ricker-Gilbert. 2014. “Rural land rental markets in Southern Africa: trends, drivers, and impacts on household welfare in Malawi and Zambia”.
35

Selected paper for presentation at the Agricultural and Applied Economics Association 2014 Annual Meeting in Minneapolis, Minnesota, July 27-29, 2014.




34
                                                                                                                   Terraced hills of Kisoro sustain agricultural
                                                                                                                   production (Sheila Gashishiri, 2015)




abnormally low levels and protecting tenants from eviction except                         they operate within the terms defined by the legal framework. Thus, in
with a court order. This development generated conflicts and acted                        addition to developing this legal framework, the state must develop
as a strong disincentive for landlords to participate in land rental                      the institutional infrastructure, systems and personnel for registering,
markets. While the proportion of agricultural households renting land                     valuing and taxing land transactions and for regulating land use.38 In
had increased from 13 percent in 1992 to 36 percent in 1999,36 this                       Uganda, such interventions are administered through the Ministry of
figure declined to 17 percent by 2007 following the implementation of                     Lands, Housing and Urban Development and its associated agencies.
this legislation.37 The share is estimated to have declined even further                  These land-related agencies register land transactions such as sales,
following the promulgation of amendments to the Land Act (1998) in                        mortgages and inheritances. They also directly conduct or facilitate
2010 to check the rapid eviction of tenants by landlords.                                 the valuation of land and facilitate state acquisition and taxation
                                                                                          activities and other land-related transactions. Furthermore, they
Historically, land markets in Uganda have operated without a                              are mandated with the responsibility for establishing standards for
strong institutional framework to monitor and regulate their                              and regulating the activities of real estate professionals, including
operations. Land markets require the presence of the state to ensure                      surveyors, valuers, physical planners and real estate agents.




         Deininger, K. and P. Mpuga, 2003. “Land markets in Uganda: Incidence, impact and evolution over time”. Discussion Paper. World Bank, Washington DC. Working Paper
        36

        No. 4454.
         Baland, J. M., F. Gaspart, J.M. Platteau, and F. Place. 2007. “The distributive impact of land markets in Uganda.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 55(2):
        37

        283-311.
         Williamson, I., S. Enemark, J. Wallace, and A. Rajabffard. 2010. Land Administration for Sustainable Development. ESRI Press Academic, Redlands, California
        38




                                                                                                                                                                              35
In the context of the issues addressed in this section, it is clear                         (a) Slow transformation of agriculture
that in Uganda, the role of the formal land markets is still
limited, particularly in areas where a large proportion of land                             Uganda has failed to facilitate a transformation of the
is communally owned, where such markets are often almost                                    agricultural sector, with this sector growing at a much slower
non-existent. Without proper markets to facilitate the reallocation                         rate than that of the overall economy. This has been largely
of this vitally important production asset, it is unlikely that an                          the result of the low rate of productivity growth, with poor
efficient distribution of land will be achieved. Unless this issue is                       land management being a major contributing factor. In spite
addressed, it will continue to serve as a significant constraint on                         of its huge potential, agriculture in Uganda has been growing
the achievement of higher levels of productivity in both rural and                          at an average rate of less than two percent per annum over the
urban areas.                                                                                past decade, recording one of the lowest rates of productivity
                                                                                            improvement in the world. Various interventions have been
3.3 What is the cost of land tenure insecurity                                              implemented to eliminate credit market failures; to address
and inefficient land markets?                                                               information related failures, particularly related to inputs and
                                                                                            advisory services; and to rectify goods market failures to ensure
                                                                                            farmers produce gets to the market. However, the failure of these
Around the world, it has been increasingly recognized that                                  interventions to achieve their intended outcomes may be due to
a failure to manage and utilize land well can act as a major                                the fact that they have not effectively supported the adoption of
obstacle on the achievement of economic growth and on                                       innovative technology and the intended development of markets.
poverty reduction. Land plays a critically important role in the
social, political and economic life of Uganda. In the rural context,                        In Uganda, as a result of fragmentation and prevailing land
land is a key determinant of livelihoods, with access to land                               management practices, most agricultural activities are
facilitating residents of rural areas’ ability to engage in agriculture                     conducted on small farms. This acts as a constraint on the
and to exploit natural resources, with these activities providing                           sector, preventing it from adopting technological innovations
the main means of achieving food security and generating                                    that may result in improved productivity. In fact, the evidence
incomes and employment. For many Ugandans, land also has                                    shows that in Uganda, farms of a size of less than five hectares use
major cultural and spiritual significance. In urban areas, good                             resources more efficiently and hence are more productive, with
land management plays a vital role in the achievement of efficient                          these farms contributing to more than 94 percent of agricultural
urban development, with a significant effect on building densities,                         output.40 However, smallholder farming is characterized by
mobility, and the provision of decent housing to the urban                                  inherent personalization and informality. This acts as a constraint
population. As De Soto states, without secure rights, land is dead                          against economies of scale in skills and technology; finance and
capital. 39                                                                                 access to capital; and the organization and logistics of trading.41
                                                                                            Small farms do not have the potential to internalize the costs of
Economic development in Uganda has been constrained by a                                    technological innovation adoption and adaptation, which would
lack of tenure security and by the inefficient operation of land                            enable them to achieve higher levels of productivity as well as to
markets, both in rural and in urban areas. Many activities that                             internalize institutional costs.
could facilitate accelerated economic development, including the
commercialization of agriculture; the production of higher value                            However, larger farms in Uganda also record relatively low
products; the construction of vitally necessary infrastructure;                             levels of productivity. On the one hand, farmers who already
and the implementation of measures to improve connectivity                                  have land have not used it effectively, while those who would
and mobility within and between cities and to improve housing,                              like to access land for large scale farming have faced challenges,
require secure land rights and fluid land markets to ensure efficient                       especially if their targeted investments is in the land abundant
exchanges between those who own land and those who need to                                  north, where at the same time markets are not functioning
acquire it for these purposes.                                                              properly, yet. Therefore, the country has ended up with large
                                                                                            scale farmers operating like “big peasants” because they are




39
     De Soto, Hernando, 2000, The Mystery of Capital: Why Capitalism Triumphs in the West and Fails Everywhere Else (New York: Basic Books).
40
     World Bank 2012, Uganda Promoting Inclusive Growth: Transforming Farms, Human Capital and Economic Geography, Washington DC.
41
     Collier and Dercon (2014), African Agriculture in 50 years: Smallholders in a Rapidly Changing World?




36
cultivating 20 acres of a particular crop with family labor and                     (b) Constraining business development, particularly
producing a yield of five bags per acre. The term ‘big’ is being                    in the industrial sector
used relative to the larger number of farmers who may be
cultivating one acre using modern technology and generating                         Except in cases involving the provision of the most
a yield of 20 bags per acre. These co-exist with a number                           sophisticated of virtual services (such as ship registration
of promising commercialization and agro-industry sectors                            in Panama, the provision of domain names in Tuvalu, and
failing to expand due to a number of major challenges, a large                      similar services building on virtual networks), establishing
proportion of which relate to availability of land. The sugar
                                                           42                       or expanding a business requires physical space. In some
sector, for instance, is the largest organized agriculture sector in                cases, it is theoretically possible to reduce the requirement for
the country, which is also based on sustainable development                         such space through vertical expansion, such as through the use
activities. However, expansion of this industry has been                            of multistoried buildings. However, many activities, particularly
constrained by land availability. Other examples include the                        those in the manufacturing, mining and other industrial sectors,
flowers industries, whose investors would be interested in                          require land both as a base for activities and for the production
acquiring unencumbered land on leasehold terms. Upland rice                         and extraction of raw materials. The bulk of Ugandan
on the other hand requires land consolidation to support a                          businesses continue to operate in the informal sector. Of those
more sustainable production process.                                                in the formal sector, more than 90 percent of those established
                                                                                    in the first decade of the 21st century were small businesses
Insecurity of land rights has acted as a constraint against                         with not more than five employees, with the vast majority of
investments in agriculture, irrespective of the size of the                         these businesses engaged in the services sector. Attempts to
farm. In areas such as the northern and north-eastern regions                       establish larger businesses have met with numerous challenges,
of Uganda, where the system of communal land ownership                              with the difficulties involved in the acquisition of land being
predominates and where land administration institutions are                         one of these. In fact this could be the reason why economic
particularly weak, investors have faced major challenges to                         transformation in Uganda has involved the movement of
buy or rent land and invest on a large scale. Such areas also                       economic activity away from agriculture towards services.
have a large potential for large scale farming, but because
the communal land owning groups are not legal entities and                          Activities such as industrial operations that require
therefore can neither register their land nor enter into contracts                  large pieces of land are still few, but will increase as
with investors, this potential has not been realized.                               transformation continues. Currently such operations face
                                                                                    enormous challenges acquiring land. With respect to the
The impact of land disputes on the growth and                                       development of the extractives industry, the private sector has
transformation of the agricultural sector has been                                  already urged Government to urgently address the issue of
significant, with an estimated 5-11 percent of agricultural                         land especially for upstream development of oil and mining
production being lost due to land conflicts.43 The impact                           activities. They note that a robust legislative framework
is even larger in areas where the system of mailo land tenure                       needs to be established which secures land for upstream oil
predominates, such as in the central region and in Kibaale                          development , a refinery and pipelines in an efficient manner
district. In these areas, it has been estimated that losses due                     but also minimizes land take and accounts for community
to land conflicts increase to up to 25 percent of agricultural                      needs.47 Although Uganda Investment Authority has programs
production. Similarly, yields are on average 20 percent lower
              44
                                                                                    to allocate land to investors, there are still difficulties with
in conflict areas.45 According to the private sector analysts,                      respect to industries that do not meet the criteria set for
the new land policy still does not satisfactorily address the                       accessing this land. As discussed in previous sections, many
longstanding issues of land conflicts and land fragmentation.46                     of these difficulties relate to issues such as overlapping rights



 Private Sector Foundation Uganda, 2012 “Private Sector Plan for Action – A Synopsis of Private Sector Growth Challenges and Proposals for Policy Reform”.
42

Kampala. Uganda

 Deininger, K. and R. Castagnini, 2004. “Incidence and impact of land conflict in Uganda”. Policy Research Working Paper. World Bank, Washington DC. Working
43

Paper No.3248.

 Deininger, K and D. A. Ali, 2008. “Do Overlapping Land Rights Reduce Agricultural Investment? Evidence from Uganda”. American Journal of Agricultural
44

Economics, Vol. 90, No. 4, pp. 869-882, November 2008.
45
  Mwesigye, F. and T. Matsumoto, 2014. “Rural-rural Migration and Land Conflicts: Implications on Agricultural Productivity in Uganda”, Paper prepared for
presentation at the “2014 World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty”. The World Bank - Washington DC, March 24-27, 2014.

 Private Sector Foundation, 2015 E-Newsletter July 2015
46




                                                                                                                                                               37
and to disputes regarding compensation claims. In terms of                             which now provide a basis for a significant proportion of overall
ease of doing business, in the area of the challenges involved                         lending.51 By contrast, in Uganda, a large proportion of the
in the transfer of property rights, Uganda ranks 125th out of                          population remains excluded from accessing credit due to the lack
189 countries.48 And in the enterprise survey49 the difficulty of                      of such collateral. At present, the total value of credit provided to
accessing land ranked among the six most significant constraints                       the private sector in Uganda is equivalent to 13.5 percent of GDP.
on facilitating the growth of enterprises.                                             This is less than half the value in neighboring Kenya, where the
                                                                                       figure stands at 32 percent. In more developed markets, such as in
(d) Constraining access of financial services                                          South Africa, the figure is in excess of 100 percent.

The limited extent to which land is formally registered
and the lack of security of tenure also acts as a constraint
against accessing finance and to the overall development of
financial services. The ability to use land as collateral enables                         The sugar sector, for instance, is
the mobilization of capital embedded in land, thereby expanding
                                                                                          the largest organized agriculture
the deposit base and reducing the level of risk faced by lending
institutions.50 The existence of easily transferable land titles                          sector in the country, which is also
facilitates the use of these titles as collateral, reducing the cost                      based on sustainable development
of accessing credit. In developed countries, on average, more
than two thirds of small business loans are secured on the basis
                                                                                          activities. However, expansion of this
of collateral in the form of land and real estate. In Eastern and                         industry has been constrained by land
Central Europe, the establishment of a comprehensive formal
                                                                                          availability.
land titling system, especially in urban and peri-urban areas,
played a significant role in the development of mortgage markets,




                                                                                                    Land and such developed real estate
                                                                                                    industry form the collateral for finance,
                                                                                                    But those without land collateral remain
                                                                                                    unbanked (Digital Media Network Ltd, 2015)


 Private Sector Foundation Uganda, 2012 “Private Sector Plan for Action – A Synopsis of Private Sector Growth Challenges and Proposals for Policy Reform”.
47

Kampala. Uganda
48
     World Bank. 2014. Doing Business 2015: Going beyond efficiency. Washington, DC: World Bank
49
     World Bank. 2014. Uganda - Enterprise Survey 2013. Washington, DC: World Bank
 Byamugisha, FFK. 1999. The effects of land registration on financial development and economic growth: A theoretical and conceptual framework. Policy Research
50

Working Paper 2240. Washington DC: The World Bank.
 Satana, S., M. P. Torhonen, A. Anand and G. Adlington. 2014. “Economic impact of ECA land registration projects”. Paper prepared for the presentation at the Annual
51

World Bank Conference on Land and Poverty, March 24-27, 2014. Washington DC: World Bank.




38
       Box 4: Firms do not use bank credit to finance investments


     In line with Uganda’s regulatory requirements for firm registration, up to 87 percent of firms hold bank accounts. This
     level is similar to the average for Sub-Saharan Africa, and only slightly lower than the World Average of 88 percent
     (Table B1). The value of collateral required to secure a loan also falls below the world average. However, firms in
     Uganda do not use bank credit to a significant extent, either for investments or for working capital. According to the
     2013 enterprise survey, only 8 percent of Ugandan firms financed their investments with bank loans, compared to the
     global average of 27 percent. The majority of firms (80 percent) still financed their investments using internal sources,
     compared to the global average of 69 percent across the world, with some 13 percent securing financing through
     equity or stocks. To secure working capital, and even smaller proportion of firms use bank credit as the source of
     financing, with only 7 percent of businesses doing so, compared to the average of 10 percent across SSA.


       Indicator                                                                 Uganda          SSA            World
       Percent of firms with a checking or savings account                       86.7            88.1           88.2
       Percent of firms with a bank loan/line of credit                          9.8             23.8           36.5
       Proportion of loans requiring collateral (%)                              86.4            79.7           77.3
       Value of collateral needed for a loan (% of the loan amount)              159.4           175.2          182.2
       Percent of firms not needing a loan                                       41.9            34.1           40.9
       Percent of firms whose recent loan application was rejected               7.7             15.3           14.5
       Percent of firms using banks to finance investments                       8.2             18.0           27.3
       Proportion of investments financed internally (%)                         79.5            78.3           69.2
       Proportion of investments financed by banks (%)                           3.3             9.9            16.3
       Source. World Bank, Uganda-Review of Financial Sector, 2015




Financial institutions in Uganda generally insist that                   growth, with these potential benefits including economies
borrowers provide some form of collateral in order to mitigate           of scale; agglomeration; and the effective substitution
the high risk of lending in an environment where information             of land with non-land inputs. The development of efficient
is scarce and unreliable. Uganda’s financial infrastructure              cities is predicated upon an efficient system of land use, which
remains underdeveloped, with one of the characteristics of this          in turn is determined by the promulgation of the appropriate
underdevelopment being a high level of risk aversion on the part         policies and the development of the appropriate institutions to
of lending institutions. Uganda ranks relatively lowly in terms of       ensure their effective implementation. An increased density of
the credit indicator of the Ease of Doing Business index. In terms of    economic activities is one of the key characteristics of successful
the depth of credit information, Uganda scores 0 points on a scale       urbanization, with this increased density being achieved through
of 0 to 6. In terms of the strength of the legal rights of creditors,    the use of a greater proportion of land for higher value activities.
Uganda also ranks relatively lowly (6 points out of 12), primarily       At present, land-related constraints create significant entry
because there is no collateral registry and secured creditors are        costs for businesses in urban areas. For instance, despite recent
not paid first. An increase in the extent of easily transferable legal   restructuring, it still takes an average of 154 days and costs the
titles would unleash this “dead capital” so that it could be used        equivalent of 11 percent of the value of a warehouse for a business
as collateral to secure loans to fund new businesses or for other        to obtain a construction permit in Kampala, while registering
purposes.                                                                property takes 43 days.

(e) Constraining efficient urbanization                                  Planning for urban infrastructure has also been difficult
                                                                         given the current state of land management. Following the
Lack of land tenure security and undeveloped land markets                promulgation of the 1995 constitution, which created private land
have also prevented Uganda from fully benefiting from                    ownership and either converted to freehold land leases vested
the economic benefits that could be derived from urban                   with urban local bodies or transferred their management to the



                                                                                                                                         39
Uganda Land Commission or district land boards, fragmentation                                public use. Specifically, urban councils, responsible for controlling
of land parcels and rapid suburbanization has ensued, with fiscally                          land use in a given administrative unit, have practically failed to
starved local governments unable to acquire land and protect                                 override private interests. They have no leverage of power to control
rights-of-way for infrastructure improvements. On the other hand,                            access and ownership of urban land. Three, the existing policy lays
unhealthy rural-urban migration could be exacerbated by the                                  much emphasis onto tenure security rather than development.
unclear property rights and related conflicts that adversely affect                          For instance, 7 percent of Kampala’s land area is associated with
agriculture and have created disincentives for investment and are                            Kabaka‘s unplanned settlements while 75 percent belongs to
estimated to have reduced agricultural productivity by up to 25                              private mailo. It is mainly because of this type of land ownership
percent. Yet customary tenure systems in the East and North restrict                         structure that development control has not been affected in the city
the sale and rent of land.                                                                   as expected. It also perpetuates land speculation which withdraws
                                                                                             land from the market thereby causing artificial shortage which
The lack of fluidity of land as an asset acts as a constraint                                increases the cost of land. Four, multiple land tenure systems exist
against the achievement of higher levels of productivity and                                 in Kampala which constrain the preparation and implementation
economic integration as urbanization progresses. For example,                                of agreed physical plans. For example, transport and school
the existence of efficient land rental markets, made possible by                             development plans initiated by the central government or city
secure land tenure, can facilitate the process of rural to urban                             councils are not being implemented because most of the schools
migration, enabling residents of rural areas to participate in more                          and urban councils do not have land title. Especially revealing is the
rewarding off farm activities. The existence of such markets enables                         case of Makindye Division, where there are contradictions in land
farmers to sell or lease out their land to secure the funds necessary                        ownership policies between Mengo and KCCA because 60 percent of
to facilitate the migration process, with the possibility of their                           land is owned by the Kingdom (Ministry of Land Housing and Urban
reacquiring their land if they later return to rural areas. A phenomena                      Development, 2013). In sum, Kampala’s land policy should focus on
of this sort occurred in Thailand during the boom-bust period in the                         the establishment of a special land tenure regime for an orderly and
period from 1997 to 1999, when farmers sold or rented out their land                         sustainable urban development and service delivery.54
to facilitate migration to urban areas to engage in non-agricultural
activities, before returning to rural areas to again buy or receive back                     (f) Constraining infrastructure development
their rented land when non-agricultural opportunities diminished
following the economic downturn.52 In rural China, when the security                         The lack of fluidity in land markets has also constrained the
of land tenure was strengthened through the elimination of the                               development of public infrastructure and other services,
system of the administrative reallocation of agricultural land and                           both for central government and local urban authorities. The
through the introduction of long term land leases, landowners were                           public sector needs to acquire land to implement investments in
able to rent out their land to migrate to the booming coastal areas                          infrastructure, including roads, highways and railways. This requires
and cities, where they were able to engage in more remunerative                              the expropriation of land and the payment of compensation, both
activities.53 The degree of market fluidity depends on numerous                              of which require sound institutional capacities and effective systems
factors, the most important factor being the level of land tenure                            to accurately identify the owners of the land; to conduct valuations;
security. As the previous section of this report has made clear,                             and to allocate funds for the payment of compensation from sources
Uganda’s land is still marred by insecurity of tenure, perpetuated by                        such as land taxes.
unclear property rights, disputes, and conflicts.
                                                                                             With economic development, increased demand for land,
In Kampala for instance, there are a number of problems with                                 together with public investment in infrastructure and roads
respect to urban land policy. One, urban land in Uganda, and                                 tends to increase land values. In many cases, however, lack of
particularly so in Kampala, is characterized by ineffective and                              well-functioning mechanisms to tax land implies that the potential
inadequate management systems. For instance, Kampala has                                     for society, especially local governments, to benefit from these
multiple land administration organizations, such as, Kampala                                 increases is limited. Instead much of the gains fuel speculation
Capital Council Land Board, Uganda Land Commission, Buganda                                  or end up as bribes. Colombia illustrates the potential for quick
Land Board and so on, each pursuing its own interests irrespective                           increases in land taxes that can contribute significantly to local
of the urban development standards. Two, ineffective regulation of                           government revenue, thus helping to match decentralization of
urban land has deterred access to land especially for investment and                         responsibilities for service delivery with the needed resources.


 Brits, A.M., C. Grant, and T. Burns. 2002. “Comparative study of land administration systems with special reference to Thailand, Indonesia and Karnataka (India).” Paper
52

presented at the World Bank Regional Land Workshop, June 4-6, Phnom Penh, Cambodia.
 Deininger, K. and S. Jin, 2007. “Land rental markets in the process of rural structural transformation: Productivity and equity impacts in China”, a World Bank Policy
53

Research Working Paper No. 4454.
54
     Goswami A. G. and S. Lall, 2015 “Jobs in the City: Explaining Urban Spatial Structure in Kampala”, forthcoming




40
         4. What should Uganda do to ensure
         land contributes rather than con-
         strains productivity improvements?


The discussion in the previous section shows that in
Uganda, the limited ability to transfer land may be acting as
a binding constraint on endeavors to improve productivity
in both rural and urban areas.

The increasing population density in urban areas has been accompanied by increased
difficulty in utilizing land for new purposes and for transferring ownership from
one entity to another. In turn, this has acted as a constraint on investment and on the
achievement of a transformation characterized by an increase in higher productivity activities.
This situation is at least partly the result of a failure by the Government to address bad laws
that have created overlapping rights and conflicting interests. The Government has also
inadequately facilitated the development of institutions that can manage land transactions
appropriately. In addition, in many regions, land markets are either non-existent or are
dysfunctional, being characterized by a high rate of speculative transactions, especially in
urban areas and in areas in which significant public infrastructure development projects
are being implemented. In rural areas, these dysfunctional markets enable exploitative
transactions, which result from a lack of information and/or unequal power relations between
buyers and sellers. This dysfunctionality has resulted in an increased rate of occurrence
of conflicts and disputes. If current patterns of land management continue, a significant
proportion of Uganda’s population will remain poor due to the failure to transform the               If current patterns
agricultural sector and to facilitate a shift towards an increased emphasis on higher value
production. In addition, this dysfunctionality means that, rather than driving equitable
                                                                                                     of land management
economic growth, the process of urbanization will exacerbate the proliferation of slums on the       continue, a significant
peripheries of cities; increased congestion; and a decline in the quality of infrastructure as the
costs of construction and compensation escalate.
                                                                                                     proportion of
                                                                                                     Uganda’s population
Ugandan policy makers must adopt and implement smart policies that will ensure
that land becomes a more productive asset that contributes to a more rapid positive
                                                                                                     will remain poor
transformation and diversification of the economic base. These policies should aim to:               due to the failure
(i) promote security of land tenure and reduce conflicts and disputes caused by overlapping
                                                                                                     to transform the
rights; (ii) promote the marketization of land, including through rental markets; and (iii)
strengthen institutions for the appropriate management of land. The implementation of these          agricultural sector
policies would facilitate the achievement of higher levels of productivity and hence generate        and to facilitate a shift
a large surplus, enabling the Government to benefit from increased revenues, a portion of
which could be used to compensate those who may lose out in the process of economic                  towards an increased
transformation. However, vested interests, suspicion, fear of disruption to livelihoods, activism    emphasis on higher
against any form of land reforms, sensitivities around the location of investment projects, all
need to be taken into account to manage the tensions that may arise through the process
                                                                                                     value production.
of land reforms. In particular, in certain areas, there are numerous cultural and political
sensitivities, with historical conflicts that have resulted in serious conflict and animosity




                                                                                                                           41
between landlords and tenants. These animosities are exacerbated by                        and conflict. To prevent this, a wide range of stakeholders should be
weaknesses within formal land administration institutions, which in                        involved in the process of reform.
turn are exacerbated by in-fighting over mandates for the adjudication
of land cases and by the lack of funding for key institutions.                             Drawing on lessons from global experience, particularly from
                                                                                           countries in Africa that share many similar characteristics
The Government must strive to sustain the progress made                                    with Uganda, this report recommends four points of action to
in formulating policies related to land management and                                     address critical issues related to land use and the transferability
administration to close gaps and accelerate the achievement of                             of land assets and to strengthen institutions responsible for
its goals. The Ugandan authorities have made important strides in                          the administration of land and land tenure. The first two of
the establishment of a smart policy framework for land management                          these actions build on the Government’s prior achievements and
and administration. In addition to the National Land Use Policy                            involve: (i) accelerating the process of land registration; and (ii)
of 2007 and the National Land Policy of 2013, the Government is                            redesigning the Land Fund to ensure that it operates more efficiently
currently in the advanced stages of developing a complementary                             and equitably. The second two actions are intended to accelerate
National Resettlement Policy, National Urban Policy and a National                         the implementation of land reforms and involve: (iii) strengthening
Housing Policy. It has also embarked on the process of rehabilitating                      institutions responsible for land management and administration;
and modernizing institutions with a mandate for the management                             and (iv) strengthening systems for the valuation of land.
of land administration, including through the computerization
of land information systems. According to the 1995 Constitution
and the terms of the Land Act 1998, the Uganda Land Commission                             4.1 Accelerating the process of land registration
operates a Land Fund, the objective of which is to fund the purchase
of land by lawful and bona fide occupants from landlords and to
finance the resettlement of those made landless by disasters. There                        Increasing the overall proportion of land in Uganda that is
are also initiatives to establish communal land owners in Northern                         formally registered would ultimately result in significant
Uganda as legal entities for the purposes of land management and                           improvements to productivity. Thus, the Government should
registration, while at the same time accelerating the systematic                           take steps to develop and implement systems that accelerate the
registration of individual land rights more generally. These policies                      achievement of this goal. The Government has already implemented
should be informed by and be consistent with regional and global                           a number of measures to systematically register land, with various
initiatives for land reform to which Uganda is a party, including the                      measures intended to ensure registration of individually, communally
African Union’s Framework and Guidelines on Land Policy in Africa,                         and state owned land. The proper demarcation and registration of
the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure of                        land is a first step towards improving the security of land tenure and
Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National Food Security                       raising the productivity of land. Global evidence suggests that land
and the Principles for Responsible Investment in Agriculture and Food                      tenure security has a positive and significant impact on investment
Systems.                                                                                   and productivity.55 In China, the break-up of collective farming in
                                                                                           1978; the adoption of individual rights to use land in the 1980s;
However, while the establishment of the appropriate legal                                  and the issuance to households long term leases even without
framework is critically important, ensuring the appropriate                                registration, nearly tripled the rate of growth of the agricultural
implementation and enforcement of this framework is just                                   sector, from an average annual rate of 2.7 percent in the period from
as crucial in order to ensure that land in Uganda is secure,                               1970 to 1978 to 7.4 percent in the period from 1979 to 1984. These
transferable, marketable, and thereby plays a significant positive                         reforms had considerable impact on China’s agricultural production
role in the achievement of economic development. Land policy is a                          notwithstanding the weaknesses including a ban on land sales and
highly political issue. It is not possible to disentangle its determinants                 mortgages, and inadequate compensation for land acquisition by
and impacts from the material and political interests of the individuals                   local governments56 . More recently, in the 2000s, the implementation
and groups involved. However, despite the political challenges                             of systems to facilitate the registration of land rights has resulted
involved, the cost of inaction may cripple Uganda’s economy. While it                      in improved land tenure security and increases in the value of
is impossible to avoid politically difficult actions, it is vitally important              investments in Ethiopia57 and Rwanda.58
to develop a clear and transparent framework to avoid controversy


55
   Lawry, S., C. Samii, R. Hall, A. Leopold, D. Hornby and F. Mtero. 2014. “The impact of land property rights interventions on investment and agricultural productivity in
developing countries: A systematic review”. Campbell Systematic Review 2014:1
56
   Byamugisha, F. F. K. 2014. “Land reform and investments in agriculture for socio-economic transformation of Uganda”, Paper presented at the National Development Policy
Forum, Kampala, Uganda. July 2014.
57
   Deininger, K., D. A. Ali, and T. Alemu. 2011. “Productivity effects of land rental markets in Ethiopia: Evidence from a matched tenant-landlord sample.” Policy Research
Working Paper 5727, World Bank, Washington, DC.
58
   Ali, D., K. Deininger, and M. Goldstein. 2011. “Environmental and Gender Impacts of Land Tenure Regularization in Africa: Pilot Evidence from Rwanda.” World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper No. 5765, World Bank, Washington, DC.



42
Table 3: Improving land management can contribute to productivity growth
                                                   Land Reform Type                                               Growth in the Agriculture sector
 Japan (1954-68)                                   Redistribution & registration                                                        4.0
 S. Korea (1954-63)                                Redistribution & registration                                                        4.0
 Taiwan (1953-64)                                  Redistribution & registration                                                        4.6
 China (1979-84)                                   Decollectivization & long term leases                                                7.4
 Viet Nam (1991-95)                                Decollectivization & long term leases                                                4.1
 Source : Byamugisha, F. F. K. 2014. “Land reform and investments in agriculture for socio-economic
 transformation of Uganda”, Paper presented at the National Development Policy Forum, Kampala, Uganda.
 July 2014.

The Government must accelerate its land registration                                 of land on the basis of a detailed survey of boundaries in
program to increase the proportion of formally registered                            peri-urban areas and in areas with high value rural land. The
land to exceed that of the targeted level of 30 percent in the                       Government expects to issue one million new land titles in the
next five years. The systematic land titling program that the                        next five years, mostly in rural areas. This process will involve
Government has initiated must be supported with an extensive                         the use of low cost technology and will build on experiences
sensitization and information campaign on the benefits and                           from Rwanda (see box) and Ethiopia. The program is intended
challenges of registering land in the country. This initiative                       to increase the proportion of titled land in Uganda to 30
should build on the lessons and experiences of the pilot phase                       percent. However, this is still very low compared to the rates
of the program, which was undertaken in the period from 2005                         achieved by neighboring countries such as Rwanda, which has
to 2007 and which covered the three districts of Ntungamo,                           achieved the rate of at least 60 percent, and Ethiopia, which has
Iganga and Mbale. The pilot involved the systematic registration                     achieved the rate of about 50 percent.



  Box 5: Registering Land Rights fast and cheaply: Experience from Rwanda


Rwanda first embarked on a systematic land tenure regularization program with the implementation of a pilot program in the period
from 2008 to 2009, following which the program was scaled up in the period from 2010 to 2013. This program utilized a systematic
community-by-community participatory approach implemented in cooperation with local land committees. Low technology
“general boundaries” rules and simple methods of boundary demarcation were utilized by locally trained para-surveyors, who
used aerial photography and/or satellite imagery to conduct mapping. By March 2015, virtually all land parcels in Rwanda, a total
of 11.3 million, had been demarcated, with 8.3 million land titles having been approved and printed for issuance. However, only
7.2 million land titles, representing about 64 percent of the total number of demarcated plots, had been collected by owners. The
gap (36 percent) between the number of demarcated land parcels and the collected titles may be attributed to a number of factors,
including the absence of owners, with some being located outside the country. Another factor may have been the inability of some
owners to pay for the land titles, despite the low fees charged.

The total cost of the land title regularization program was about US $ 60 million, of which 25 percent was funded by the Government
of Rwanda and the rest by development partners, including DFID. Of the total cost of US $ 60 million, approximately US $ 7 million
(about 12%) was recovered through fees charged for the collection of titles, with these fees amounting to an average of approximately
US $ 1.6 per parcel, except in Kigali (the capital), where the fee imposed averaged at approximately US $ 8.3. The average cost of
demarcating a parcel and issuing the associated title deed was approximately US $ 8. On average, the cost recovery for the program
was 12 percent, implying a total subsidy of 88 percent. However, land owners in the capital paid the full cost, while the owners
outside the capital received a subsidy of about 80 percent. It should be noted that the average cost per title of US $ 8 is low, given
that the average cost of similar exercises globally is in the range of US $ 20. Despite the low cost, the program significantly improved
tenure security and women’s access to land and it also increased land rental market activities (Ali, Deininger and Goldstein 2011).

Source: Sagashya, D. G. 2014. “Land tenure reform in developing countries: What can we learn from Rwanda?” World Bank Land and Poverty Conference. Wash-
ington DC; Ali, D. A., K. Deininger, and M. Duponchel. 2015. “Sustainability of the LTR program: Preliminary results from the 2015 household survey round in rural
Rwanda.” Kigali, May 5, 2015. MINERENA.




                                                                                                                                                                     43
It will be possible to accelerate the process of land                                   no constraints to registering subsequent transactions unlike in
registration through the use of low cost, efficient technology,                         Rwanda where only 30 percent of such rural land transactions
as has been demonstrated by the experience of a number of                               are being registered (after completion of the systematic land
other countries, including several African countries. Thailand                          regularization program in 2013) partly due to the high transaction
employed a low cost remote sensing and satellite technology                             costs and fees of registration faced by clients.59 Given the
to produce orthophotos using ground survey methods to                                   potential benefits from scaling up this program, it is important
implement its 20 year land titling program. Using a similar                             that implementation of this reform program remains a top
methodology, but based on cheap labor and less expensive                                priority. For optimal results to be achieved, the Government
and more efficient technology , which also uses remote sensing                          must commit to extending its efforts beyond the project currently
and satellite imagery, Rwanda was able to undertake a country-                          being funded by the World Bank.60
wide land registration program by utilizing an advanced spatial
framework entirely based on photo maps, which enabled the                               To accelerate the process of land registration, it will
process to be completed rapidly and at low-cost. Within a period                        also be necessary to move forward with the registration
of about five years, ending March 2015, Rwanda demarcated                               of communally owned land, including through the
11.3 million land parcels across the entire country and issued                          formalization of landowning groups. More than 50 land owning
land titles for 7.1 million of these parcels at an average cost                         groups have already been organized, out of which ten have
of US$ 8 per parcel. Almost 100 percent of Rwanda’s land is                             been registered as Communal Land Associations (CLAs). The
now demarcated, with 64 percent of the demarcated parcels                               Government should build on this initial process to scale up the
having their titles collected by land owners (see Box 4). Many                          registration of land-owning groups as CLAs and to register their
other countries have implemented fast, effective and low cost                           land in line with the 1998 Land Act. Under the current program,
approaches to registering land. In Ethiopia, certificates for 20                        at least 600 CLAs could be organized, with their land rights being
million parcels were issued at an average cost of less than US $                        adjudicated, demarcated, and registered. However, as incidences
1 per parcel. The completion of this program has incentivized                           of resistance to the titling program have demonstrated in the
landowners to rent land. Although government policy still limits                        past, some communities are still suspicious of government
these transactions, placing restrictions on how much land can                           intentions and resistant to engaging in land market transactions
be rented and for how long, as the system evolves, markets are                          with non-community members. This resistance must be
expected to become more active, leading to increased land                               overcome through measures to win their acceptance. Linking
concentration and higher rates of migration from rural to urban                         these communities to investors, with a legally binding stake in
areas. Ethiopia is piloting the method used by Rwanda, which                            the new investments, could help. Moreover, organizations in
relies on low cost cadastral index maps to demarcate and register                       these areas would likely be more receptive to engaging in land
land. The Ugandan Government is in the process of adopting                              markets if they were able to rent out their land, rather than selling
similar technologies to scale up its own land registration program                      it. Therefore, the current program to formalize groups and to
but is preceding the program with design of a GIS software and                          register their land needs to be accompanied by the promulgation
with other necessary preparations to ensure that the captured                           of the necessary regulations and guidelines for long term leasing,
land titling data integrates smoothly in the business processes                         as was successfully implemented with the Ejidos in Mexico; with
and workflows of the land information system and that there are                         native lands in Fiji; and with allodial lands in Ghana (see Box 6).




                                                                                             Banana plantation in Masaka, South east Uganda,
                                                                                             have to thrive to feed the urbanites (Great Lakes
                                                                                             Film Production Ltd, 2014)


59
  Ali, D. A., K. Deininger, and M. Duponchel. 2015. “Sustainability of the LTR program: Preliminary results from the 2015 household survey round in rural Rwanda.” Kigali, May
5, 2015. MINERENA.
60
     The LIS program is being supported by a World Bank- supported GOU project “Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project”




44
  Box 6: Land Rental Markets in Communally Owned Land: Experiences in Mexico, Fiji and Ghana



Mexico: Ejidos are communal settlements owned by beneficiaries of land reform processes in Mexico. These settlements were subject to
an accelerated land reform process in the period from 1992 to 1999, with this process involving the formalization of community groups
as land owners; the establishment of community self-governance institutions; and the registration of communal land rights. Within a five
year period, 57.2 million hectares of land were measured and mapped, with 2.9 million households receiving certificates to individual,
common, and housing land. The program increased security of land access for approximately 1 million households who previously had
few or no land rights. It also improved governance: more than 18,000 Ejidos formalized internal bylaws through the assembly, with 90
percent electing representatives through a democratic process. The program provided a strong legal basis for numerous contracts and
joint ventures between Ejidos and entities from outside the communities.

Ghana: About 80 percent of Ghana’s land is held under customary tenure. This land is administered by traditional authorities (chiefs)
who are recognized by Ghana’s Constitution as trustees with the authority to allocate land to their subjects for use. The traditional
authorities are also empowered to endorse individual allocations of land for registration. As legal trustees, traditional authorities are
also empowered to enter into long term leases with investors. In fact, they are the main source of land for commercial investments in
agriculture in Ghana.

Fiji: About 87 percent of land in Fiji is held under customary title (native land). This land is owned communally by indigenous Fijians,
who make about half of Fiji’s population. Fijians of Indian origin make up about 45 percent of the population but do not own land.
However, the Fijians of Indian origin are the key planters of sugar cane, with this planting being conducted on native land leased from
indigenous Fijians on 30-year renewable leases, with lease arrangements managed by an autonomous entity called iTaukei Land Trust
Board (TLTB). TLTB manages land transactions involving other entities, including local and foreign investors.

Source: Byamugisha, F. F. K. 2013. Securing Africa’s Land for Shared Prosperity: A program to Scale up Reforms and Investments. Africa Development Forum Series.
Washington DC. World Bank; Dodd, M. J. K., 2012. Reform of leasing regimes for customary land in Fiji, A dissertation for a Bachelor of law, University of Otago; and
World Bank. 2011. “Ghana Second Land Administration Project. Project appraisal document. World Bank, Washington, DC.




Government-owned land should also be demarcated and                                     shown. For example, in Ghana, a similar process enabled the
registered to promote the achievement of higher levels of                               Government to start managing state land assets more effectively
productivity. The Government still owns large amounts of land                           and productively. The Government of Ghana is in the process of
either directly or indirectly, including land declared as public land                   preparing a comprehensive policy for the management of public
during the colonial period. Much of this land is either unused                          land (see Box 7).
or underused. For this type of land, the most urgent action is to
undertake an inventory to establish the status of occupation and                        To promote its efficient use, all land, including that owned
the purpose for which the land is used. Once this process has                           by religious and cultural institutions, should be clearly
been completed, the land could then be allocated to the land                            demarcated and registered. Cultural and religious institutions
poor and to investors on the basis of transparent and competitive                       have large holdings of unused and underutilized land, both
processes, as advocated by the National Land Policy 2013, while                         in rural and urban areas. As in the case of government owned
resisting pressures from business entities that wish to obtain                          land, much of this land is not properly demarcated. Often,
government land without going through competitive processes                             its occupation status and the purpose for which it is used is
. There is no doubt that there will be some obstacles to the                            not clearly defined. Hence, there is a need for an inventory to
implementation of this plan, as it may involve the displacement                         demarcate and identify the status of occupation and use. While
of entities currently utilizing the land. However, the benefits                         recognizing that this is private land administered by cultural
could be significant, as experiences in other countries have                            and religious authorities as trustees, the Government has an




                                                                                                                                                                        45
     interest in ensuring that the land is used efficiently to benefit                  (i) take inventory and register their lands; and (ii) to improve
     not only the land owners and tenants, but the nation as a                          management of their lands, in a similar way as the Government
     whole. To promote the efficient use of these lands, one option                     of Ghana has supported traditional authorities to establish
     is for government to provide subsidies by way of grants and                        Customary Land Secretariats for land administration and to
     technical assistance to religious and cultural authorities to:                     demarcate allodial boundaries.




           Box 7: State land inventories: Ghana’s experience



     Ghana has a large stock of government-owned land, most of which was accumulated during the 1950s under the radical land
     policies of Kwame Nkrumah. In 2001, it was estimated that the Ghanaian government owned 40 percent of all urban and peri-urban
     land (Kasanga and Kotey 2001). To improve the management of state-owned land, in the period from 2003 to 2010, the Ghanaian
     Government worked to establish a national inventory of these lands, with the objective of establishing accurate information as a
     basis for decisions related to the management of public land. The process involved the collection of information on the location,
     size, ownership, and the boundary measurements of land, as well as current land use and encumbrances, including the presence of
     squatters. Ten consulting firms implemented pilot inventory exercises in three regions of the country, through which 1,144 sites were
     identified, significantly greater than the 288 sites compiled from public land sector agencies’ records. The exercise provided a clearer
     picture of the composition of government land and of the principal sources of tension in communities impacted by government
     land acquisitions. For example, of the 722 sites inventoried, only 58 (less than 10 percent) were formally acquired, compensated
     for, and fully used for their intended purpose; 198 sites (27 percent) were occupied and used by state agencies without any formal
     acquisition process; the acquisition status could not be established for 377 (52 percent) sites; and 6 sites reserved by the state were
     never formally acquired and were not being used for the intended purpose.

     Source: Ahene, R. and F. F. K. Byamugisha. 2014. “Inventory of government land: Lessons from Ghana and Uganda.” Chapter 6 in Byamugisha, F. F. K (ed.). Agricul-
     tural Land Redistribution and Land Administration in Sub-Saharan Africa: Case Studies of Recent Reforms. Directions in Development. World Bank: Washington DC




     4.2 Redesigning the Land Fund                                                     and with technical assistance and for improved funding
                                                                                       provided to enable bona fide and lawful occupants to buy the
     The Ugandan government should redesign the Land                                   residual land rights of landlords. Additional steps are required
     Fund to achieve higher levels of efficiency and equity.                           to ensure that the Land Fund provides an effective means to
     This will require the Government to promote the sharing and                       disentangle the overlapping land rights and to make the land
     redistribution of land between mailo landlords and tenants                        more productive. First, the operational priorities of the Land
     through free negotiations between the two parties to enable                       Fund should be revised from the single political objective of
     one party to buy out the rights of the other, followed by support                 restitution to that of a multi-objective operation that not only
     to improve productivity on the land. Current operations of                        addresses restitution, but also poverty reduction. This should
     the Land Fund are not efficient and equitable (see Box 8). The                    be achieved by prioritizing the provision of support to poor
     National Land Policy of 2013 provides a basis for changes to                      tenants, agricultural workers and displaced citizens, and other
     the Land Fund to include land sharing, facilitated by mediators                   land poor and landless Ugandans in the agricultural sector.




     61
          “Ministers gave me Namulonge Land – Sudhir”, Daily Monitor Newspaper, Thursday August 27, 2015
     62
          World Bank. 2011. “Ghana Second Land Administration Project. Project appraisal document. World Bank, Washington, DC.




46
                                                                                          Traditional livestock farming still dependent
                                                                                          on extensive land for pasture (Great Lakes Film
                                                                                          Production Ltd, 2014.




  Box 8: Uganda Land Fund to address historical injustices and landlessness



The Land Fund (LF) was created under the Land Act of 1998, to be managed by the Uganda Land Commission (ULC) to
primarily (a) give loans to lawful and bona fide occupants to buy out and register residual interests of landlords or to buy
on their behalf those residual interests to settle injustices caused during the colonial era; and (b) resettle people rendered
landless by Government action, natural disaster or any other cause. Since FY 2002/03 when it started its operations, the
LF received funding of UShs 31.1 billion and acquired 62,279.74 hectares of land with bona fide occupants on it in Kibaale
district, thereby buying out the interests of landlords. However, the ULC has not taken any further action on the land: it
has neither transferred the ownership interests to the bona fide occupants nor evicted them. Furthermore, since its
establishment, the LF has not undertaken any actions to improve the productivity of the land it purchased partly because
productivity improvement is not part of its mandate. Based on the amount of land purchased and the money put into the
LF, the approximate cost is nearly UShs 500,000 per hectare. In the meantime, the design of the fund also led to distortion
of prices on account of the land lords’ expectation that their land was to be bought off by the fund. For Kibaale district, it
was found that by 2004, just one year after the setup of the fund, prices for mailo land had increased to levels higher than
the expected future income stream from agricultural production on that land, and also higher than prices for freehold and
customary land, despite the encumbrances on mailo land (Deininger, Ayalew and Yamano 2006).

Source: Based on information from MLHUD; Deininger, K., D. Ayalew and T. Yamano, 2006. Legal knowledge and economic development: The case of land
rights in Uganda, World Bank Research Working Paper No. 3868, Washington DC: World Bank




                                                                                                                                                    47
 Second, the operations of the Land Fund should be                                   which successfully incorporated measures to achieve improved
 made more efficient by: (i) involving beneficiaries (bona                           efficiency and poverty reduction (see Box 9). Based on the
 fide occupants) in negotiating the price of residual rights of                      Regulations for the Land Fund gazetted in March 2014, the
 landlords to avoid the imposition of exorbitant prices; and                         Uganda Land Commission should urgently issue Guidelines for
 (ii) incorporating in the operations of the Land Fund the                           the Land Fund, taking into account the guidance provided in the
 necessary technical services and agricultural inputs to raise                       2013 National Land Policy and the experience of land reforms
 the productivity of land. The Government can learn from the                         elsewhere, such as in Malawi and Brazil.
 experiences of Brazil and Malawi’s land reform programs,




     Box 9: Land acquisition and development for the poor: Experience from Malawi and Brazil




 To address the highly unequal distribution of overcrowded arable land, which coexists with underused large-scale farms, Malawi
 piloted a land reform program with funding from the World Bank (World Bank 2004). The pilot project aimed to increase the income
 of about 15,000 rural poor families using a decentralized, community-based, and voluntary approach in four districts. Modeled on
 Brazil’s market-based approach to land reform (under implementation since the mid-1990s), the pilot had three key elements: (a)
 voluntary acquisition by communities of land sold by willing estate owners; (b) resettlement and on-farm development, including
 transportation of settlers, establishment of shelter, and purchase of basic inputs and advisory services; and (c) survey and registration
 of redistributed land. Land reform beneficiaries, organized in voluntary groups, were self-selected on the basis of predefined eligibility
 criteria. Each family received a grant of US$1,050, managed directly by beneficiaries, with up to 30 percent for land acquisition
 and the rest for transportation, water, shelter, and farm development. Land for the project was acquired from willing sellers, the
 government, or private donations and was registered initially under group title; it is expected that individual titles will be provided
 to beneficiaries upon demand in the future. Implementation was decentralized through District Assembly institutions and required
 capacity enhancement, especially for surveying and registration.

 According to the impact evaluation, the project achieved even better results than the Brazilian model on which it was based (World
 Bank 2009): more than 1.5 hectares of land were distributed, on average, to each of 15,142 rural households (40,102 households in
 Brazil); agricultural incomes increased an average of 40 percent per year for beneficiaries (compared to non-beneficiaries) between
 2005–06 and 2008–09 (6 percent in Brazil); the economic rate of return was 20 percent (13 percent in Brazil); and impacts on the
 livelihoods of beneficiaries and surrounding communities were positive, with improvements in landholdings, land tenure security,
 crop production, productivity, income, and food security (similar results in Brazil).

 Source: Byamugisha, F. F. K. 2013. Securing Africa’s Land for Shared Prosperity: A program to Scale up Reforms and Investments. Africa Development Forum Series.
 Washington DC. World Bank




48
       4.3 Strengthening institutions for land                          records, especially maps and registration documents; (ii) wide
       administration                                                   spread corruption; (iii) fraudulent title certificates; (iv) fraud in
                                                                        the administration of land rights; (v) chronic understaffing and
       The third measure that the Ugandan government should             underfunding; and (vi) cumbersome and long procedures to
       implement is to strengthen the institutions responsible for      register land and land transactions. In 2005, the Government
       the management of land, including the administration and         started rehabilitating and modernizing institutions responsible
       management of land transactions and the resolution of related    for the management of the administration of land through
       disputes.                                                        interventions built around the development of computerized
                                                                        land information systems. At the central government level,
       a) Accelerating progress on land administration and              these institutions are managed under the Ministry of Lands,
       management                                                       Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD) with its 21 zonal
                                                                        offices, and is decentralized to 111 districts as of June 2015.
       The most critical institutions in the management of land         The Uganda Land Commission and the Institute of Survey and
       administration are those involved in the documentation;          Land Management also operate under the auspices of MLHUD.
       information storage, analysis and retrieval; and valuation       Progress In addition to the rehabilitation and modernization
       processes. Prior to recent initiatives, after more than three    of land institutions, the Government has also piloted key
       decades of poor land governance, Uganda’s land administration    reform initiatives, including: (i) the organization of communal
       systems had become virtually dysfunctional. Services had         land owners into legal entities and the registration of their
       almost ground to a halt, with the dysfunctionality taking the    communal land rights; and (ii) the acceleration of the systematic
       form of: (i) disorganized and physically worn out manual land    registration of individual land rights.




Figure 13: Steady progress in improving land information system


     Location of Ministry Zonal Offices (MZO) to spread across Uganda     The six Zonal Offices already operational leading the way.




         - MZO Offices operational - pilot stage (6)
         - MZO Offices ready - 2nd stage (7)
         - MZO Offices to build - 3rd stage (8)
         - MZO areas Offices operational (pilot stage) (6)
         - MZO areas with offices ready - 2nd stage (7)
         - MZO areas to build the offices - 3rd stage (8)




Source: Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development




                                                                                                                                         49
      The implementation of the Land Information System (LIS)                          mortgage transactions were completed within the three-days
      program has already demonstrated the benefits to be                              service standards set in the Client Charter. Similarly, only 21
      derived from an efficient land management system. The                            percent of total searches (verification of landownership and
      development of the computerized LIS began with the re-                           any encumbrances on the title) were completed within the
      engineering and computerization of processes and workflows                       three-days stipulated in the Clients Charter, although this is
      of the land registration function and the associated cadastral                   much better than the average period of 50 days prior to the
      mapping. The process is now being scaled up to cover other                       implementation of the system. The impact on land-related
      land administration functions, including physical planning,                      revenue has been considerable. The value of the average
      valuation, and topographic mapping. It is also being extended                    monthly revenue from transaction taxes increased from US
      from six zonal centers to all 21 of these centers across the                     $ 0.7 million in 2013/14 to US $ 3.6 million in FY 2014/15.
      country. So far, the impact on land transactions and on the                      With intensified training and closer supervision of staff, the
      collection of land-related revenue has been impressive (see                      Government expects actual performance to be very close to the
      Box 10). The average time taken to facilitate the transfer                       service standards defined in the Client Charter by mid-2016.
      of property titles has been reduced from 227 days in 2007                        It is envisaged that by its completion in 2018, the LIS program
      to 43 days in 2014. This is lower than the average for Sub-                      will be able to support all functions of land administration.
      Saharan Africa, which according to the Doing Business Survey                     Because it will be fully computerized, this program is expected
      is 57 days. However, the performance is still short of the
                  64
                                                                                       to facilitate the achievement of dramatically improved levels of
      service standards set in the Government’s Client Charter and                     efficiency, enabling land transactions to be completed within
      therefore requires further improvement. For example, during                      a single day. In addition, the system will facilitate electronic
      FY 2014/15, in Uganda, only 22 percent of all transfers were                     linkages with strategic clients, including banks (to facilitate
      completed in the 10 days service standard stipulated in the                      mortgage transactions); the chief government valuer’s office
      Client Charter.65 For mortgage transactions, while the average                   (to facilitate valuation); and local urban authorities (to facilitate
      time to facilitate a mortgage declined from a period of 3 to 4                   compliance with land use regulations, including the issuance of
      weeks before the implementation of LIS, only 10 percent of the                   construction permits).



           Transforming Kampala Central Registry – From stacks
           of old papers during the old registry to organized filing
           under the new registry, (Ministry of Lands Housing and
           Urban Development, 2015)




                                            Old system of records                                           New system of records


64
     World Bank. 2014. Doing Business 2015: Going Beyond Efficiency. Washington, DC: World Bank
65
  Uganda Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD), 2014. Lis Review Report, March 2013- December 2014; also supplemental progress Notes
provided by MLHUD




50
  Box 10: How technology is improving land administration in Uganda - The Uganda Land Information System


In 2005, Uganda embarked on a program to rehabilitate and modernize its land administration system. A core component of this
program is its computerized Land Information System (LIS).

Following the implementation of a baseline study and a conceptual design in the period from 2007 to 2008, the development of
LIS was planned for implementation in two phases. First, in the period from 2010 to 2013, a three-year pilot was implemented in
six zonal offices, with these six offices together holding approximately 70 percent of all registered land titles in Uganda. The LIS was
implemented along with a legal review and a program to rehabilitate land offices; to re-engineer business processes and work flows;
and to build institutional capacities. This pilot phase became fully operational in March 2013.

What has been the impact?

While it is still too early to draw comprehensive conclusions regarding the long-term impacts of the program, in the short term, LIS has
achieved the following: (a) a decrease in the average time to transfer property: In the Masaka zonal office, for example, the average
time taken to facilitate the transfer of property titles decreased from 227 days in 2007 to an average of 26 days in 2014. While it still
takes about two months to implement such transfers in the less successful zonal offices, such as the one in Wakiso, the average time
is now significantly lower than 57 days, which is the average time for such transfers in the sub-Saharan African region; (b) decreases
in the time to conduct searches: The average time taken to complete a search (verification of land ownership and encumbrances on
the title) declined from 50 days to 8 days in Masaka, and to 32 days in the worst performing zonal office, in Wakiso; and (c) decreases
in the time taken to facilitate bank mortgages: The time taken to process a bank mortgage has been reduced from more than 50 days
to 7 days in Mbarara, and to 48 days in the worst performing zonal office of Wakiso. The potential to improve performance in all these
areas is high, given that the high service standards defined by the Client Charter have been achieved for a significant proportion of
land related transactions, with 22 percent of the land transfers being completed in 10 days, 12 percent of mortgages being registered
in three days and 21 percent of searches also being completed in 3 days. In addition to efficiency gains in land transactions, there
has been an impressive increase in the value of monthly land-related revenues, from US$ 0.7 million in 2012/13 to US$ 3.5 million in
2013/14, representing a fivefold increase.

The roll-out phase, which commenced in 2015, is expected to extend the LIS from six to 21 zonal offices. In this phase, the functional
coverage of the program will be extended to physical planning and valuation. It will also facilitate the establishment of electronic
linkages between land administration services and strategic clients and partners, including banks and real estate agents.

During the roll out phase, it is expected that the time taken complete land and mortgage registration and searches will be reduced to a
single day. This will result in an additional boost to land-related revenue, since the valuation function will be fully computerized.

Source: Uganda Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development (MLHUD), 2014. LIS Review Report, March 2013-December 2014; also supplemental progress Notes
provided by MLHUD.




b) Strengthening systems for valuation of land                                   In addition, government valuers, under the leadership
                                                                                 of the Chief Government Valuer, are responsible for the
The ability of government institutions to accurately and                         establishment of standards and regulations to guide the
efficiently conduct land valuations plays a vital role in a                      valuation of land by private sector entities and to facilitate
number of processes, including the following: (i) Expropriation                  the development of valuation data bases that can be used
and compensation: Accurate valuations are required in order to                   by all valuers in the public and private sectors to undertake
ensure that fair compensation is paid to the original owners of the              their work. This process is particularly critical in urban areas,
land; (ii) Revenue collections: Accurate valuations facilitate the               where a credible system for documenting and valuing land
collection of revenue by enabling an accurate assessment of the                  will go a long way towards streamlining transactions and
value of stamp duties to be charged on land transfers and of the                 eliminating speculation. However, the existing system needs
property rates to be collected by municipal authorities.                         to be strengthened and improved into an efficient valuation



                                                                                                                                                           51
system. This would require passing legislation to promote mass                          d) Institutions for dispute resolution
valuation across the country; developing valuation standards;
institutionalizing periodical property re-valuations in the country                     As a matter of urgency, the Government should strive to improve
including the LGs through the District land boards; setting quality                     its systems for the resolution of land-related disputes and to
control guidelines; undertaking periodic audits; publishing                             fill institutional vacuums in land administration while also
results of all process to empower the population and improve                            strengthening the judiciary and the local council courts and their
accountability; improving governance in the valuation units                             interface with traditional institutions.
including fighting corruption; and strengthening human and
financial resources. Under a World Bank supported project,66 the                        Of course, measures to accelerate the land registration process
Government is developing systems and capacities to conduct                              and to disentangle land rights under the mailo tenure system will
valuations in the public sector and to establish valuation                              in themselves have a significant positive impact in reducing land-
databases and standards and regulations that can improve the                            related disputes. However, there will still be a need to establish
performance of private sector valuers. Implementation of this                           effective systems and to provide necessary resources to resolve
process should be accelerated to ensure that valuation services                         emerging land disputes quickly and at low-cost. As already
and standards are improved rapidly.                                                     alluded to, this would require filling the institutional vacuum in
                                                                                        land administration in the hotspots of land disputes, especially
c) Institutions for managing local urban authorities finances                           in northern Uganda and the Albertine region, by ensuring that
and land                                                                                zonal and district land offices are adequately staffed. In addition,
                                                                                        and for the whole country, it would also require building
The capacities of urban institutions responsible for financial                          competent formal institutions for dispute resolution by providing
management need to be strengthened in order to enable                                   adequate staff, budget and training to judges, magistrates, Local
them to effectively collect the revenue necessary to acquire                            Area Committees, and Local Council Courts, and to strengthen
land and to pay for infrastructure improvements. At present,                            alternative dispute resolution (ADR) mechanisms as well as
the institutional arrangements in this area are poorly coordinated                      the interface between formal and traditional institutions, by
and badly managed. These institutions need to be equipped with                          empowering the latter.
the necessary management systems and tools and with adequate
human resources to plan and manage urban affairs, including
the collection and management of public urban finances. While                           4.4 Prioritizing and closing gaps in policy
the on-going government projects 67 have excellent potential                            commitments for effective implementation
to develop and strengthen institutional capacity in Kampala
and the chosen municipal towns, implementation needs to be
                                                                                        The Government should review the many existing policy
accelerated and extended to other urban authorities.
                                                                                        commitments related to the administration of land and
                                                                                        to prioritize measures to close critical gaps when these
At present, urban public finances are derived from two primary
                                                                                        are identified. In recent years, the Government has strived to
sources: (i) own source revenues; and (ii) transfers from the
                                                                                        develop a land policy framework to underpin essential reforms
central government. With the exception of Kampala City, which
                                                                                        related to the system of land administration. In addition to
raises about 50 percent of its budget from its own source
                                                                                        the Constitution of Uganda of 1995, significant instruments for
revenues, all other urban authorities in Uganda depend heavily
                                                                                        this purpose include the 1998 Land Law (and its subsequent
on central government transfers to fund their development
                                                                                        amendments) and at least five different national policies (the
programs. The value of the Government transfers is very limited,
                                                                                        National Land Policy; the National Land Use Policy; the National
with urban authorities receiving only 6 percent of the total value
                                                                                        Resettlement Policy; the National Urban Policy; and the National
of transfers to LGs, with this value amounting to UGX 1.2 trillion
                                                                                        Housing Policy). If not properly coordinated, these various
to LGs in FY 2004/05 – 2009/1068 It is critical that the urban
                                                                                        instruments could be a source of confusion. In fact, the confusion
authorities develop the capacities to increase revenue derived
                                                                                        resulting from the multiple and inadequately coordinated policies
from their own sources and to manage this revenue prudently.




66
     World Bank 2013. Project Appraisal Document for The Competitiveness and Enterprise Development Project
67
  World Bank supported projects, ‘Uganda Support to Municipal Infrastructure Development Program’ and ‘Kampala Institutional Strengthening and Infrastructure
Project’.
68
     Ministry of Local Government, 2015. Local Government Profile. Republic of Uganda




52
and their instruments has already been the source of some                                These initiatives involved measures to improve land tenure
conflict in various parts of the country, especially in relation                         security and to remove restrictions on the rental of land as part of
to resolving land disputes. To prevent further occurrences of                            a broader agrarian reform process. Impact evaluations indicate
this sort, it is vitally essential that a thorough review of these                       that these reforms played a vital role in improving access to
instruments be conducted to ensure consistency.                                          land by the land-poor and in increasing overall productivity.
                                                                                         In China, these measures are estimated to have increased
Despite – or perhaps partly because of – the existence of this                           agricultural productivity by approximately 60 percent.69 In
wide range of land-related laws and policies, there are still                            Vietnam, participation in rental markets grew from 3.8 percent
critical gaps in the policy framework. To support the effective                          in 1993 to 15.8 percent in 1998, with the development of both
implementation of land reforms, it is vital that these gaps be                           rental and sales markets being found to have an unambiguously
addressed. Critical gaps identified in this update include the                           positive impact on productivity.70 In addition, the reforms in
following: (i) the need to amend laws to remove restrictions on                          China reduced population pressures in the densely populated
rental markets to improve landlord-tenant relations on both                              agricultural areas by facilitating out-migration, with this process
mailo and freehold land; (ii) the establishment of disincentives to                      resulting in an increase in the share of migrants to China’s
discourage the speculative holding of unused land for extended                           urban labor force from 5 percent in 1988 to 17 percent in 2000,
periods of time; (iii) the need to clarify policies governing the use                    representing a total of 124.6 million people.71,72 In Vietnam, the
of urban land, including the provision of incentives to encourage                        reform process increased the rate of migration by households
vertical expansion and multi-purpose usage of structures as                              from 29 percent in 1993 to 64 percent in 1998.73
a means to promote increased density and sustainable urban
development; (iv) the adoption of innovative instruments for land                        There are two critical factors that enable land rental markets
pooling, financing and development to achieve economies of                               to operate efficiently, these being land tenure security and
scale and equitable urban land development; and (v) measures                             the elimination of restrictions on land rental markets. While
to address the issue of expropriation and compensation and                               registration of land is critical, it must be supported by a legal
thereby to promote the principle of fairness and equity. The                             framework that does not overly constrain landlords and tenants
current market-based practice often underestimates the value                             from negotiating freely the terms and conditions of the rental or
of future income from the investment for which the land is being                         lease of land. Thus, in the Ugandan context, existing restrictions
acquired, and often does not factor in the cost of moving people                         on land rental markets, especially the fixing of nominal rents at
into a new area of settlement and the restoration of livelihoods                         uneconomic levels, as under the Land (Amendments) Act 2010,
to at least the level that existed before the expropriation. To                          need to be eliminated, as advocated by the 2013 National Land
achieve this goal, it is vital that the authorities not merely                           Policy. These restrictions have driven landlords out of rental
strengthen regulations, but ensure that existing regulations are                         markets and made tenants more vulnerable to eviction, which is
appropriately enforced.                                                                  the exact opposite of the intended purpose of the Act.

a) Removing restrictions on rental markets                                               b) Optimizing usage of land to promote markets

To ensure the development of more effective land rental                                  In Uganda, much land remains idle and functions merely as
markets and thereby to facilitate increased access to land,                              a highly illiquid form of savings. Uganda could learn from the
the Government could learn from the experiences of China                                 experiences of other countries, where measures have been
and Vietnam, but keeping in mind that the land reform                                    implemented to promote land markets as a means of optimizing
agenda in China has some way to go especially to lift a ban                              the use of land and ensuring that it serves as a productive asset.
on rural land sales and mortgages, and to pay adequate                                   With the limited availability of savings instruments in Uganda,
compensation for expropriated land. These countries                                      many Ugandans use land as an investment vehicle for their
implemented measures to develop land rental markets with                                 savings. This has led to speculative buying and the accumulation
initiatives first implemented during the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s.                         of unused land in both rural and urban areas. To discourage this




 Deininger, K, and S. Jin, 2009. “securing property rights in transition: Lessons from implementation of China’s rural land contracting law”. Journal of Economic
69

Behavior and Organization, 70 (1-2).
70
     Deininger, K. and S. Jin. 2003. “Land sales and rental markets in transition: Evidence from rural Viet Nam”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3013.
71
     Zhai, F., T. Hertel, and Z. Wang. 2003. “Labor market distortions, rural-urban inequality and the opening of China’s economy.” Working Paper No. 27, GTAP
 Deininger, K. and S. Jin. 2007. “Land rental markets in the process of rural structural transformation: Productivity and equity impacts in China”, a World Bank Policy
72

Research Working Paper No. 4454.
73
     Deininger, K. and S. Jin. 2003. “Land sales and rental markets in transition: Evidence from rural Viet Nam”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3013




                                                                                                                                                                       53
practice, Ugandan policy makers should consider the introduction                         land being exempt. Other urban authorities hardly bother with the
of a punitive tax to act as a disincentive. A number of countries                        collection of such rates. Overall, the collected property rate tax is
have imposed taxes on agricultural land to encourage landowners                          estimated to be around 1 percent of the property value.
to use it productively. Countries that impose taxes on agricultural
land include Rwanda, South Africa, Namibia, Jamaica, Colombia,                           In addition, a number of other taxes are imposed on landowners,
Brazil, St. Lucia, Japan and the USA.74 Rwanda imposes a property                        including taxes on rental incomes (30%); capital gains tax (15%);
tax on freehold land, while annual lease fees are paid on leasehold                      and Value Added Tax (18%). However, to increase the value of
land with a certificate of registration, except for agricultural land of                 collected revenues and to promote efficient land markets, it is
less than two hectares. Property taxes are paid at the simple rate                       most important that at least the two main land-related taxes,
of one thousandth of the taxable value of the land each year. The                        namely the stamp duty and property rate tax, be effectively and
fee structure for land lease fees is complex, with rates set within                      efficiently administered, with the collection of these taxes being
minimum and maximum thresholds and related to market value                               extended to all eligible tax payers. To achieve this, the following
of land, with the level of the fee depending on the use to which the                     steps should be implemented: (i) a more intensive utilization of
land is put and its size, with these levels being determined by each                     the LIS in the six zonal centers, which cover approximately 70
district.75                                                                              percent of land transactions; (ii) an intensification over the next
                                                                                         five years of the use of the cadastral and registration data and of
An additional measure to avoid keeping land idle and to free                             the improved valuation system and its links with the scaled up
it up for more productive use is to reduce the duration of                               LIS covering the rest of the country to extend revenue collection
statutory leases, in the way of leasehold, from the current                              efforts to cover the whole country; (iii) reductions in exemptions
99 years to a more realistic duration of up to 49 years that is                          from tax through an extension of the tax system to include
closer to the period required by an investor to recover the                              residential property and undeveloped property, although at lower
money invested in land. This would put Uganda on the same                                rates than for commercial and industrial property; and (iv) an
footing as some other developing countries in the continent and                          extension of the property rate tax system to registered rural land
beyond including Rwanda, Ethiopia, Tanzania, Mozambique,                                 after five years, at a point when the proportion of registered land is
Viet Nam and China, and these countries have moreover been                               expected to have increased from 20 percent to 30 percent.
doing well in attracting both local and foreign investment
into agriculture. The reduction in leasehold from 99 years to a                          c) Improving urban land management
maximum of 49 years should initially be done for foreign investors
and then gradually extended to Ugandan citizens.                                         With the rapid process of urbanization in Uganda, it is vitally
                                                                                         important that systems are implemented to ensure that urban
Ugandan policies should strive to implement an efficient                                 land is allocated optimally. The allocation of this land should be
framework to tax land to promote efficient land markets. Land                            consistent with land use planning regulations and designed to
is lightly taxed in Uganda. The most significant tax is imposed on                       promote efficient usage. The actions to streamline the current
land sales, with a stamp duty of 1 percent of the value of land.                         system of land rights and to strengthen land administration
Even this stamp duty is under-collected due to a proliferation                           institutions highlighted above are critically important measures for
of informal land sales and under declarations of the sale price.                         the foundation of an efficient system for urban land management.
For example, when the LIS became fully operational in February                           It will also be necessary to implement specific actions to improve
2013, resulting in a consequent improvement to the integrity of                          the efficiency of these systems in urban areas, where there is
land records, the value of revenues collected from stamp duty                            a higher population density and hence a requirement for land
increased dramatically, with this value increasing fivefold in the                       to be used even more efficiently. Such reforms should focus on
period from 2012/13 to 2013/14. In addition to stamp duties,                             measures to ensure that the urban land tenure system supports
municipal authorities also impose property rates. In Kampala City,                       investments and service delivery, as well as facilitating the healthy
these rates are set at the equivalent of 6 percent of the ratable                        development of satellite towns. As an estimated 70 percent of land
property value, although this is imposed only on commercial and                          in Kampala is either public or private mailo land, with overlapping
industrial properties, with residential properties and undeveloped                       rights and conflicting interests between landlords and bona


 Childress, M. D., A. Hilton, D. Solomon and van den Brink, R. 2009. Agricultural land tax, land-use intensification, local development, and land market reform”, chapter
74

12 in Binswanger-Mkhize, H. P., C. Bourguignon, and van den Brink, eds. Agricultural Land Redistribution: Toward Greater Consensus. Washington, DC: World Bank
75
  Childress, M. D., A. Hilton, D. Solomon and van den Brink, R. 2009. Agricultural land tax, land-use intensification, local development, and land market reform”, chapter
12 in Binswanger-Mkhize, H. P., C. Bourguignon, and van den Brink, eds. Agricultural Land Redistribution: Toward Greater Consensus. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Masengo, F., T.H. Ngoga and E. Ingabire, 2014. Land Tenure Reform and Local government revenues in Rwanda. Land Project Policy Research Brief No. 3, Kigali, Rwanda:
USAID Land Project.




54
fide and lawful occupants, it is important to reform the legal       In addition, Ugandan policy makers should give consideration
framework to promote the practices of land sharing, pooling and      to measures to improve urban planning and zoning; to
readjustment as a means to support the development of vertical       facilitate downtown improvements and readjustments; and
multi-family and multi-purpose buildings that promote the            to reform systems of agricultural land management. There is
efficient use of land. In addition, laws to improve the regulation   also a clear and vital need to strengthen the capacities of land
of the land market needs to be formulated and implemented            administration institutions. In the medium to longer term, such
to improve the management of land. This will involve both            measures will play a significant role in preparing Uganda to
the imposition of taxes and the provision of incentives, and         implement a land valuation system (including an integrated
the promotion of both conventional and innovative financing          land management and registration system); to manage land
instruments to facilitate the development of both private and        transactions (including the setting of levels of compensation
public infrastructure in urban areas. The current development        for land acquisitions); to settle land-related disputes; and to
of the new National Housing Policy should be seized as an            review regulations that govern land transactions. Uganda should
opportunity both to introduce policies to strengthen policies        learn from the experience of other countries, with the evidence
related to land administration and financing and to compensate       showing that highly urbanized countries such as South Korea
for market failures that have excluded low income earners from       established the institutional foundations for fluidity in land
the housing market. Housing policies need to be reviewed             transformation at incipient stages of urbanization.
to address market failures that prevent low income earners
from accessing housing. Policymakers should consider the             It is also vitally necessary that Ugandan policy makers
implementation of a number of measures to address the                implement measures to achieve improved compliance with
challenges faced by urban local governments, including the           land use regulations. In addition to a land tax to encourage
following: (i) accelerating the formulation of a clear national      efficient land use, efficient and sustainable urbanization
policy for urban development, including urban land use; (ii) the     requires effective planning of physical development, including
enforcement of urban development regulations; and (iii) the          compliance with land use regulations. In its 2007 National
establishment of a framework to promote the development of           Land Use Policy, the Government committed to promoting
high rise buildings with multipurpose usages.                        effective physical development planning, a commitment that
                                                                     was further manifested by the promulgation of the Physical
The top priority for the promotion of effective land reform is       Planning Law in 2010. The law requires that, before land title
the development of an effective system for the documentation,        and construction permits are issued for land development,
registration and valuation of land. This should be accompanied       the relevant authorities should ensure compliance with local
by specific measures to support the development of a more            development plans and regulations. At present, due to low levels
fluid land market in Uganda, as described in the previous            of institutional capacity and the lack of effective coordination,
chapter. Such reforms should be designed to reduce land-             compliance with land use regulations remains problematic.
related conflicts and overlapping land rights; to reactivate land    With funding available to strengthen physical development
rental markets; to encourage the emergence of rental markets         planning under CEDP, the Government should seize the
in areas where the system of communal land ownership                 opportunity to strengthen institutional capacities for physical
predominates and where changes to the tenure system are              planning, including through the provision of training and the
not likely to be realized soon; and to strengthen the capacity       further development of the computerized LIS to strengthen the
of land administration institutions. Furthermore, measures           coordination of land registration and physical development
should be implemented to improve the finances of local urban         planning.
authorities to develop their capacities to acquire land and to
fund the development of infrastructure. Measures to achieve this     d) Balancing expropriation with commensurate
should include improving the coverage and level of compliance        compensation
with property taxes; a review of the system of transfers from the
central government; and a thorough assessment of the manner          In Uganda, three main issues negatively affect systems
in which future oil revenues will be shared.                         for the assessment and payment of compensation for the
                                                                     expropriation of land and the implementation of these




                                                                                                                                  55
systems, with these three issues also affecting a number of                           both of which are advocated by the 2013 NLP. These involve the
other countries in the region.76 Firstly, the legal framework for                     formulation of a new marriage law that promotes co-ownership of
the payment of compensation for expropriations is outdated.                           land for married and cohabiting couples; and an overhaul to the
While the 1995 Constitution and the 1998 Land Act to some                             succession law to protect the rights of women following divorce or
extent attempted to address this issue, the primary instrument                        the death of their spouse.
in this area is the Land Acquisition Act 1965, which is outdated
and inadequate for handling new developments in land policy,                          Since the existing legal framework for land does not encourage
such as legal recognition of customary tenure (much of which                          joint titling and registration of land, as advocated for by the 2013
is undocumented) or secondary and tertiary rights, such as                            NLP, the Government is formulating a new marriage law (Marriage
rights of access to pastoral and forestry resources. Secondly,                        and Divorce Bill 2013; and Administration of Muslim Personal
current valuation practices tend to result in the undervaluation                      Bill 2013) to provide for joint registration and co-ownership of
of land, as systems for the valuation of rights that are not easily                   land not only for married women, but also for women in de facto
monetized, such as pastures and access to forest resources,                           relationships. It is particularly important that the implementation
are poorly developed. These systems prioritize the payment                            of this law proceeds rapidly, so that its provisions can be applied
of compensation in cash, rather than facilitating land-for-land                       in the systematic scaling up of land registration, which will result
compensation and resettlement, both of which may serve as a                           in the issuance of 1 million new titles by 2019.
better means of ensuring that the livelihoods of those affected
would be protected from the negative impacts of expropriation.                        Ugandan policy makers should also give serious consideration to
In addition, with most land being held under customary tenure                         a thorough revision and reform of the Succession Law to protect
being unregistered, under-compensation is particularly common                         the rights to inheritance by women upon divorce or upon the
in cases involving land of this type. Thirdly, weaknesses in systems                  death of their spouses. Given that inheritance is the most common
of governance and corruption often lead to underpayment                               means by which land is acquired in Uganda, this is particularly
and/or prolonged delays in the payment of compensation.                               significant. The greatest discrimination against women in property
In consideration of these weaknesses, there is a need to: (i)                         rights is at the point of inheritance. To promote women’s access
accelerate the process of updating the 1965 Land Acquisition                          to land and their security of tenure, it is therefore important to
Act; (ii) implement measures to avoid the undervaluation of land                      overhaul the current Succession Law to provide for a fair share in
(see above section on valuation) and the use of poorly conceived                      inheritance for women.
forms of compensation; and (iii) improve systems of governance
as a means to reduce and eliminate corruption to ensure that fair
and full compensation is paid.

e) Promoting the rights of women

In the area of land ownership, Ugandan women continue to
face significant institutionalized and informal discrimination.
                                                                                        The sugar sector, for instance, is the
This discrimination is not only unjust, it also acts as a significant                   largest organized agriculture sector
constraint on economic growth. Increasing women’s access
to land and improving their security of tenure would be
                                                                                        in the country, which is also based on
significant measures towards eliminating the gender gap in                              sustainable development activities.
agricultural productivity, with this gap currently standing at
                                                                                        However, expansion of this industry
19 percent.79 Eliminating this gap would provide a significant
boost to agricultural production, given that over 50 percent of                         has been constrained by land
agricultural work in East Africa is done by women.78 To increase
                                                                                        availability.
women’s access to land and to improve their security of tenure,
Ugandan policy makers should implement at least two actions,




 Byamugisha, F. F. K. 2013. Securing Africa’s Land for Shared Prosperity: A program to Scale up Reforms and Investments. Africa Development Forum Series. Washington
76

DC. World Bank
 Ali, D., D. Bowen, K. Deininger and M. Duponchel, 2015. Investigating gender gap in agricultural productivity: Evidence from Uganda. Policy Research Working Paper
77

No. 7262. Washington DC: World Bank
 SOFA Team and Cheryl Doss, 2011. “The role of women in agriculture”. Background paper for FAO’s The State of Food and Agriculture 2010-2011: Women and
78

Agriculture: Closing the Gender Gap for Development




56
Zooming in on Kampala – Central Division of Kampala
cadastral map (Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban
Development, 2015




     AnnexES




                                                      57
58
     A nn e x 1 : H o w h i st o ry h a s st ru c tur ed th e l a n d te n u re sys te m in Ugan da



     Period & Event             Changes in land administration system                                                       Impact on land tenure system

     Pre- independence          During the British colonial period, land reforms mainly in the central (Buganda,            Created freehold system of land ownership in the central region, thereby
                                Ankole and Toro), gave large tracts of land to the political elite but turned most of the   starting off a market, but also created a grossly unequal land tenure system,
                                people of Buganda into tenant farmers.                                                      of tenant farmers. These had customary unwritten right to use the land for
                                                                                                                            grazing and farming renting on the landlords mailos of land.

     1900 Agreement             Divided land in Buganda into Mailo land and Crown land. Mailo land was doled out            Customary unwritten right to use the land for grazing and farming were
                                to the Kingship, the chiefs and some notables while Crown land was held for govern-         terminated
                                ment purposes.

     1927 Busuulu and Envujjo   Regulated the rent that peasants in Buganda were supposed to the holders of                 Access to land was increased through direct purchase and through official
     law                        certificates if they wished to use the land (‘Busuulu’ and ‘Envujjo’) they hitherto used    alienation of hitherto communal land, the customary tenure remained very
                                by right of history and custom. This turned the bona fide occupants into tenants.           dominant with its demerits.
                                Landlords were hiking the ‘Busuulu’ and ‘Envujjo’ rates haphazardly.
                                                                                                                            Allocation of land to absentee landlords saw the evolution of squatters --
                                                                                                                            people who settled, farmed and grazed animals on the undeveloped land of
     1937 Toro Landlord and                                                                                                 an absentee landlord but who could later be evicted by the landowners.
                                Set up for the same reason in Ankole
     Tenant Law

     1969 Public Land Act       Provided for the protection of customary land rights.                                       Legalized the rights of holding land under customary ownership

     1975 Land reform decree    Declared all land in Uganda public land and title to it was vested in the Uganda Land       Reduced the authority of landlords and attempted to develop rental market
                                Commission. All free land, including Mailo, was converted into leaseholds. Custom-          for land. At the same time, created more uncertainty in rights to holders of
                                ary occupants were deemed to hold the parcels of land at sufferance, which could be         land
                                terminated any time without notice. Rent payment by tenants was also removed.

     1995 Uganda constitution   Land is vested in the citizens of Uganda in four land tenure systems: Customary, Free-      Returned land to citizens of Uganda. Created more certainty about rights to
                                hold, Mailo and Leasehold.                                                                  holders of land.

     1998 Land Act              Provided for a certificate of occupancy to be issued to the occupant on application to      Strengthened the rights of the occupants of land, especially the tenants on
                                the registered owner                                                                        mailo land

     2005 Constitutional        “the entire property in, and the control of, all minerals or petroleum in, on or under,     Strengthened government’s authority over the extractive riches under the
     amendments                 any lands or waters of Uganda are vested in the Government on behalf of the Repub-          land by making it a public good.
                                lic of Uganda”.

     2010 Land Act Amend-       Tenants who have lived unchallenged on registered land for 12 years or more, or who         Strengthened the tenant’s rights to land, hence creating overlapping rights to
     ment                       are settled on the land by the Government, cannot be evicted for any reason other           the same piece of land
                                than non-payment of a nominal ground rent.
A n n ex 2: s tati stic al tables

Table A1: Key Macroeconomic Indicators

Indicator                           Unit measure     2009/10        2010/11          2011/12       2012/13      2013/14    2014/15

Population                          Millions             31.0           31.9             32.9         33.9          34.9       35.9
GDP                                 USD millions     20,181.4       20,262.5         23,237.3     24,624.3      26,953.1   27,121.3
Per capita GDP                      USD                 578.9          562.4            652.0        670.0         709.0     754.8
GDP growth                          %                     5.2               9.7           4.4           3.3          4.6        5.0

Gross Domestic Savings              as % of GDP          19.7           19.5             17..7        21.6          20.7      22.1

Gross Investments                   as % of GDP          12.5           12.3             28.2         29.5          28.9      31.4
Inflation (period average)          %                     9.4               6.5          23.4           5.8          6.9        2.4
Exchange Rate (end-year)            UGX/USD           2,283.3        2,623.2          2,484.4      2,630.6       2,599.7    2,918.8
External Sector
Exports - Goods and Services        Million USD       3,470.1        3,827.9          4,672.0      4,992.3       5,317.6    5,342.9
Imports - Goods and Services        Million USD    -5,757.2      -6,828.5          -7,665.3      -7,530.1     -7,868.7     -8,082.2

Current Account Balance             Million USD      -1,631.0       -1,984.0         -2,218.0      -1,879.0     -2,133.0   -2,385.0

Balance of Payments (overall
                                    Million USD         235.0         -597.0            759.0        337.0         377.0     -475.0
balance)
Gross Foreign Reserves              Million USD       2,384.7        2,044.0          2,643.8      2,912.3       3,394.0    2,912.0

External Debt                       Million USD       2,343.4        2,904.9          3,067.3      3,742.9       4,339.5    4,877.2

Foreign Direct Investment           Million USD         693.0          719.0          1,244.0        940.0       1,225.0    1,186.0

Monetary Sector

Average Deposit Rate                %                     2.0               2.1           3.2           3.0          3.1        2.9

Average Lending Rate                %                    20.7           19.8             24.6         24.8          22.1      21.3
Growth in Money Supply (M3)         %                    15.9           17.1             13.0         14.0          14.9      15.1
Government Finance

Total Domestic Revenue              as % of GDP          10.5           13.6             11.2         11.4          11.9      13.0

Tax Revenue                         as % of GDP          10.3           10.9             10.1         11.0          11.4      12.5

Non Tax Revenue                     as % of GDP           0.3               0.2           0.4           0.5          0.5        0.5

Grants                              as % of GDP           2.1               1.9           1.9           1.5          1.0        1.1
Total Expenditure and net lending   as % of GDP          16.7           19.1             15.6         16.5          16.7      18.6
Recurrent Expenditure               as % of GDP          10.5           12.7              9.4           9.1          9.8      10.0
Development Expenditure             as % of GDP           6.1               6.1           5.8           6.6          7.0        7.9
Fiscal Balance (overall)            as % of GDP           -4.0              -3.6          -2.5         -3.6         -3.8       -4.5




                                                                                                                                      59
     Table A2: Growth and Structure of the Economy


     Economic Activity                     2009/10   2010/11   2011/12   2012/13   2013/14   2014/15

     Real GDP Growth Rates (%)               5.2       9.7       4.4       3.3       4.6       5.0

      Agriculture                            3.2       2.9       1.1       1.8       1.5       4.4

     Industry                                7.8      11.4       3.1       4.3       4.3       6.4

     o/w manufacturing                       8.3      29.3      -5.6      11.3       5.6      10.8

     o/w construction                        12.6     15.0       3.9      10.8       5.7       2.0

     Services                                5.9      12.4       4.9       4.0       4.2       4.6

      GDP Shares (% of constant GDP)

      Agriculture                            26.2     24.6      23.8      23.5      22.8      22.7

      Industry                               18.1     18.4      18.2      18.4      18.3      18.6

      o/w manufacturing                      8.5       8.4       8.2       7.8       7.6       8.0

      o/w construction

      Services                               48.5     49.7      49.9      50.3      50.2      50.0

      FISM and net taxes                     7.2       7.3       8.1       7.9       8.7       9.2

      GDP Shares by expenditure type
      (% of nominal GDP)

      Final Consumption Expenditure          83.2     84.2      86.6      84.8      80.7      86.1

      Households                             73.8     74.6      73.9      76.6      72.8      74.9

      Government                             9.4       9.6      12.7       8.2       8.0       9.6

      Gross Capital Formation                26.9     26.8      28.5      28.2      29.5      26.8

      Gross fixed capital formation          26.6     26.5      28.1      27.9      29.1      26.5

      Charges in inventories                 0.4       0.3       0.3       0.4       0.4       0.4

      Net exports                           -10.1     -11.0     -15.1     -13.0     -10.3     -13.0

      Gross domestic saving (% of GDP)       12.5     12.3      17.7      21.6      20.7      22.1

      Public                                 2.9       3.3       2.4       3.1       1.5       1.4

      Private                                9.6       9.0      15.3      18.5      19.2      20.7




60
     Table A3: Fiscal framework(% of GDP)

                                                                                               Approved   Projected
                                   Outturn   Outturn   Outturn   Outturn   Outturn   Outturn                          Projection
      as % of GDP                                                                               Budget     Outturn
                                   2008/9    2009/10   2010/11   2011/12   2012/13   2013/14                           2015/16
                                                                                                2014/15    2014/15
     Total revenue and grants        13.5     12.7      15.5      13.1      12.9      13.0       14.8       14.1        15.1

     Revenue                         11.0     10.5      13.6      11.2      11.4      11.9       13.3       13.0         13.6
     Tax                             10.6     10.3      10.9      10.1      11.0      11.4       12.7       12.5         12.9

     Nontax                          0.4       0.3       0.2       0.4       0.5       0.5       0.6         0.5         0.6

     Grants                          2.6       2.1       1.9       1.9       1.5       1.0       1.5         1.1         1.6

     Budget support                  1.5       1.1       1.1       1.0       0.3       0.3       0.1         0.3         0.3

     Project grants                  1.0       1.0       0.8       0.9       1.2       0.7       1.4         0.7         1.3

     Total Expenditure               15.0     16.7      19.1      15.6      16.5      16.7       21.7       18.6        22.1

     Recurrent                       9.5      10.5      12.7       9.4       9.1       9.8       10.3       10.0        10.4

     Development                     4.8       6.1       6.1       5.8       6.6       6.9       8.0         6.5         8.6

     Overall balance

     Including grants                -1.5     -4.0      -3.6      -2.5      -3.6      -3.8       -6.9       -4.5         -7.0

     Excluding grants                -4.0     -6.1      -5.5      -4.5      -5.0      -4.8       -8.4       -5.6         -8.6

     Financing                       1.5       4.0       3.9       2.0       3.3       3.6       6.9         4.5         7.0

     External financing (net)        1.6       1.9       1.5       2.0       2.2       1.3       3.5         1.1         5.0

     o/w Budget support              0.7       0.6       0.5       0.2       0.5       0.0       0.0         0.0         0.0

     Domestic financing (net)        0.0       1.7       2.3       0.0       1.0       2.3       3.4         3.4         2.0




61
Table A4: Value added (seasonally adjusted) by activity, at constant 2010 prices, percentage change, 2009/10-2014/15

                                                                                                              Trade    Accommo-
                                                             Manufac-                 Construc-
     Year   Quarter   Agric   Livestock   Fishing Industry              Electricity               Services     and     dation and
                                                              turing                    tion
                                                                                                             Repairs      food
 2008/9                2.9       3.0       -7.0     5.8        10.0        10.6          3.7        8.8        9.7        4.5
 2009/10               0.3       0.3       4.5      2.0        3.2         -0.4          1.6        4.6        2.6        11.0
 2010/11               7.9       2.4       4.0      9.9        9.9         1.2          14.6        3.0        9.1        8.1

 2011/12               4.5      10.3       2.3      3.8        4.0         17.0          2.4        4.1        3.2        4.4
 2012/13               0.0       1.0       5.3      3.1        3.6         0.2           4.0        2.7        2.1        5.4
 2013/14               1.8      -0.2       1.3      1.4        -1.0        1.0           4.2        1.8       -1.4        4.3


 2007/8       Q4       1.0       4.5       -14.3    3.0        -1.8        5.1           5.5        4.7        4.8        7.3


 2008/9       Q1       2.3       5.8       -11.9    3.1        7.0         4.1           0.8        6.5        8.2        5.3
              Q2       1.6       8.3       -9.3     2.1        3.1         10.1          1.6        5.5        4.1        4.3
              Q3       1.9      -1.7       -4.2     5.0        6.4         5.5           5.0        8.4        4.0        2.5
              Q4       5.8       0.2       -2.0     13.7       26.3        21.5          7.7        15.2      25.1        5.7


 2009/10      Q1       7.0       5.9       6.4      5.6        0.8         3.5           7.5        7.0        3.4        34.9
              Q2       0.3      -3.5       1.9      0.4        1.8         -1.3          1.2        0.2       -1.9        3.0
              Q3      -0.5       1.6       5.9      7.1        12.3        -7.4          8.9        6.7        5.4        -3.9
              Q4      -5.8      -3.0       3.7      -5.0       -2.0        3.6          -11.4       4.6        3.6        9.9


 2010/11      Q1      -0.4       7.5       8.8      12.1       15.7        1.9          10.1        2.6       -0.3        17.2
              Q2       7.2       0.0       17.8     7.9        9.6         1.8           9.1        -0.2      17.9        -5.3
              Q3      13.3       5.1       5.1      16.0       11.0        1.7          31.6        5.4       11.9        11.1
              Q4      11.3      -2.9       2.7      3.7        3.3         -0.6          7.7        4.1        6.8        9.4


 2011/12      Q1      10.0      13.9       4.1      19.1       31.2        -3.1          7.7        9.6       15.9        14.0
              Q2       5.7      21.7       12.2     -0.6       -2.6        -4.9          2.9        2.4        0.1        -7.4
              Q3      -5.4       5.5       -3.5     -0.1       -7.8        76.2          0.1        2.2       -3.0        3.3
              Q4       7.6       0.0       -3.6     -3.1       -4.9        -0.1         -1.0        2.3       -0.1        7.8


 2012/13      Q1      -2.6      -0.2       -3.4     2.0        1.8         1.2           1.4        3.5        0.1        17.1
              Q2       0.0       2.2       0.2      2.2        4.4         -0.3          3.2        2.4        0.6       -13.4
              Q3       3.9       1.5       9.2      1.7        1.5         -3.9          5.3        2.3        3.9        13.9
              Q4      -1.3       0.5       15.3     6.6        6.8         3.7           6.2        2.6        3.6        3.9


 2013/14      Q1       2.1       4.7       1.9      -1.7       -6.6        0.8           2.0        1.6       -7.4        15.0
              Q2       1.9      -7.3       4.6      0.5        -3.3        -1.3          5.2        1.2        1.3        -9.3
              Q3       5.4       3.5       -2.3     2.2        4.8         0.9           0.0        2.4        0.9        15.3
              Q4      -2.4      -1.6       1.0      4.7        1.0         3.7           9.6        2.0       -0.5        -3.7


 2014/15      Q1      -3.5       0.8       1.5      1.7        6.6         2.7          -3.6        -1.2      -2.4        4.0
              Q2       9.1       0.6       1.8      0.7        0.6         -2.1          1.5        1.2        2.9        -7.5



62
                                                     Public                    Human
Transport &   Financial   Real estate    Other                                              Other             Taxes on
                                                   administra-   Education    Health &                FISIM
  Storage     services     activities   business                                           services           products
                                                      tion                   social work
   14.3         25.4          5.7         12.4         5.5          4.3         -3.2        12.3      21.7      11.8
    1.5          3.5         12.6                      7.5          3.2          2.0         3.8                3.5
    4.3          9.7         -3.8                      5.3          3.5          2.3         3.9                4.2

    5.9          4.2          4.2                      4.0          5.5          4.5         7.8                3.7
    4.1          0.7          4.7                      1.3          3.6          5.5         4.2                4.3
    0.2          7.7          3.1                      3.0          4.6          5.0         2.2                2.4


   28.6         -5.2         -0.7         7.0          8.8         -8.1         -12.3        8.1      -5.1      15.3


   21.2         -9.3         -2.1         12.2         7.6          1.3         -5.0        12.3      -11.5     9.9
   14.0         17.8         -0.6         9.7          2.5          2.9         -3.3        13.5       4.2      14.9
   11.3         46.4         11.9         12.8         4.6          5.9         -7.7        13.2      54.6      12.4
   11.3         50.5         12.4         14.8         7.5          7.4          3.7        10.0      68.5      9.8


    2.8          1.5         39.9         16.7        19.6         -0.7          2.5        12.3      111.2     7.7
   -0.4         -5.0          3.2         9.8         -1.0          3.6          1.4         -0.6     100.6     -2.6
    4.3         10.8          5.1         15.2         5.1          6.6          0.9         5.0      52.7      5.4
   -0.7          6.5          2.3         18.4         6.2          3.3          3.0         -1.5     37.7      3.6


    0.8         10.0         -23.6        14.8        17.9          4.7          3.2         1.9      28.5      5.2
    4.9          7.0          2.8         15.3         0.2          1.1          3.0         4.9      34.8      1.6
    3.0          8.7          1.8         6.2          0.6          4.8          2.2         2.7      21.3      4.1
    8.3         12.9          3.7         -0.8         2.5          3.3          0.7         6.2      30.3      5.8


    7.5          6.3          2.8         1.7          5.0          4.4          1.4        17.1       1.1      6.5
    5.8         11.4          5.1         1.4          8.2          0.2         -0.9         8.4      -14.6     2.1
    6.9          4.2          4.1         0.3         -2.0          9.4          9.4         4.0      -11.8     6.6
    3.5         -5.1          4.7         6.3          4.9          8.1          8.2         1.8      -12.3     -0.3


    3.5          2.1          3.9         13.2        -0.9          8.4          6.7         5.7      -7.2      0.2
    8.8          0.5          2.8         13.3         1.5          3.4          6.3         4.2      -5.8      4.2
   -1.3          2.9          6.4                      3.7          0.9          5.3         3.2                10.6
    5.4         -2.6          5.6                      0.8          1.7          3.5         3.7                2.0


    1.6          1.6          2.1                      2.8         10.2          2.1         0.9                1.0
    2.4          0.5          2.0                      3.7          2.8          2.2         3.8                -1.3
    2.3         -0.3          4.2                      5.3          2.7          9.2         3.3                6.4
   -5.5         28.8          4.1                      0.0          2.7          6.4         0.6                3.3


   -0.4          5.3          1.4                     11.5          3.8          0.4         2.4                -2.4
    0.9         13.9          1.7                      4.1          3.3          1.1         -0.3               7.7



                                                                                                                       63
64
     Table A5: Balance of Payments (percent of GDP unless otherwise stated)

      VARIABLE                                                     2009/10    2010/11    2011/12    2012/13    2013/14   2014/15
      Current Account (incl transfers)                             -8.1       -9.8       -9.5       -7.6       -7.9      -8.9
       Exports of goods                                            11.5       11.3       11.4       11.8       10.1      10.4
       Imports of goods                                            -20.4      -23.1      -22.6      -20.4      -18.7     -18.6
       Services (net)                                              -2.1       -3.4       -1.7       -1.7       -0.9      -1.8
       Trade balance                                               -8.9       -11.8      -11.1      -8.6       -8.6      -8.2
       Income (net)                                                -1.7       -1.7       -2.0       -2.2       -2.4      -2.7
       Current transfers (net)                                     4.6        7.1        5.3        4.9        4.0       3.8


      Capital and Financial Account                                8.8        5.3        10.1       7.3        7.9       7.1
       Capital account                                             1.0        0.8        0.8        1.2        0.8       0.7
       Financial account                                           7.9        4.5        9.3        6.1        7.1       6.4
        o/w direct investment                                      3.4        3.5        5.4        3.8        4.5       4.4


      Overall Balance                                              1.2        -2.9       3.3        1.4        1.4       -1.8
      Gross International Reserves (million USD)                   2,384.67   2,043.98   2,643.77   2,912.34   3,394.0   2,912.0
      Gross international reserves in months of imports            4.4        3.2        4.3        4.5        5.0       4.0




     Table A6. Inflation Rates

      PERCENTAGE CHANGES                                  2008/9   2009/10    2010/11    2011/12    2012/13    2013/14   2014/15
                                                          FY       FY         FY         FY         FY         FY        FY
      CPI (average)                                       14.2     9.4        6.5        23.7       5.8        6.7       2.4
      CPI (end of period)                                 12.3     4.2        15.7       18.0       3.7        5.0       6.0
      Food (end of period)                                27.9     16.5       9.3        12.8       -1.4       7.2       -1.9
      Core Inflation (end of period)                      8.9      6.7        5.7        19.5       5.8        2.9       2.7
     Table A7: Exchange rates and Interate rates (2011-2015


                                                                                                                      Deposit                      Lending
                                                                      Treasury bill   Central Bank   Deposit (Local               Lending (Local
                                    Nominal        NEER       REER                                                    (Foreign                     (Foreign
      Year           Month                                            rate(91-days)   Rate*          Currency)                    Currency)
                                    UGX/USD        Index      Index                                                   Currency)                    Currency)
                                                                      %               %              %                            %
                                                                                                                      %                            %
      2011           Jun            2,461          131.1      114.6   12.1            16.7           2.6              1.3         19.9             9.4
                     Jul            2,587          137.8      118.4   13.1            13.0           2.8              1.3         21.7             9.7
                     Aug            2,753          146        123     14.5            14.0           4.3              1.2         21.3             9.8
                     Sep            2,814          145.9      115.4   15.6            16.0           2.5              1.1         23.3             9.7
                     Oct            2,805          143.3      112.2   18.8            20.0           2.4              1.1         23.6             9.5
                     Nov            2,582          132.5      104.1   19.6            23.0           3.1              1.6         26               10.3
                     Dec            2,447          126.1      99.7    20.1            23.0           3.3              1.3         26.7             10.1
      2012           Jan            2,414          124.3      99.4    20.3            23.0           3.4              1.3         27.3             10.3
                     Feb            2,328          122        96.1    17.6            22.0           3.3              1.3         26.8             10.4
                     Mar            2,485          129.7      102.6   15.7            21.0           3.4              1.3         27.6             10
                     Apr            2,506          130.4      101.7   16.3            21.0           3.7              1.2         26.1             8.2
                     May            2,479          127.4      99.8    16.4            21.0           3.5              1.4         26.7             9.3
                     Jun            2,484          124.9      98.6    16.7            20.0           3.5              1.6         27.0             8.4
                     Jul            2,474          120.7      110.4   16.7            19.0           3.6              1.2         26.9             9
                     Aug            2,600          121.8      111.7   12.7            17.0           3.6              1.3         26.4             9.1
                     Sep            2,593          123.8      112.8   10.7            15.0           3.1              1.2         25.7             8.7
                     Oct            2,621          127.1      115.7   9.1             13.0           3.0              1.2         24.9             10.7
                     Nov            2,625          128.2      116.3   9.3             12.5           2.9              1.2         23.7             10.4
                     Dec            2,614          130.7      118.8   9.4             12.0           2.6              1.2         24.8             8.7




65
66
      2013           Jan     2,684      130.9   119.8   9.2    12.0   2.8    1.4    24.2    9.8
                     Feb     2,658      129     118.3   9.1    12.0   2.6    1.2    24.3    9.3
                     Mar     2,637      127.4   116.1   8.8    12.0   2.8    1.4    24.0    9.9
                     Apr     2,578      125     112.7   9.5    12.0   2.8    1.5    24.6    10.3
                     May     2,586      124.8   112.3   9.4    12.0   2.9    1.5    23.5    9.7
                     Jun     2,593      124.1   112.5   9.5    11.0   2.6    1.4    22.7    10.1
                     Jul     2,589      122.9   111.7   9.4    11.0   2.9    1.3    23.1    9.2
                     Aug     2,579      121.8   108.4   9.2    11.0   2.9    1.3    23.1    9.6
                     Sep     2,569      120.7   106.4   9.4    12.0   3.0    1.3    22.5    9.7
                     Oct     2,534      118.5   105.4   9.7    12.0   2.6    1.4    22.2    9.6
                     Nov     2,523      117.1   105.2   10.2   12.0   2.9    1.3    22.7    11.4
                     Dec     2,513      116.6   105.4   8.8    11.5   3.4    1.54   22.0    9.9
      2014           Jan     2,450      115.5   104.6   8.4    11.5   3.3    1.46   21.8    9.4
                     Feb     2,472      114.3   103.4   8.9    11.5   3.1    1.32   20.7    9.7
                     Mar     2,534      117.7   105.8   9.4    11.5   3.1    1.34   21.9    9.4
                     Apr     2,529.79   117.7   93.5    9.9    11.5   3.8    1.42   21.7    9.0
                     May     2,532.39   118     95.1    9.5    11.5   3.0    1.53   22.0    9.7
                     Jun     2,580.86   119.7   97.8    8.9    11.0   2.4    1.55   21.4    9.0
                     Jul     2,633.52   122.1   100.4   9.1    11.0   2.8    1.34   21.5    8.1
                     Aug     2,612.50   120.5   98.3    10.1   11.0   2.5    1.20   21.7    8.8
                     Sep     2,618.80   119.6   97.2    10.0   11.0   2.6    1.37   21.1    9.7
                     Oct     2,680.51   121.6   98.1    10.3   11.0   2.5    1.39   21.9    10.8
                     Nov     2,734.22   122.9   100.4   10.4   11.0   2.8    1.33   22.1    9.3
                     Dec     2768.8     123.2   100.5   10.6   11.0   3.0    1.44   19.9    10.8
      2015           Jan     2,860.71   130.8   102.7   11.0   11     2.89   1.33   21.69   9.67
                     Feb     2,868.80   130.6   102     11.4   11     3.38   1.37   20.82   8.35
                     Mar     2,951.70   132.7   102.7   12.3   11     2.66   1.47   20.08   10.44
                     Apr     2,995.60   134.4   102     13.1   12     3.51   1.34   22.1    10.25
                     May     3,054.29                   12.9   12

     Source:Bank of Uganda
     Table A8. Monetary indicators

                                             2008/9   2009/10   2010/11   2011/12   2012/13   2013/14   2014/15 proj
      Monetary Aggregates
       M3 as % of GDP                        18.3     20.5      22.4      19.0      18.9      20.7      21.5
       M2 as % of GDP                        14.3     15.9      17.1      13.0      14.0      14.9      15.1
       M3 growth rate (%)                    25.0     33.2      25.7      7.2       6.6       17.4      14.2
       M2 growth rate (%)                    26.3     32.1      23.9      -4.2      15.7      14.1      11.3
      Domestic Credit
       Total domestic credit (% of GDP)      9.2      11.9      16.0      11.8      12.5      14.2      16.9
       Private sector credit (% of GDP)      10.4     11.5      14.4      12.7      12.5      13.3      14.0
       Total domestic credit growth (%)      64.1     54.7      54.1      -6.5      13.6      21.9      30.5
       Private sector credit growth (%)      31.3     30.6      43.6      11.5      6.4       13.9      15.7
      Interest Rates Structure
       Average TB rate (period average, %)   8.4      5.3       7.6       17.2      10.3      9.3       11.0
       Average lending rate (%)              20.9     20.7      19.8      24.6      24.8      22.1      21.3
       Average deposit rate (%)              2.1      2.0       2.1       3.2       3.0       3.1       2.9

       Source: IMF, BoU




67
68
     For more information, please visit:
     www.worldbank.org/uganda
     Join the discussion on:
     http://www.facebook.com/worldbankafrica
     http://www.twitter.com/worldbankafrica
     http://www.youtube.com/worldbank




70
