                                                                                                99250




                                  From Gas to Cash:
  Policy Options for Transferring Resource Revenues to
                 Citizens in Mozambique




World Bank Policy Note

June 2015




This policy note is a product of joint collaboration between the Macroeconomics and Fiscal
Management, Poverty, and Social Protection & Labor Global Practices. The work was led by Natasha
Sharma and the team included Pedro Olinto, Eric Zapatero, Vanessa Moreira da Silva, Carlos da Maia,
Ruben Villanueva, Nada Choueiri, and Poorva Karkare. Feedback and support was provided by Enrique
Blanco Armas and Julio Revilla, and the work was carried out under the overall guidance of Mark Roland
Thomas. The team would like to acknowledge the financing provided by DFID for this work under the
programmatic AAA 'Enhancing macroeconomic and fiscal policy making for inclusive growth in a
resource-rich setting.'

                                                  1
2
Contents
Acronyms ...................................................................................................................................................... 5
Executive Summary....................................................................................................................................... 6
Introduction .................................................................................................................................................. 9
Section 1: Growth and Poverty ................................................................................................................... 10
Section 2: The Social Protection System ..................................................................................................... 13
Section 3: Policy Options for Scaling-Up Cash Transfers in Mozambique’s Future Resource-Rich
Environment ............................................................................................................................................... 16
   (i)       Rationale for a Scaled-Up Cash Transfer Program .......................................................................... 16
   (ii)         Design Options for a Scaled-Up Cash Transfer Program............................................................. 17
               Option 1: Universal Cash Transfer Program................................................................................ 19
               Option 2: A Cash Transfer Program Targeted to the Poor .......................................................... 21
               Option 3: A Cash Transfer Program Targeted to the Poor with a Conditional Component ....... 24
   (iii)        Addressing Potential Risks of a Scaled-up Cash Transfer Program............................................. 27
   (iv)         Preparing for a Scaled-up Cash Transfer Program ...................................................................... 28
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................... 30
References .................................................................................................................................................. 34




                                                                               3
Figure 1: There is wide variation in how poverty responds to growth in resource-rich countries… .......... 12
Figure 2: ….While in non-resource-rich countries the dispersion is not as great ....................................... 12
Figure 3: Over time domestic financing for social protection is steadily increasing .................................. 14
Figure 4: The amount spent on progressive social action programs is increasing as subsidies decline ..... 14
Figure 5: With a budget constraint between 0 and 1.5% of GDP the poverty headcount does not vary
much with different transfer levels* .......................................................................................................... 22
Figure 6: With a budget of 1% of GDP, the poverty gap index improves with a higher transfer value and
lower coverage levels**.............................................................................................................................. 22
Figure 7: The poverty severity index also improves with a higher transfer value and lower coverage
levels*** ..................................................................................................................................................... 23




Box 1: Characteristics of Poverty and Vulnerability in Mozambique ......................................................... 11
Box 2: Unconditional cash transfers improving poverty and welfare in selected peer countries .............. 16
Box 3: Methodology and Assumptions used in the Simulation Exercise .................................................... 18
Box 4: Determining eligibility for a targeted cash transfer program .......................................................... 19
Box 5: Natural Resource Wealth Redistribution through Cash Transfers in Alaska ................................... 20
Box 6: Cash Transfer Programs in Latin America Reducing Poverty and Inequality, and improving the use
of Social Services ......................................................................................................................................... 25
Box 7: Transferring gas to cash in Bolivia to reduce poverty and promote development outcomes ........ 26
Box 8: Implementing an integrated cash transfer program in Mozambique ............................................. 26
Box 9: Universal distribution of cash transfers in Mongolia ....................................................................... 28



Table 1: Coverage of basic social protection programs implemented by INAS (number of Households).. 14
Table 2: Changes to monthly subsidies under the Basic Social Subsidy Program (PSSB) ........................... 15




                                                                                4
Acronyms

CCT :   Conditional cash transfers

CT:     Cash transfer

GEPR: Growth Elasticity of Poverty Reduction

HDF:    Human Development Fund

INAS:   Instituto Nacional de Acção Social (National Institute of Social Action)

IOF:    Inquérito aos Orçamentos Familiares (Household Budget and Expenditure survey)

LNG :   Liquefied Natural Gas

MIS:    Management Information System

OVC:    Orphan and Vulnerable Children

PASP: Programa de Acção Social Produtiva (Productive Social Action)

PASD: Programa de Acção Social Directa (Direct Social Assistance)

PSSB:   Programa de Subsídio Social Básico (Basic Social Subsidy)




                                                     5
Executive Summary

While Mozambique’s growth rate is impressive, the extent to which growth impacts poverty reduction
is declining, and this trend is likely to continue unless there are major policy changes. In the period
after the end of the civil war (1996 to 2002) strong economic growth largely led by agriculture was
associated with an impressive decline in poverty rates from 69 percent to 56 percent. In later years
(2002 to 2009) economic growth continued to be strong, but as capital intensive investments
increasingly contributed to GDP, including megaprojects with limited linkages to the rest of the
economy, poverty fell slightly from 56 percent in 2003 to 52 percent in 2009. Therefore, the sources of
growth matter, where labor-intensive sectors such as agriculture and manufacturing are typically more
poverty reducing compared with resource extractive sectors. As Mozambique’s economy evolves to one
where extractive industries will play an increasingly important role, this tenuous relationship between
growth and poverty is likely to continue in the absence of major policy changes.

In Mozambique’s future resource-rich environment, implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program
could be a relatively cost effective policy option for using resource revenues to reduce poverty over a
short period of time. The government is currently in a transition period, with an opportunity to plan for
the use of resource revenues expected to come on stream from 2020 onward. Among the policy options
under consideration, investing in human and physical capital, and strengthening institutions will
undoubtedly continue to be government priorities, which should lead to improvements over the
medium to long term. However, given absorptive capacity constraints it may not be possible for the
pace of spending to increase at the same pace as government revenues. Implementing a scaled-up cash
transfer program in Mozambique’s future resource-rich environment could complement these efforts
through reducing poverty over a relatively short period of time.

Evidence from both within the region and internationally has shown that the distribution of cash
transfers can reduce poverty, improve welfare and promote development outcomes. In Africa, impact
evaluations in Zambia, Kenya, Malawi and South Africa have all shown that the distribution of cash
transfers can reduce poverty and have other positive impacts such as better agricultural productivity,
increase in self-employment, enhanced health status and improved school attendance. The
implementation of cash transfer programs in these countries have in part been motivated by the success
of cash transfer programs worldwide, particularly in Latin America. Impact evaluations undertaken in
Mexico, Colombia, Brazil and Nicaragua among others have demonstrated that the implementation of
conditional cash transfer programs can be directly attributed to a reduction in poverty and improved
welfare.

Implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program could build on the achievements Mozambique has
made in recent years in improving the social protection system. Over the last few years Mozambique
has been engaging in efforts to modernize the social protection system, including the introduction of the
Social Protection Law and the National Social Protection Strategy, which is underpinned by an increase
in domestic financing. Furthermore, spending on social action programs which directly benefit the poor
have been increasing. However, the coverage of existing social protection programs is low, where

                                                   6
approximately only 14 percent of the poor benefit. Implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program
could build on existing achievements, although efforts would be needed to strengthen the overall social
protection system, including: (i) strengthening capacity to administer methods for targeting the poor; (ii)
establishing a management information system, which would include a single registry of beneficiaries;
(iii) outsourcing the payment system; (iv) strengthening the capacity of the national Institute of Social
Action (INAS) at the local level; and (iv) developing monitoring and evaluation mechanisms to include
regular reports from the management information system, strengthened internal control measures and
period impact assessments.

Implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program targeted to a broad section of the poor, could rapidly
reduce poverty and encourage wider support for this policy initiative from the population. Different
options for implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program in Mozambique’s future resource-rich
environment have been considered in this report. The optimal scenario for poverty reduction would be
to distribute a relatively generous transfer (compared to the average consumption of the poor) to the
entire population, which is estimated to reduce poverty from 52 percent to 36 percent. Assuming
Mozambique was already in receipt of expected resource revenues this policy option would cost around
5 percent of GDP, which is unlikely to be affordable given other spending priorities. Instead, with a more
limited fiscal envelope, a scaled-up cash transfer program could target the poor, and decisions would
need to be made on whether to have a large target population or provide a more generous transfer to a
smaller target population. With a budget of 1 percent of GDP, cash transfers could rapidly reduce
poverty by 4 percentage points by covering the majority of the population under the food poverty line.
Increasing the budget to 2 percent of GDP could further reduce poverty by 7 percentage points.

One component of the scaled-up targeted cash transfer program could include a conditional cash
transfer to encourage school attendance for children. While distributing cash without any conditions
can reduce poverty and promote positive development outcomes, the evidence suggests that
introducing conditions or co-responsibilities in order to receive cash can help to promote specific
behaviors, such as increased school attendance. In Mozambique, school enrollment levels are high,
expected to reach 100 percent, but pupil absenteeism is estimated to be 56 percent. Also, the majority
of poor households have children and the current social protection programs do not specifically address
their needs. Therefore, it is suggested that a conditional cash transfer could be introduced to encourage
school attendance, but this would need to be complemented with broader efforts to improve the
availability of schools and the quality of teaching. Over time, capacity would also need to be developed
to monitor compliance with the conditions or co-responsibilities.

There may be risks to implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program which should be addressed
through sound fiscal management and program design. Concerns are sometimes put forward that cash
transfers can have unintended consequences on the labor market and the economy. On the contrary,
evidence from other countries suggests that recipients of cash transfers are more likely to participate in
the labor market and engage in productive agricultural activities. Other concerns could be related to a
scaled-up cash transfer program being financed through resource revenues because of the potential risk
of volatility. These risks can be avoided through sound macroeconomic and fiscal management, such as

                                                    7
avoiding earmarking resource revenues for cash transfers. Instead, the increased fiscal space should be
used as an opportunity to increase financing through the regular budget process for cash transfers.
There may also be concerns that a cash transfer program could stoke inflationary pressures, which could
be avoided through ensuring the transfer is capped at a modest level.

In sum, once resource revenues are on stream, a scaled-up cash transfer program could be an
affordable and effective way of significantly reducing poverty over a short period of time. A scaled-up
cash transfer program could be part of the government’s broader strategy toward ensuring impressive
economic growth is having an impact on poverty reduction, which is likely to be even more challenging
in a resource-rich environment. With revenues from natural resources on stream, a scaled-up cash
transfer program would be affordable and a relatively cost-effective policy option. Therefore,
implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program provides an opportunity to significantly reduce the
number of people living below the poverty line, and improve other welfare measures, while sharing the
benefits of resource wealth more widely amongst the population.




                                                  8
Introduction

If developments in the extractive industries are implemented as planned, Mozambique could have
unprecedented opportunities to reap the benefits of a natural resource boom. Based on proposed
developments in the liquefied natural gas (LNG) sector, government revenues are expected to increase
significantly by 2020 onward. By 2032 resource revenues could be as high as US$9 billion, representing
7 percent of GDP and 21 percent of total government revenues. If channeled correctly, resource
revenues could significantly reduce poverty and provide a basis for inclusive growth and shared
prosperity.

Mozambique has enjoyed strong economic growth but poverty levels are still unacceptably high.
Economic growth has been strong over the last two decades, with an average annual growth rate of 7.4
percent in real terms. Despite the sustained growth levels an estimated 52 percent of the population
lives below the national poverty line (Alfani et al, 2012). Over time, the extent to which poverty has
reduced in response to economic growth has declined, coinciding with the extractive and capital-
intensive sectors increasingly contributing to growth. Looking ahead, it is likely that this pattern of
growth will continue, suggesting that in the absence of major policy changes strong economic growth
may continue to have disappointing results on poverty reduction.

Mozambique is now in a transition period with an opportunity to plan for how resource revenues can
contribute to poverty reduction and inclusive growth. A clear priority will be to invest in human and
physical capital and to strengthen the institutional environment. Through investing resource revenues
effectively, benefits could be accrued to current and future generations by promoting higher and more
inclusive growth. However, due to absorptive capacity constraints the pace at which public spending
can be increased will be limited, suggesting that a strategy to alleviate poverty more quickly could be
called for. The distribution of cash transfers could form a key part of such a strategy, enabling the
government to significantly reduce poverty over a relatively short period of time.

Indeed, the experience in other countries suggests that cash transfer programs can directly reduce
poverty, improve welfare and promote development outcomes. Impact evaluations undertaken in the
region, and further afield in a number of Latin American countries, provide wide-ranging evidence on
the positive effects of cash transfer programs in reducing poverty and promoting welfare. In
Mozambique, while there have been some improvements to the social protection system, coverage
levels are low reaching only an estimated 14 percent of the poor. The onset of resource revenues
provides an opportunity to significantly scale-up the distribution of cash transfers, which could be a
comparatively cost-effective way of reducing poverty in a relatively short period of time. A scaled-up
cash transfer program could also be a way of distributing the benefits from natural resources amongst a
wide segment of Mozambicans, thereby promoting broader popular support for this policy initiative.

Any policy to scale-up a cash transfer program will operate with a limited budget, meaning that
decisions will need to be made on the optimal design choice in Mozambique. In a resource-rich
environment, the possibility of implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program will be much more

                                                  9
affordable. Nevertheless, due to other spending priorities, there is likely to be a limited fiscal envelope,
implying the need to make decisions on the optimal design of a cash transfer program in order maximize
poverty reduction and improve welfare. Therefore, there are likely to be trade-offs. For example would
it be better to have a more generous transfer and cover a smaller segment of the population, or would
wider coverage and a less generous transfer promote greater gains? Similarly, there may be questions
on how the target population should be defined, for example with limited resources should a scaled-up
cash transfer program attempt to cover all of the poor, or to target the very poorest? Furthermore,
from a political economy perspective, ensuring support for a cash transfer program may involve
increasing coverage of the population so that the benefits are felt more broadly. Finally, it is important
to consider the potential risks of a scaled-up cash transfer program, and the steps that could to be taken
to prepare for implementation.

The objective of this policy note is to generate debate on implementing a scaled-up cash transfer in
Mozambique’s future resource-rich environment, as part of a broader strategy to reduce poverty. The
scope of this note is focused on distributing resource revenues through a scaled-up cash transfer
program, and not the broader management of resource revenues.1 Section one discusses growth and
poverty dynamics. Section two presents the existing social protection system. Section three discusses
policy options for implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program using a simulation exercise to
estimate poverty and welfare effects for a given fiscal envelope. Section four discusses how to address
the risks of financing a scaled-up cash transfer program from resource revenues. Section five focuses on
the practicalities of how the social protection system should be strengthened to implement a scaled-up
cash transfer program. And the final section concludes.

Section 1: Growth and Poverty
Mozambique has enjoyed high levels of economic growth, where extractive industries are increasingly
playing an important role. Over the last two decades an average real growth rate of 7.4 percent has
been sustained. From 1992 to 2000, following the end of the civil conflict, strong growth was supported
by agricultural activity. While agriculture continues to play an important role, over the last decade
capital intensive investments including megaprojects have become increasingly important, and are
expected to continue growing as plans to develop coal and LNG sectors come underway. However,
capital and import-intensive megaprojects have developed with limited linkages to the local economy.

While economic growth has been impressive, job creation has been limited, leading to high levels of
underemployment. Mozambique has an estimated population of 25 million in 2014, with an
economically active population of around 11 million (Cunha et. al, 2013). There are high rates of labor
force participation where virtually everyone of working age is economically active, albeit not to their full
potential. Unemployment largely affects the urban youth with an estimated 39 percent being
unemployed (INCAF, 2012). Overall, there are limited formal job opportunities, where approximately 10
percent of the population work in the formal sector and are salaried employees (Jones and Tarp, 2012).
1
 Separate policy notes on natural wealth accounting and resource revenue management have been developed
which complement the findings in this policy note

                                                    10
Informal sector employment is dominated by the agriculture sector, with an estimated 70 percent of the
population involved in subsistence farming.

The extent to which poverty reduction is responsive to economic growth is declining over time. The
rapid economic growth at the end of the civil war, which was supported by agricultural activities helped
raise living standards and per capita incomes from a very low base. Poverty rates fell from 69 percent of
the population in 1997 to 56 percent in 2003. During this period, a 1 percent increase in GDP was
associated with a reduction in poverty by 1.44 percent (a relationship described as the growth elasticity
of poverty – GEPR). In comparison, from 2003-2009 poverty only fell slightly from 56 percent in 2003 to
52 percent in 2009, where a 1 percent increase in GDP was associated with a reduction in poverty by
0.17 percent. During this latter period capital intensive megaprojects increasingly contributed to GDP,
and it is likely this trend will continue, implying that in the absence of major policy changes growth may
continue to have a disappointing impact on poverty reduction (see box 1 for a description of poverty
and vulnerability in Mozambique).

                    Box 1: Characteristics of Poverty and Vulnerability in Mozambique
  Poverty is associated with a number of factors in Mozambique including demographics, education
  and employment. The poorest households are typically larger, have a higher proportion of children,
  people with disabilities, greater dependency rates, are female headed with lower education levels
  and are predominantly rural.
  Given the high prevalence of poverty, consumption levels are comparatively flat for quintiles 1 to 4,
  making it relatively challenging to identify the absolute poorest. The age-dependency ratio in poor
  households is above 60 percent, which is considerably higher than non-poor households at 51
  percent. Of the poorest 10 percent of households, 91 percent have children. Persons over 60 years
  comprise 10 percent of the poorest quintile.
  About 25 percent of children (5 to 14 years) and more than 80 percent of the senior population (60
  years and above) are economically active. The poor are largely engaged in the agriculture sector,
  without access to any kind of insurance or social benefit. Levels of access to financial and credit
  markets are also low. In rural areas only an estimated 19 percent of people report using a financial
  product from a bank, compared to 43 percent for the urban population.
  Households with higher education levels have greater consumption levels. For example, female
  literacy rates in the poorest two quintiles are 12.7 percent and 17.0 percent respectively, compared
  with 83.9 percent in the least poor quintile. However, the quality of education is a concern where
  the youth literacy rate is 67.2 percent, and is one of the lowest compared with peer countries.
  Rural households are vulnerable to seasonal and frequent climate-related shocks as they are heavily
  dependent on agriculture-related income. During the “lean season” affected households are
  estimated to consume 40 percent fewer calories. Poor households in urban areas are particularly
  vulnerable to protracted underemployment, low income, and food price increases. With shifts in
  labor movements from low productivity rural agriculture to even lower productivity urban activities,
  the vulnerabilities of urban households are of increasing concern.
Sources: IOF 2008-09; Fox et. al 2012; Demographic and Health Survey 2011; and World Bank, 2012 and 2013a, WB
FinCap Survey 2013



                                                     11
Evidence from the region also suggests that growth led by extractive industries will not immediately
contribute to poverty reduction. Looking at a sample of 15 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa there is wide
variation in the extent to which poverty reduction is responsive to changes in growth in resource-rich
countries.2 Poverty reduction has been more responsive to growth in resource-rich countries such as
Niger, Botswana and the Republic of Congo (see figure 1). However, in other resource-rich countries
such as Zambia, Cameroon and Guinea increases in per capita growth rates have occurred in parallel
with worsening levels of poverty. In comparison, for the majority of non-resource rich countries
increased per capita growth has led to a reduction in poverty (see figure 2). These trends can partly be
explained by the sources of growth being important for poverty reduction, where growth in labor
intensive sectors such as agriculture and manufacturing is typically more poverty reducing compared
with capital intensive sectors (World Bank, 2013b). Therefore, growth related to the extractives will not
have an immediate impact on poverty reduction, suggesting the importance of adopting specific policy
measures to reduce poverty in Mozambique.

Figure 1: There is wide variation in how poverty Figure 2: ….While in non-resource-rich countries the
responds to growth in resource-rich countries…   dispersion is not as great3

       5                                                                                                                                                                          5
       3                                                                                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                                                                           GEPR



       1
GEPR




       -1                                                                                                                                                                         -1
       -3                                                                                                                                                                         -3
       -5                                                                                                                                                                         -5
                                                                                                                                                                                       Mozambique




                                                                                                                                                                                            Malawi




                                                                                                                                                                                              Benin
                                                                                                                                                                                           Ethiopia

                                                                                                                                                                                           Burundi
                                                                                                                                                                                             Ghana




                                                                                                                                                                                           Rwanda
                                                                                                                                                                                          Tanzania

                                                                                                                                                                                           Uganda
                                                                                                                                                                                         Swaziland

                                                                                                                                                                                        Cabo Verde

                                                                                                                                                                                               Togo



                                                                                                                                                                                           Lesotho
                                                              Chad
                                                                     Burkina Faso




                                                                                                                      Zambia




                                                                                                                                                                 Guinea
            Niger



                                             Namibia




                                                                                    Sierra Leone




                                                                                                                                         Mauritania
                                                                                                                               Senegal
                                                       Mali
                    Botswana




                                                                                                            Nigeria
                                                                                                   Angola
                               Congo, Rep.




                                                                                                                                                      Cameroon




Source: World Development Indicators

Initial levels of inequality also affect the extent to which economic growth impacts poverty reduction.
Studies using cross-country data have shown that where initial inequality levels are lower, growth has a
larger impact on poverty reduction (Bourguignon, 2003 and Chhibber and Nayyar, 2007). Latest
available estimates show that levels of inequality are actually higher in Mozambique compared with a
number of resource-rich countries in SSA such as the Republic of Congo, Guinea, Mali and Sierra Leone
(WDI). Therefore, for Mozambique to promote pro-poor growth, reducing inequality should be a
priority, where redistributive income policies can play an important role.

In sum, in order for strong economic growth increasingly related to the extractive industries to impact
poverty reduction it is likely that specific policy measures will be required. While economic growth has

2
  The analysis is based on differences in poverty headcount ratios using a sample of 28 spells (the period between
two consecutive surveys) which vary by five to nine years, depending on data availability
3
  For the purposes of this analysis Mozambique, Ghana, Uganda and Tanzania are categorized as not being
resource-rich as the recent discoveries in natural resources were not significantly contributing to growth during
the survey periods

                                                                                                                                                                          12
been strong in Mozambique, there has been limited creation of formal job opportunities, resulting in
high levels of underemployment. Following the end of the civil war, strong economic growth supported
by agricultural activity was associated with a significant decline in poverty. However, more recent data
shows that the pace of poverty reduction has slowed, coinciding with capital intensive megaprojects
increasingly contributing to GDP. Evidence from the region shows that in resource-rich countries growth
does not always result in poverty reduction, and that performance varies considerably. Mozambique has
relatively higher inequality levels compared with other countries in the region, which is also likely to
affect the extent to which economic growth reduces poverty. Therefore, as the extractive industries
grow in importance, specific policy measures to directly reduce poverty are called for.

Section 2: The Social Protection System

The social protection system is in the process of being modernized as part of the government’s
response to tackling poverty and vulnerability. The government has implemented new institutional
arrangements for social protection, including a Social Protection Law (2007) and a National Social
Protection Strategy 2010-2014. This strategy is being operationalized through three core social action
programs: (i) The Basic Social Subsidy Program (PSSB), a social pension for poor households without
adults able to work (elderly, disabled and chronically ill); (ii) the Productive Social Action Program
(PASP), a labor intensive public works program for poor households with adults able to work, and (iii)
the Direct Social Support Program (PASD), a temporary support program for households experiencing
idiosyncratic shocks affecting their consumption and income. These three core cash transfer programs
are complemented by the provision of social services for targeted vulnerable groups in institutions like
orphanages, community centers for the elderly or daycare centers for vulnerable children.

The progress in the social protection sector has been facilitated by an increase in domestic financing
for social protection. The increase in the government’s contribution to social protection is a shift in
trend from previous years when donors largely provided financing to the sector. Importantly, the
increased spending is being channeled toward social protection programs, while the amount allocated
to subsidies is reducing. This trend is important as subsidies were found to be regressive and not pro-
poor, indicating that spending on social protection is increasingly benefitting the poor (World Bank,
2012).




                                                  13
 Figure 3: Over time domestic financing for social Figure 4: The amount spent on progressive social
 protection is steadily increasing4                action programs is increasing as subsidies decline

            1.5%                                                                     1.5%

            1.0%
% of GDP




                                                                                     1.0%




                                                                          % of GDP
            0.5%                                                                     0.5%

            0.0%                                                                     0.0%
                       2011      2012         2013       2014                                  2011       2012       2013      2014

           Recurrent    External investment    Internal investment                          Social Action Programs     Subsidies

 Sources: 2011 to 2013 CGE; 2014 REO


 Overall, the coverage of social protection programs in Mozambique is low. There has been some
 expansion of the major social assistance programs (see table 1),5 but coverage levels still remain low. An
 estimated two million people benefit from one of the major programs thereby covering approximately
 14 percent of the poor, or eight percent of the entire population.6 Furthermore, important
 programmatic gaps still remain, particularly for poor households with children, which represent a large
 share of the poor.

Table 1: Coverage of basic social protection programs implemented by INAS (number of Households)
                             Programs              2012                    2013                                      2014 (Planned)
 Direct Social Assistance (PASD)                  33,988                  51,414                                          43,698
 Basic Social Subsidy (PSSB)                     274,025                 304,576                                        341,188
 Productive Social Action (PASP)                   9,592                  11,345                                          33,680
                                   7
 Social Services for Social Action                 4,470                   8,971                                           8,818
 Source: INAS 2012 and 2013 Annual Reports and Economic and Social Plan, 2014


 Coverage levels are also low compared with peer countries. In SSA coverage levels vary significantly
 where middle income countries have a much larger coverage compared with low income countries. For
 example, South Africa’s grant system reaches approximately 27 percent of the entire population, where
 the Child Support Grant covers 8.8 million children, comprising 70 percent of the target population.
 Coverage of the target population is around 70 percent in Botswana and 20 percent in Malawi.8



 4
   This figure shows the level of resources channeled for social protection through the government’s treasury
 system and therefore does not include donor financed projects that do not use government systems
 5
   The Mozambique Social Protection Assessment, 2012 has a detailed assessment of all social protection programs
 and coverage levels including those implemented by the Ministry of Education, Ministry of Health and
 development partners
 6
   This calculation is based on a national average household size of 4.7 people
 7
   This is not a cash transfer program, but institutional support for targeted vulnerable groups
 8
   Aspire database

                                                                     14
Furthermore, coverage levels are very low compared with countries where cash transfers have been
used as an instrument to significantly reduce poverty. For example, Mexico’s Oportunidades program
covers 72 percent of the poor population and Brazil’s Bolsa Familia covers 84 percent of the poor (Garcia
and Moore, 2012). A study examining cash transfers in Eastern Europe and Central Asia found that the
mean coverage rate of the poorest quintile is 42 percent (Fiszbein and Schady, 2009). Therefore, while
coverage levels have been improving in Mozambique they are still far below countries in the region and
countries that are using cash transfers as a key policy instrument to reduce poverty.

There have been some improvements to the generosity of transfers. As seen in table 2 the transfer
value of the PSSB subsidy is improving over time. However, not all social protection programs have
increased in value. For example, the transfer value of the labor intensive public works program has
remained unchanged since 2012, where households receive 650 MT per month for a maximum of four
months. For a household solely relying on this transfer for its annual income, the value is equivalent to
217 MT per household per month or 1.6 MT per household member per day, which is only 17 percent of
median per capita consumption of the poor.9 Therefore, while generosity of the PSSB has been
improving this is not the case for other non-contributory social protection transfers.

            Table 2: Changes to monthly subsidies under the Basic Social Subsidy Program (PSSB)
    Size of the Household (number of        Amount (MT) in 2012         Amount (MT) in        Amount (MT) in 2014
           household members)                                                    2013
                             1                               130                250                           280
                             2                               190                320                           350
                             3                               260                380                           420
                             4                               320                440                           480
                    5 or above                               380                500                           550
Source: INAS Economic and Social Plan, 2012, 2013 and 2014

In sum, while improvements have been made to the social protection system, the scale of
implementation is still relatively low. Important progress includes improving the institutional
environment for social protection programs and increasing domestic financing for programs that benefit
the poor. However, overall coverage levels are low, reaching only 14 percent of the poor. This coverage
level is below other countries in the region, and countries that have used cash transfer programs to
significantly reduce poverty levels.




9
 This value is calculated as follows: 650 MT multiplied by the four month limit, and divided by twelve months. This
amount is then divided by 4.7 as the average household size and then taken as a percentage of the median per
capita consumption of the poor for each household member

                                                        15
Section 3: Policy Options for Scaling-Up Cash Transfers in Mozambique’s
Future Resource-Rich Environment

       (i)         Rationale for a Scaled-Up Cash Transfer Program

A growing body of evidence from other countries demonstrates that cash transfer programs can
reduce poverty and improve welfare. Cash transfer programs have successfully contributed to reducing
the number of people living below the poverty line, and the depth and severity of poverty.10 Amongst
the best known examples are in Latin America, where conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs have
reduced poverty and inequality, and enabled households to smooth consumption to cope with shocks.
For example, CCT programs in Colombia and Nicaragua significantly reduced poverty among program
beneficiaries, and in Brazil and Mexico the wide-scale implementation of CCT programs has reduced
poverty more broadly at the national level. Furthermore, by making the receipt of cash conditional on
the utilization of social services, CCT programs have encouraged school enrollment and use of health
facilities (see box 6 in the section on CCT programs for further details). Following these experiences, a
number of other countries have implemented cash transfer programs both with and without conditions,
also showing positive results. Amongst peer countries in Africa the emerging evidence shows that
distributing cash reduces poverty and also leads to other benefits such as improved agricultural
productivity, food security, and better education and health statuses (see box 2 for further details).

         Box 2: Unconditional cash transfers improving poverty and welfare in selected peer countries
      In Zambia an evaluation of the Child Grant Social Cash Transfer program, which targets transfers
       to poor households with children without conditions was found to reduce extreme poverty by 5.4
       percentage points. The depth and severity of poverty also reduced by 10 percentage points.
       Other productive impacts were observed where the use of agricultural inputs and cultivated land
       increased, contributing to a higher value of the harvest by 50 percent.
      In Kenya, an evaluation of the GiveDirectly unconditional cash transfer program attributed a 58
       percent increase in assets built by the poor to the program, an increase in food consumption by
       20 percent and a 42 percent reduction in the number of days children go without food. Transfers
       also increased revenue from animal husbandry and self-employment.
      In Malawi, an evaluation of the unconditional Mchinji Social Cash Transfer Scheme showed that
       recipients of the cash transfer registered an increase in health status, had improved hygiene
       practices, greater school enrollment rates with reduced absences, improved agricultural
       production and greater food security.
      In South Africa, an impact assessment of the Child Support Grant suggests that children enrolled
       in the program reported improved height-for-age scores for children, improved school attendance
       and learning outcomes particularly for girls, and reduced likelihood of illness especially for boys.
Sources: Seidenfeld et. al, 2013, Haushofer and Shapiro, 2013, Miller et. al, 2008, and UNICEF South
Africa, 2012

10
  The depth of poverty is also known as the poverty gap, and is defined as the mean shortfall from the poverty line
expressed as a percentage of the poverty line. The severity of poverty is also known as the squared poverty gap
and is calculated by averaging the squares of the poverty gap relative to the poverty line

                                                        16
Implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program in Mozambique would provide a means to reduce
poverty in a relatively short space of time. Given low levels of human and physical capital, it is a priority
to use the increased fiscal space from resource revenues to support development goals such as investing
in public goods, infrastructure, agriculture and strengthening the institutional environment. These
efforts are likely to produce results over the medium to long-term. Due to absorptive capacity
constraints there will also be limitations to the pace at which public spending can be effectively
increased to enhance public service provision. A scaled-up cash transfer program would provide a
relatively rapid way to increase household consumption and reduce poverty, enabling the current
generation of Mozambicans to increase their welfare, which in turn could generate further growth. The
experience in other similar contexts (for example, in Tanzania), shows that scaling up a cash transfer
program would take four to five years to achieve full national coverage.

A scaled-up cash transfer program would also be a more effective intervention for reducing poverty
compared with other policy measures. One potential policy option under consideration is to provide
gas at subsidized rates to domestic industries to promote local employment opportunities. However, the
number of potential jobs that can be created is limited and there is a high subsidy for job creation.11 For
example, in the methanol industry potentially 420 jobs could be created, and the average annual cost of
creating one job through providing subsidized gas is estimated at US$ 114,000. Similarly, a fertilizer
plant megaproject is estimated to generate 300 jobs at an approximate annual cost of US$ 166,000 per
job. If the subsidies that would be used to create these potential 720 jobs were instead distributed as
cash transfers it could be possible to lift over 720,000 people out of poverty in one year, thereby scaling
up the benefits a thousand fold.

In sum, a scaled-up cash transfer program is a relatively quick and cost effective policy option for
reducing poverty over the short term. The international evidence demonstrates that cash transfer
programs have been directly attributed to reducing poverty and inequality, as well as promoting
productivity and the use of social services. A scaled-up cash transfer program could reduce poverty in a
relatively short space of time, which would complement continued efforts to improve service provision
in priority areas such as health, education and infrastructure. Furthermore, in comparison with other
policy interventions such as the creation of local jobs through providing subsidized gas, a scaled-up cash
transfer program is a relatively cost effective policy measure that could potentially benefit a broad
section of the population. The next section will discuss different design options for a scaled-up cash
transfer program, and the likely costs in a resource-rich environment.

     (ii)        Design Options for a Scaled-Up Cash Transfer Program

It is assumed that the primary objective of a scaled-up cash transfer program should be poverty
alleviation. Cash transfer programs can be designed in different ways to address specific issues. Given
high levels of poverty, it is assumed that the main objective of a scaled-up cash transfer program in

11
  These estimations are based on data from the Gas Master Plan (2014) which specifies the amount investors are
willing to pay for gas, the quantity of gas they are requesting, the netback value of LNG to estimate opportunity
costs of subsidizing gas, and the approximate number of jobs that could be created

                                                        17
Mozambique should be to reduce poverty and improve welfare. However, other secondary objectives
may also be considered. For example, a cash transfer program may be a way of sharing resource wealth
amongst the population or the program may be designed in a way that will promote the utilization of
public services such as education and health facilities to address low levels of human capital. Experience
also shows that cash transfer programs have resulted in enhanced productive activities by beneficiaries
(see box 2). Therefore, in discussing different design options, poverty and extreme poverty alleviation
will be the main objective, while other secondary objectives may also be considered.

To inform discussions on how a scaled-up cash transfer program can maximize poverty reduction for a
given fiscal envelope, a simulation exercise has been undertaken. The exercise estimates the likely
impact that a scaled-up cash transfer program targeted to the poor could have on poverty reduction for
a given budget. The exercise uses the latest available data on poverty which is from the IOF 2008/09. To
assess the affordability of a cash transfer program in a resource-rich environment, a counterfactual GDP
has been estimated which assumes the revenues expected from coal and gas in 2025 were available in
2009. The scenarios use different transfer values in relation to the median per capita consumption of
the poor, to see how poverty levels vary as the generosity of the transfer increases. Details on the
assumptions used for the simulation exercise are presented in box 3.

                  Box 3: Methodology and Assumptions used in the Simulation Exercise
    Due to data availability, the exercise estimates the likely impact on poverty if the cash transfer
     program had been implemented in 2008/09, using the IOF 2008/09.
    A counterfactual GDP has been estimated that assumes the revenues from coal and gas
     expected in 2025 were available in 2009, based on all four LNG trains being built.
    A proxy means test (which is a targeting method used to estimate household income by
     associating indicators or ‘proxies’ with household expenditure or consumption) is applied to
     estimate household consumption in urban and rural areas.
    The predicted values of daily per capita household consumption are used to calculate the
     probability of a given household being poor.
    These household consumption values are used to determine eligibility to receive a cash transfer.
    The estimated median per capita consumption of the poor in the 2008/2009 IOF survey is MT
     9.48 /day in 2009 prices. This value is equivalent to $10.47 /month in 2009, and $14.24 /month
     in 2015.
    Four different transfer values have been considered which correspond to 50, 100, 150 and 200
     percent of the median per capita consumption of the poor.
    It is assumed that all cash transfers are consumed.

Source: IOF 2008/09 and World Bank staff calculations

The simulation exercise shows how the extent to which a scaled-up cash transfer program can reduce
poverty and enhance welfare for a given budget will depend on three factors: coverage, generosity
and targeting accuracy. For a given level of resources, decisions will need to be made on whether a
scaled-up cash transfer program can maximize poverty reduction through having a wider coverage level
so that more poor people could benefit, or by providing a more generous transfer, which may also affect
the depth and severity of poverty. Therefore, for a given fiscal envelope there are trade-offs between


                                                   18
coverage levels and generosity. However, even once a target population has been defined using criteria
for eligibility based on poverty, it may not be possible to reach all of the intended beneficiaries due to
targeting errors. By targeting individuals with a higher probability of being poor, the number of non-
poor individuals benefiting would reduce but some of the intended poor individuals would also be
excluded by mistake (see box 4 for further details). Therefore, the design of a cash transfer program
focused on poverty alleviation would need to consider all three factors in determining how welfare can
be maximized. The results of the simulation exercise are discussed in relation to two options: (i) a
universal cash transfer program; and (ii) a cash transfer program targeted to the poor.

                      Box 4: Determining eligibility for a targeted cash transfer program
  Under the simulation model developed, the estimations of daily per capita consumption values are
  used to determine the probability of an individual being poor, which in turn is used to assess if an
  individual is eligible to receive a cash transfer. For example, if it is decided that a cash transfer
  program should cover all of the poor this would mean selecting a probability of being poor of
  greater than or equal to 0 percent, which essentially means universal coverage. Under such a
  scenario all 52.08 percent of the poor would benefit, but 47.92 percent of Mozambicans who are not
  poor would also receive a transfer, which would be the error of inclusion or leakage rate.

  Instead, to reduce the number of non-poor receiving transfers, it may be decided that the cash
  transfer program should target the poor. Knowing the probability of an individual being poor
  through estimating daily household consumption helps to define the target population. For example,
  there could be a scenario where beneficiaries are eligible if they have a probability of being poor of
  greater than or equal to 25 percent, which would mean 87.67 percent of the poor are covered (see
  annex 1 for details). However, because targeting is not perfect, this scenario could result in 35.84
  percent of the non-poor being included, and for some of the poorest being excluded by mistake, also
  known as exclusion errors. Attempts to reduce errors of inclusion or leakage would also mean that
  the coverage of the poor reduces, indicating trade-offs between inclusion and exclusion errors. A full
  presentation of different eligibility points, coverage of the poor and leakage rates is provided in the
  annex. A discussion on how to reduce targeting errors is included in section iv.
Source: World Bank staff projections

       Option 1: Universal Cash Transfer Program

A universal program could significantly reduce poverty, but it is unlikely to be affordable or the most
cost effective option. The greatest impact on poverty is when the highest transfer value is distributed
universally. Under such a scenario 200 percent of the median per capita consumption of the poor is
distributed to the whole population, resulting in the poverty headcount ratio falling from 52.08 percent
to 36.56 percent. However, the cost of this program is estimated to be around 5 percent of GDP, which
is unlikely to be affordable given other spending priorities. If instead the second highest transfer value is
distributed universally the poverty headcount ratio would reduce from 52.08 percent to 44.69 percent
and cost an estimated 2.57 percent of GDP. However, for a similar cost it would be possible to reduce
poverty even further under a cash transfer program targeted to the poor. For example, for a budget of
2.46 percent of GDP it could be possible to cover approximately 78 percent of the poor and the poverty
headcount ratio would reduce to 42.98 percent. Therefore, a more affordable and cost-effective
approach would be to target a cash transfer program to the poor.

                                                     19
A universal cash transfer program could also have the objective of sharing resource wealth among
citizens, to help create a broad-based constituency for resource revenue management. It has been
argued that transferring cash directly to citizens could be an effective way of ensuring the benefits of
natural resources are distributed amongst the population (Sandbu, 2005). Such an approach could also
create support for the management of resource revenues, particularly in Mozambique where a large
majority of the population may be vulnerable to falling into poverty at some point in their lifetimes. In
practice, not many countries have prioritized this wealth sharing objective. The state of Alaska in the US
is a rare example12 of where resource revenues are distributed to citizens, with everyone receiving a
share of the income accumulated from earnings from the Alaska Permanent Fund. Part of the
motivation for this policy measure results from apprehensions from the electorate that politicians would
not use the revenues effectively based on past experience (see Box 5 for further details).

            Box 5: Natural Resource Wealth Redistribution through Cash Transfers in Alaska
Alaska has institutionalized universal unconditional cash transfers linked to its resource revenues. One
of the main motivations for the universal cash transfer was the fear that politicians would squander the
resource revenues. At least 25 percent of resource revenues accruing to the state should be deposited
with the Alaska Permanent Fund. The Fund can only invest in income producing assets, and only
earnings on these investments can be spent. Since 1982, a share of these earnings is distributed to
residents of Alaska (who need to apply and give proof of residency) following a clearly defined formula
that ensures some stability in the annual payout as well as independence from political pressures to
maximize the dividend in the short term for electoral purposes. Approximately 50 percent of annual
returns from the Alaska Permanent Fund are distributed in equal amounts to all citizens, as an annual
payment, regardless of their income level. Meanwhile, sales and income tax have been abolished. There
is wide-spread support for the cash transfer program, which is largely viewed as an entitlement.
Sources: Anderson, 2002; and Goldsmith, 2001

Another potential objective of a universal cash transfer program could be to promote governance
outcomes through taxing a portion of the transfer, but it is unlikely this would be feasible in the
Mozambican context. For countries rich in natural resources it may be less important to rely on taxation
to finance public service provision, which is argued to weaken accountability between the state and its
citizens, encouraging authoritarianism, corruption and poor service delivery (Moore, 2004). To address
some of these concerns, a portion of the cash transfer could be taxed, which could encourage
accountability since citizens are arguably more aware of their rights as a taxpayer, and an increase in
direct taxation is associated with more democratic institutions (Devarajan et al., 2010; Sala-i-Martin and
Subramanian, 2003; Sandbu, 2005; Gupta et al., 2014; and Moss and Young, 2009). However, it is
unlikely that taxing cash transfers could work in Mozambique. Firstly, while the principle of using
taxation to improve accountability is theoretically appealing there are no real examples of direct
taxation from a universal distribution of cash from resource revenues. In the case of Alaska for example,
sales and income taxes have been abolished, which is leading to growing apathy from the population on

12
  The state of Alberta in Canada is also referred to in the literature as an example of where universal benefits have
been implemented. However, Alberta does not have an established program of universal benefits. Rather, there
have been two one-off payments to residents from an oil dividend (Gupta et. al, 2014). As part of efforts to
restructure subsidies, Iran implemented a universal cash transfer program, where implementation is in the early
stages. Finally, Mongolia has implemented universal cash transfers on an iterative basis which is discussed in Box 9.

                                                         20
public spending scrutiny and a decline in public goods (Devarajan et. al, 2010). Secondly, in Mozambique
the amount that could be transferred would not be sufficient to allow for taxation, which would
compromise the intended governance objectives.13

In sum, while a universal cash transfer program does have certain advantages; implementing such a
program is unlikely to be feasible in Mozambique. Since a universal cash transfer program would cover
the entire population, all the poor would benefit, and it would provide a way of sharing resource wealth
more broadly. However, it is unlikely that a universal cash transfer program will be affordable if the
highest transfer value is distributed; or the most cost effective option to alleviate poverty if a lower
transfer value is distributed. Secondly, while a universal cash transfer program could theoretically
provide a means to realize potential governance objectives through taxation, this is unlikely given the
low transfer values. Therefore, a more feasible and cost effective option would be to implement a cash
transfer program targeted to the poor, which will be discussed in detail below.

        Option 2: A Cash Transfer Program Targeted to the Poor

A second option is to implement a cash transfer program targeted to the poor, which could reduce
poverty at a lower cost. Incorporating the likelihood of targeting errors, the simulation exercise shows
that for a budget of 1 percent of GDP implementing a program with either (i) a generous transfer value
and lower coverage level; or (ii) a less generous transfer value and higher level of coverage would yield
the same result, with poverty reducing from 52 percent to 48 percent (see figure 5). With the first
option 41 percent of the poor would be covered with an estimated 25 percent leaking to the non-poor
and with the second option 72 percent of the poor would be covered but 30 percent would leak to the
non-poor. It is important to note that with the second option, almost the totality of those under the
food poverty line, comprising 40 percent of the population, would be included in the program. Going
further, if the budget was increased to 2 percent of GDP, poverty could be reduced from 52 percent to
45 percent, again with either a lower transfer value and high levels of coverage or vice versa. Therefore,
a scaled-up cash transfer program would be both a rapid and affordable way of reducing poverty in
Mozambique’s future resource-rich environment.

Overall, welfare can be maximized in a scenario with the most generous transfer value targeted to a
more narrowly defined coverage of the poor. With a limited fiscal envelope of 1 percent of GDP, a
scenario with a generous transfer value (for example one that is double the median per capita
consumption) could be distributed to the very poorest. Since the consumption of the very poorest is
even further from the poverty line compared with the median consumption of the poor, increasing the
generosity of the transfer reduces both the depth and severity of poverty (see figures 6 and 7). This
result indicates that the greatest impact on overall poverty alleviation and welfare is when a more
generous transfer is distributed among a smaller share of the population.




13
  The annual personal income tax threshold in Mozambique is MT 42,000 (equivalent to approximately US$ 1,360)
and so the transfer would in most cases not be taxed.

                                                     21
                                  Figure 5: The poverty headcount does not vary much with different transfer levels*




                                                   53
                                                                                              Transfer amount per household per year
                                                                                           % of median consumption of the poor (in 2015 US dolars)




                                                   51
                                                                                                          50%                            100%
                                                                                                          150%                           200%
                                                   49
Poverty Headcount




                                                   47
                                                   45
                                                   43
                                                   41
                                                   39
                                                   37
                                                   35




                                                         0           1            2             3                        4                      5
                                                                                 Cost (as % of GDP)


                                  * The red/horizontal line indicates the baseline poverty headcount.

                                  Figure 6: The poverty gap index improves with a higher transfer value and lower coverage levels**
                                                    22




                                                                                              Transfer amount per household per year
                                                                                           % of median consumption of the poor (in 2015 US dolars)

                                                                                                          50%                           100%
                                                    20




                                                                                                          150%                          200%
                                                    18
              Poverty Gap Index




                                                    16
                                                    14
                                                    12
                                                    10




                                                         0            1           2             3                       4                      5
                                                                                 Cost (as % of GDP)


                                  ** The red/horizontal line indicates the baseline poverty gap index.




                                                                                      22
                         Figure 7: The poverty severity index also improves with a higher transfer value and lower coverage
                         levels***




                                           11
                                                                                      Transfer amount per household per year
                                                                                   % of median consumption of the poor (in 2015 US dolars)

                                                                                                  50%                           100%
                                           10                                                     150%                          200%
                                            9
Poverty Severity Index




                                            8
                                            7
                                            6
                                            5
                                            4




                                                0            1            2             3                       4                      5
                                                                         Cost (as % of GDP)


                         *** The red/horizontal line indicates the baseline poverty severity index.
                         Source: World Bank staff calculations based on IOF 2008/09

                         However, to ensure broad support for a cash transfer program targeted to the poor, an optimal
                         strategy would be to increase coverage and distribute a less generous transfer. With a budget of 1
                         percent of GDP, welfare gains would be maximized through having a higher transfer value at the
                         expense of lower coverage, but this scenario may be less desirable for three main reasons. Firstly, less
                         than a third of the total population would benefit, meaning that the majority of the population eligible
                         to vote would be excluded, which could compromise support for a scaled-up cash transfer program.
                         Secondly, given that consumption levels are relatively flat for quintiles 1 to 4 a significant share of the
                         population may be vulnerable to falling into poverty, and would be excluded from a narrowly defined
                         target population. By distributing a lower transfer value, which would cover the median consumption of
                         the poor but not go beyond this, the welfare impacts on the depth and severity of poverty would be
                         similar but 53 percent of the population would be included. Going further, distributing a transfer
                         equivalent to half of the median consumption of the poor could mean that for a budget of 1 percent of
                         GDP 98 percent of people below the food poverty line and 87 percent of the population are covered,
                         with the poverty headcount ratio still dropping by four percentage points. Third, providing a generous
                         transfer could potentially introduce distortions in the labor market if transfers are close to labor market
                         wages. Therefore, distributing a less generous transfer which would reach a greater proportion of the
                         poor is more likely to encourage support for a scaled-up cash transfer program.

                         In sum, with a relatively modest budget, a scaled-up cash transfer program could be designed with a
                         lower transfer value and still cover a significant proportion of the population to maximize welfare and
                         ensure broad-ranging support. The simulation exercise shows that for a limited budget of around 1

                                                                              23
percent of GDP, the poverty headcount ratio could potentially reduce by 4 percentage points.
Increasing the budget to 2 percent of GDP could reduce poverty from 52 percent to 45 percent. These
results prevail through having either: (i) a lower coverage level and more generous transfer, or (ii) wider
coverage and a less generous transfer. Overall, to ensure a scaled-up cash transfer program has broad
support from the population, a higher coverage level may be more appropriate as it would achieve very
similar results in reducing the poverty headcount ratio, while including a large share of beneficiaries
below the food poverty line.

       Option 3: A Cash Transfer Program Targeted to the Poor with a Conditional
        Component

The evidence shows that imposing conditions or co-responsibilities to receive cash transfers could
help to promote specific behaviors. While distributing cash with no conditions can reduce poverty and
improve broader development outcomes, in cases where conditions or co-responsibilities are imposed,
it can be possible to promote specific behaviors such as attending school or completing health check-
up’s (Adato and Hoddinott, 2010). For example, an impact evaluation undertaken in Malawi showed
that imposing conditions contributed to better school enrollment, attendance, and test scores.
However, the group that received a cash benefit without conditions also experienced improved school
attendance (although not to the same extent) and also importantly, noted other positive effects such as
delayed marriage and child-bearing (Baird et. al, 2010). The idea of a conditional cash transfer (CCT) is
that while cash alleviates poverty today and compensates for the costs of children’s education, the
conditions help guarantee that the children in the household will have better human capital when they
become earners in their own right, and thus be more likely to escape the intergenerational transmission
of poverty (Grosh et. al, 2008). Therefore, cash transfers with and without conditions have positive
impacts, although conditions can improve specific and intended behaviors.

The positive impacts of CCT programs have been well documented. A number of impact evaluations
undertaken in Latin America provide evidence of the positive impacts of CCT programs in reducing
poverty, inequality and improving the utilization of health and education services. Gains have been
particularly impressive in countries where the school enrollment rates were relatively low before the
CCT program was implemented (see box 6 for further information). Emerging evidence in Africa also
highlights the broader positive outcomes of CCT programs. An evaluation of Kenya’s Cash Transfer
Program for Orphans and Vulnerable Children demonstrated a number of positive impacts, where
participating households have higher expenditures on food, health, and clothing, with significantly less
spending on alcohol and tobacco. And in Tanzania an impact evaluation of the Community-Based
Conditional Cash Transfer program showed that grant recipients were healthier and more likely to
complete primary school. The cash grant was also used to invest in livestock, children’s shoes,
insurance, and for the very poorest it was also possible to realize some modest savings (Evans et. al,
2014).




                                                    24
 Box 6: Cash Transfer Programs in Latin America Reducing Poverty and Inequality, and improving the
 use of Social Services
 Between 1995 and 2010 poverty and inequality declined in Latin America, where redistributive
 policies including cash transfers are estimated to contribute to 34 percent of the decrease in
 poverty. Progress was particularly impressive in countries where the cash transfer value is relatively
 generous compared with consumption of poor households. For example, in Colombia the Familias en
 Acción program reduced the depth of poverty by almost 7 percentage points. In Nicaragua the Red
 de Protección Social program (RPS) reduced the poverty headcount index by 5-7 percentage points.
 CCT programs have contributed to a reduction in poverty more broadly at the national level. For
 example, the severity of poverty reduced in Mexico by 29 percent and in Brazil by 15 percent
 respectively.

 Cash transfers have contributed to a reduction in inequality. In Brazil, since 2001 the government
 increased the average transfer amount to the elderly and disabled and broadened the coverage of
 the Bolsa Familia CCT program. Even though these programs only represent 0.5 percent of
 household income, they are estimated to have contributed to a 10 percent decline in household
 income inequality. And in Mexico inequality declined by 4.2 percentage points from 0.5472 to
 0.5052 between 1996 and 2008, where the Oportunidades cash transfer program is estimated to
 account for 18 percent of this change.
 CCT programs have led to significant and substantial increases in the use of services, particularly for
 school enrollment rates, especially in countries where enrollment rates were low before the
 program intervention. For example, school enrollment increased in Ecuador by 10.3 percentage
 points. In Nicaragua school enrollment increased by 12.8 percentage points, where the impact was
 greatest amongst the extreme poor. CCT programs have also had a positive impact on health center
 visits by children, where for example in Colombia there was an increase in children taken to growth
 and development monitoring by 22.8 percent, and in Honduras a child taken to a health center at
 least once a month increased by 20.2 percent.
 Furthermore, over the long-term, in some countries a portion of the transfers have been saved and
 invested in productive assets, enabling households to smooth consumption in the face of negative
 shocks. For example, in Mexico agricultural income increased by almost 10 percent after 18 months
 of receiving the cash transfers and in Nicaragua the RPS acted as a social safety net during the coffee
 crisis, by protecting income.
Sources: Ferreira et. al, 2013, Fiszbein and Schady, 2009, Gertler et. al, 2012and Lustig et. al, 2011

The number of countries implementing CCT programs in SSA is increasing. Examples include Mali’s
Bourse Maman and Nigeria’s Kano CCT for Girls’ Education which focus on improving educational
attainment of vulnerable groups, Eritrea’s Results-Based Financing program which aims to improve
health outcomes for mothers and children, and Nigeria’s In Care of the Poor CCT which aims to improve
both education and health care. As many of these CCT programs are in a pilot phase the evidence base
on program impact is gradually improving.

In practice, countries can implement both conditional and unconditional cash transfer programs
targeted to the poor. For example, in Kenya both conditional and unconditional cash transfer programs
have been implemented. Bolivia is an example of a resource-rich country which uses a portion of gas


                                                     25
revenues to implement a combination of conditional and unconditional cash transfer programs, with
positive effects on poverty reduction and development outcomes (see box 7).

   Box 7: Transferring gas to cash in Bolivia to reduce poverty and promote development outcomes
In Bolivia, the success of Evo Morales’ re-election to office in October 2014 was partly seen to be due
to the effectiveness of cash transfer programs. Both conditional transfers (to encourage school
attendance and regular antenatal check-ups for pregnant women) and unconditional cash transfers
for the elderly, as well as expansion of the pension system have contributed to a reduction in
extreme poverty, from 38.2 percent in 2005 to 21.6 percent in 2012. A recent impact evaluation of
the transfer to the elderly (Renta Dignidad or Old Age Bonus) undertaken by the government’s think
tank showed that poverty among the elderly reduced from 53.6 percent to 40.1 percent.
Source: IMF, 2013 and Unidad de Analisis de Politicas Sociales y Economicas, 2014

In the Mozambican context a CCT program focusing on children could be introduced as one
component of the overall social protection system. Given that the majority of poor households have
children, a CCT program would be well placed to focus on children and improve school attendance rates.
While primary school enrollment has been increasing over time, children from poor households have a
higher dropout rate meaning they are less likely to progress to secondary and tertiary education (World
Bank, 2014a). A CCT could also help to improve the generosity of transfers received by the poorest
households which are not currently covered by the PSSB. How a CCT program could be integrated with
the existing cash transfer programs is discussed in further detail in Box 8.

                Box 8: Implementing an integrated cash transfer program in Mozambique
 It is suggested that one integrated scaled-up cash transfer program could be implemented,
 combining the basic transfer (the current PSSB) and the transfer for the public works program with a
 transfer targeted to households with children. The transfer for children could have one unconditional
 household child benefit and the other conditional on school attendance.

 The advantage of having an integrated program is that a poor household could be entitled to all the
 cash transfer programs if they meet the eligibility criteria, therefore building on the existing programs
 in place as well as addressing gaps in the current system. Even if this integrated scaled-up cash
 transfer program was to be implemented gradually it could be possible over time to reduce poverty
 by 11 percentage points.

 With the CCT component, it may take time to build sufficient capacity to enforce program conditions.
 In other countries, in the early stages of implementing a CCT the conditions are presented as highly
 encouraged behaviors, where penalties for non-compliance are gradually introduced.
Source: World Bank staff projections

A CCT program could help to address demand side constraints to accessing education but efforts are
still needed to improve the quality of teaching. There are a number of factors that affect demand for
education including direct costs such as fees and scholastic materials, having to work (estimated to
contribute to half of children dropping out of secondary school), pregnancy and early marriage for girls,
and migration to South Africa for boys (Fox et al, 2012). Therefore, while school enrollment is
estimated to be close to 100 percent, around 56 percent of pupils are absent (World Bank, 2014b).
Implementing a CCT could potentially help to improve school attendance, but is only likely to be

                                                    26
effective if combined with efforts to improve and increase the supply of education services. For
example, teacher absenteeism is estimated to be around 45 percent and there are serious gaps in
teachers’ knowledge and teaching ability (World Bank, 2014b). If the quality of education services
improves, households could expect the returns to education to be higher which may increase
responsiveness to a cash transfer conditional on attending school (Fiszbein and Schady, 2009).

In sum, a conditional cash transfer component could be introduced as part of a scaled-up cash transfer
program. By focusing on children it could be possible to address existing programmatic gaps, given that
the majority of poor households have children. Even though Mozambique has made impressive
progress in improving school enrollment, school attendance rates are low. Therefore, a CCT could help
to address demand side constraints, but this should be combined with efforts to improve the quality of
teaching. A CCT component could be introduced as part of an overall scaled-up cash transfer program,
integrated with other unconditional transfers, which would mean that a household could benefit from
different transfers if it was eligible. Such an approach would address existing program gaps and build on
the current system.

     (iii)       Addressing Potential Risks of a Scaled-up Cash Transfer Program

There may be concerns that a scaled-up cash transfer program could have unintended impacts, but
this is not supported by the evidence. While there may be concerns that cash transfer programs can
create disincentives to work and have adverse effects on the economy, such claims are not supported by
the evidence. Firstly, if a relatively modest transfer value is distributed to ensure a broader coverage of
the population (as suggested earlier in section ii) potential risks of distortions to the labor market would
be minimized.14 Secondly, international evidence on cash transfer programs suggests that labor market
prospects and productivity can actually improve. For example, recipients of cash transfers in South
Africa increased their employment rates faster, and had more rapid wage increases compared with
households that did not receive cash grants. Furthermore, recipients of cash grants spent more on basic
items such as food, fuel and housing, which in turn is associated with a reduction in hunger and better
nutritional outcomes (Samson et al, 2004). In Mexico, beneficiaries of cash transfer programs invested
more than 25 percent of the cash in productive activities, leading to positive effects on long-term
consumption (Gertler et. al, 2012). In countries such as Zambia, Kenya and Malawi cash transfers also
had positive effects on agricultural productivity (see box 2 for further details).

Implementing and financing a wide-scale cash transfer program from resource revenues has a number
of potential risks. Firstly, if substantial levels of resource revenues are distributed through cash
transfers macroeconomic distortions may be created such as inflation and consumption booms that risk
turning into busts. Secondly, if cash transfers are financed from earmarked resource revenues there is a
risk that volatility of commodity prices will be reflected in unpredictability of cash transfer payments,
which could lead to greater household uncertainty and vulnerability. Early experiments with cash

14
  For example, if cash is distributed at a value which is half the consumption of the poor this would be only 8
percent of the agriculture minimum wage. Similarly a transfer value covering the median consumption of the poor
would be 16 percent of the monthly agriculture minimum wage. These modest transfer values would be very
unlikely to cause distortions to the labor market.

                                                      27
transfers in Mongolia showed this was the case where cash transfer payments to households were
affected by unpredictability and uncertainty due to volatility (see box 9).

It can be possible to mitigate the risks of financing from resource revenues through sound
macroeconomic and fiscal management. The financing arrangements for a scaled-up cash transfer
program should not be tied to earmarked resource revenues, as this inevitably implies the risk of
volatility. Rather, the government should adopt an appropriate fiscal policy framework for managing
resource revenues, including measures to address sustainability and volatility such as the introduction of
a resource fund or fiscal rules.15 The cash transfer program should be allocated resources through the
standard budget preparation process. If such measures are not undertaken, there is a risk that a
separate financial management process could be created for cash transfers, which is not subject to
transparency, accountability or controls mechanisms that apply to the regular budget process.

                           Box 9: Universal distribution of cash transfers in Mongolia
     Mongolia established the Human Development Fund (HDF) in 2009 as part of efforts to manage the
     resource boom. The HDF mission is to channel part of resource revenues to the population through
     universal cash transfers and social benefits (tuition fees, pensions, healthcare, education and
     housing). The law however does not specify the size of revenues to channel to the HDF nor the size
     of payments it can make. This lack of predictability and transparency defeats the purpose of using a
     cash transfer system to avoid political capture. Indeed, competition amongst politicians led to wide
     variations in the type and distribution of benefits, which were subject to volatility of copper prices
     and contributed to inflation. The cash benefits were not fiscally sustainable and contributed to
     uncertainty over household income levels. To improve overall fiscal discipline and stability, in 2010
     Mongolia approved a fiscal stability law (FSL) and three complementary fiscal rules, which should
     help contain potential macroeconomic risks associated with disbursements from the HDF.

Sources: Isakova, A et. al., 2012 and Fritz, 2013

Other concerns over a scaled-up cash transfer program can be addressed through program design and
sound economic policy. One potential risk is that injecting cash into the economy through transfer
payments could stoke inflationary pressures. To address this risk it will be important for the design of
the cash transfer program to appropriately cap the transfer value. Given volatility in food prices (which
can particularly affect the poor) inflation will have to be managed as part of the government’s overall
monetary policy.

       (iv)        Preparing for a Scaled-up Cash Transfer Program

To ensure the poor benefit from a scaled-up cash transfer program it will be important to strengthen
capacity to implement the targeting system. Targeting errors can arise because it is relatively
challenging to identify the very poorest as the distribution of poverty across the first four quintiles is
relatively flat. Also, as a large share of the population is involved in the informal sector and subsistence
farming it is challenging to identify beneficiaries on the basis of consumption (World Bank, 2012). To

15
 See a separate policy note ‘Generating Sustainable Wealth from Mozambique’s Natural Resource Boom’ for
more details, World Bank, 2014c

                                                      28
help address these constraints a common targeting system has been developed which includes: (i)
geographical targeting through the use of highly disaggregated poverty maps; (ii) community based
targeting using local councils; and (iii) a proxy means test to minimize inclusion errors and ensure that
only the poor are enrolled in the program. However, INAS needs to invest in its operational capacity to
correctly implement these targeting methods. In particular, it is important for INAS to develop a
grievance and redress mechanism that will allow for feedback from communities on beneficiary
selection.

Establishing an effective Management Information System (MIS) is critical to the program’s success
and its potential to scale up. INAS is currently developing a comprehensive MIS, where all databases
generated by the different program units will produce reports on resources used and outputs achieved.
All beneficiaries of the scaled-up program would be recorded in a single registry as a module of the MIS.
The single registry of beneficiaries will make it possible to monitor the progress of households that
receive support from the social protection system. The single registry will also be linked with other
databases from social sectors enabling the referral of beneficiaries to other programs and improving
coordination. The registry and the MIS will be used for the enrollment of beneficiaries (beneficiaries will
be given ID cards and a tax number linked to the civil registry) to produce payroll lists and to generate
progress reports.

Another area for improvement is the payment system. At present, cash transfer payments are done
manually with no reconciliation, leading to high fiduciary risks. To address this, INAS is currently in the
process of outsourcing the payment system for all cash transfer programs. In the initial stage it is
expected that the payment system will not be able to reach all areas in Mozambique due to information
technology challenges, such as lack of mobile and internet network, and unavailability of energy.
However, INAS should ensure that the combination of outsourced and manual payments will allow for
timely and predictable payments to beneficiaries.

Moving forward, it will also be important to develop adequate monitoring and evaluation
mechanisms. Such measures should address progress with the scaled-up program, including whether
the intended beneficiaries are receiving payments. A proper M&E system should combine a number of
features including: (i) reports on outputs and resources used from a fully operational MIS; (ii) process
and impact evaluations; and (iii) periodical control systems including internal audits, quality control
mechanisms and spot checks. An effective monitoring system might require costly investments in
information technology and can take time to develop and mature. Evaluations will complement the
monitoring system and are essential to be able to improve and adapt the program, inform stakeholders
on the program’s performance and draw lessons for other programs. Furthermore, if a CCT component
is implemented, it will also be important to monitor compliance with conditions and ensure the
information is fully integrated in the MIS (Fiszbein and Schady, 2009).

A scaled-up cash transfer program will require additional operational capacity. During the last years,
INAS has invested in the development of operational tools (such as the targeting system, MIS and
payment system) that will facilitate the scale-up of existing programs. However increasing coverage in

                                                    29
an efficient and effective manner will only be possible through an increase in human capacity, especially
at the province and district levels. It is expected that the introduction of information technology and
outsourcing of key activities such as beneficiary registration and payments will facilitate the
implementation of social protection programs. However, the allocation of additional human resources
at district and delegation level will be essential for ensuring that cash transfers are implemented
effectively and that proper monitoring and evaluation of the programs is undertaken. In the initial phase
of the scale up, operational and administrative costs are expected to be higher, which needs to be
considered in the government’s planning and budgeting processes. For the specific case of the CCT
program, clear institutional linkages need to be established between the social protection, health and
education sectors.

Sustained impacts of the scaled-up program on poverty and human capital will require long term
interventions. Cash transfer programs are expected to mitigate the impact of short term poverty, shocks
and reduce extreme poverty. However, sustained reduction of extreme poverty and enhanced capacity
of poor households to better manage risks require that those programs operate for substantially longer
periods of time. Beyond the short term cash benefit impact, the scaled-up program should also involve
medium to long term processes to enhance beneficiaries’ productivity and management of future risks
and shocks. The scaled-up program should be part of a broader strategy for poverty reduction and as
such needs to be complemented by other government measures to ensure that households leaving the
program will not fall again into extreme poverty16.

Conclusion
Mozambique’s impressive economic growth has not translated into significant poverty reduction in
recent years, a trend that is likely to continue as extractive industries increasingly contribute to
growth. In the period following the end of the civil war economic growth, supported by agricultural
activity, was associated with a significant decline in poverty. However, while economic growth continues
to be impressive the pace of poverty reduction has slowed, coinciding with capital intensive
megaprojects increasingly contributing to growth. Evidence from resource-rich countries in the region
also confirms that economic growth does not always result in poverty reduction. Furthermore,
Mozambique has relatively higher inequality levels compared with other countries in the region, which
is also likely to affect the extent to which economic growth reduces poverty. Therefore, as the
extractive industries grow in importance, specific policy measures to directly reduce poverty are called
for.

Implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program could be a relatively quick and cost effective way of
reducing poverty in Mozambique’s future resource-rich environment. In recent years, improvements
have been made to Mozambique’s social protection system, where the institutional environment has
been strengthened, and increased domestic financing signals the government’s commitment to the

16
   International experience shows that successful programs such as Brazil’s Bolsa Familia and Mexico’s
Oportunidades not only have steadily increased program beneficiaries over the last 10-15 years, but also that a
high proportion of beneficiary households have been in the program for long periods of time.

                                                      30
sector. However, coverage levels are low, benefiting only 14 percent of the poor. Implementing a
scaled-up cash transfer program could build on these achievements and enable Mozambique to
significantly reduce poverty over a relatively short period of time. International experience shows that
other countries have used cash transfer programs to reduce poverty, improve welfare and promote
development outcomes. Compared to spending on priority areas such as health, education and
infrastructure which will yield results over the medium to long term, a scaled-up cash transfer program
could reduce poverty in a relatively short space of time. Furthermore, in comparison with other policy
interventions, a scaled-up cash transfer program is a relatively more cost effective policy measure that
could potentially benefit a broad section of the population.

One option could be to implement a cash transfer program universally, but such an approach is
unlikely to be feasible in Mozambique. A universal cash transfer would mean that the entire population
benefits, thereby covering all of the poor, and would also provide a way of sharing resource wealth
more broadly. With an estimated cost of 5 percent of GDP, a universal cash transfer distributed at the
most generous transfer value could reduce poverty by 16 percentage points. However, given other
spending priorities this option is unlikely to be affordable or the most cost-effective way of reducing
poverty. Therefore, while a universal cash program has certain advantages; it is unlikely to be the best
choice for Mozambique when resource revenues start to flow.

A second option which would be more feasible in the Mozambican context would be to target the
distribution of a scaled-up cash transfer program to the poor. For a given fiscal envelope, decisions
would need to be made on whether poverty reduction and welfare can be maximized through either
having a relatively generous transfer value, or by covering a larger share of the poor. Results from a
simulation exercise show that with a budget of around 1 percent of GDP (assuming Mozambique was
already in receipt of resource revenues) it could be possible to reduce poverty by 4 percentage points
through either having (i) a low transfer value and high levels of coverage, or (ii) a high transfer value and
low levels of coverage, where both options would yield the same result. Increasing the budget to 2
percent of GDP would reduce poverty by 7 percentage points. It is also important to factor in political
economy considerations, where distributing a slightly less generous transfer would enable a greater
share of the population to be covered, which would have similar effects in reducing the poverty
headcount ratio while ensuring broader support from the population.

A further consideration could be given to introducing a conditional component to the overall cash
transfer program, which could help to address program gaps and important human capital concerns.
Through introducing a conditional cash transfer component as part of a scaled-up cash transfer program
it could be possible to improve school attendance for children. While school enrollment rates are high,
pupils are absent for around 56 percent of the time. By targeting children it could be possible to address
programmatic gaps in the current social protection system since the majority of poor households have
children. While distributing cash addresses poverty in the short-term, a CCT component aimed to
improve school attendance could help to improve the longer-term prospects of children.

It is important to mitigate potential risks from implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program
through program design, and sound macroeconomic and fiscal management. Concerns are sometimes

                                                     31
put forward that cash transfers can have unintended consequences on the labor market and the
economy. On the contrary, evidence from other countries suggests that recipients of cash transfers are
more likely to participate in the labor market and engage in productive agricultural activities. There may
be potential risks to financing a scaled-up cash transfer program from earmarked resource revenues, as
this could risk volatility. Rather, the cash transfer program should be allocated resources through the
standard budget preparation process. It will also be important to ensure the transfer value is capped at
a modest level to avoid inflationary pressures. Alongside this, efforts to prepare for a scaled-up cash
transfer program should include continued strengthening of the overall social protection system through
improving mechanisms for targeting the poor, payments, and developing a management information
system.

In sum, implementing a scaled-up cash transfer program in Mozambique’s future resource-rich
environment is a relatively cost-effective policy option for reducing poverty and improving welfare
over a relatively short period of time. In a resource-rich environment implementing a scaled-up cash
transfer program would be an affordable and rapid way of reducing poverty, where a program costing 1
percent of GDP could reduce poverty by four percentage points in one year. Compared to other policy
measures, a scaled-up cash transfer program would be a more cost-effective way of reducing poverty.
This policy initiative could be part of the government’s broader strategy toward ensuring impressive
economic growth is having an impact on poverty reduction, while sharing the benefits of resource
wealth more broadly among the population.




                                                   32
    Annex 1: Coverage and Leakage Rates
                                                                                         Total Cost as a % of GDP
Eligibility
                                                                                  Transfer amount per person per year: %                Impact on Poverty                % of Pop.
 cut-off                         % of the Population targeted
                                                                                   of median consumption of the poor (in        (2009 National Poverty Rate: 52.08%)     Targeted
  point
                                                                                              2015 US dollars)
Probability
 of being                             Below     Coverage   Coverage   Coverage     US$            US$      US$       US$        US$       US$        US$        US$
   poor       Coverage                 food        of         of         of       85.50         171.00    256.00    342.00     85.50    171.00      256.00     342.00
                         Leakage
 (greater      of poor               poverty     bottom     bottom     bottom    (50% of        (100%     (150%     (200%     (50% of   (100%       (150%      (200%
  than or                               line      20%        40%        60%        p50)         of p50)   of p50)   of p50)     p50)    of p50)     of p50)    of p50)
 equal to)
    0         100.00     47.92       100.00     100.00     100.00     100.00      1.28           2.57      3.85      5.13     48.36      44.69      40.81      36.56     100.00
    5          98.86     43.80        99.03      99.27      98.95      98.54      1.12           2.25      3.37      4.49     48.48      44.95      41.18      36.98      91.61
    10         96.89     41.87        97.76      98.73      97.55      95.91      1.04           2.07      3.11      4.14     48.91      45.52      41.82      37.85      86.80
    15         95.07     39.83        96.05      97.60      95.70      93.42      0.96           1.91      2.87      3.83     49.02      45.84      42.34      38.48      82.29
    20         92.09     37.77        93.34      95.69      92.57      89.63      0.87           1.74      2.62      3.49     49.23      46.20      42.99      39.35      77.07
    25         87.67     35.84        89.11      91.93      87.97      84.75      0.78           1.56      2.34      3.12     49.53      46.87      43.87      40.50      71.15
    30         82.87     33.99        84.95      88.21      83.35      79.52      0.70           1.39      2.09      2.78     49.77      47.62      44.92      42.03      65.38
    35         77.90     31.98        80.04      84.58      78.52      74.11      0.61           1.23      1.84      2.46     50.04      48.04      45.66      42.98      59.64
    40         71.60     30.30        73.87      78.72      72.52      67.85      0.54           1.08      1.62      2.15     50.36      48.50      46.53      44.14      53.50
    45         63.93     29.27        66.71      72.13      65.18      60.16      0.46           0.92      1.39      1.85     50.75      49.16      47.54      45.52      47.07
    50         57.55     27.71        60.36      65.78      58.72      53.72      0.39           0.79      1.18      1.58     50.91      49.57      48.21      46.56      41.46
    55         49.45     26.21        52.33      57.33      50.29      45.65      0.32           0.64      0.96      1.28     51.14      50.05      49.09      47.83      34.90
    60         41.32     24.80        44.31      47.54      41.85      38.02      0.26           0.51      0.77      1.02     51.35      50.61      49.82      48.79      28.61
    65         33.28     23.13        35.59      38.99      33.24      30.30      0.19           0.39      0.58      0.77     51.63      51.00      50.37      49.60      22.55
    70         25.77     22.77        27.38      30.06      25.48      23.37      0.15           0.29      0.44      0.58     51.74      51.25      50.84      50.23      17.38
    75         18.15     21.17        19.34      22.25      17.99      16.25      0.10           0.19      0.29      0.38     51.89      51.61      51.33      50.93      11.99
    80         12.04     19.38        13.28      15.41      12.26      10.54      0.06           0.12      0.18      0.23     51.98      51.85      51.74      51.55       7.78
    85         7.04      16.52        8.03       9.99       7.47       6.15       0.03           0.06      0.09      0.13     52.07      52.01      51.98      51.86       4.39
    90         2.93       …*          3.61       4.90       3.29       2.55       0.01           0.03      0.04      0.06     52.08      52.06      52.06      52.05       2.04
    95         0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00           0.00      0.00      0.00     52.08      52.08      52.08      52.08       0.00
   100         0.00       0.00        0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00       0.00           0.00      0.00      0.00     52.08      52.08      52.08      52.08       0.00
                  Source: WB staff calculation based on IOF 2008/09
                  *Note: Data was omitted due to the low number of observations (81 cases) affecting the precision of the estimate

                                                                                           33
References
Adato, M. and Hoddinott, J. (2010) “Conditional Cash Transfers in Latin America,” International Food
Policy Research Institute

Alfani, F., Azzarri, C., d’Errico M., and Molini, V. (2012) “Poverty in Mozambique: New Evidence from
Recent Household Surveys,” Policy Research Working Paper 6217, Washington, DC: World Bank

Anderson, J. (2002) “The Alaska Permanent Fund: Politics and Trust,” Public Budgeting and Finance, Vol.
22 No.2 pp. 57-68, Blackwell Publishers Inc.

Baird, S., Ferreira, F. H. G., Özler, B., Woolcock, M. (2013) “Relative Effectiveness of Conditional and
Unconditional Cash Transfers for Schooling Outcomes in Developing Countries: A Systematic Review,”
Campbell Systematic Reviews

Birdsall N. and A. Subramanian (2004) “Saving Iraq from Its Oil”, Foreign Affairs, V83 No 4 pp 77-89

Bourguignon, F. 2003 “The Growth Elasticity of Poverty Reduction: Explaining Heterogeneity across
Countries and Time Periods,” in: T. Eicher and S. Turnovsky, eds. Inequality and growth. Theory and
Policy Implications. Cambridge: The MIT Press

Chhibber, A. and G. Nayyar, “Pro-Poor Growth: Explaining the Cross-country Variation in the Growth
Elasticity of Poverty,” Brooks World Poverty Institute Working Paper 14, 2007

Cunha, N., Pellerano, L., Mueller, J., Lledo, V., Xiao, Y., Gitton, P. (2013) “Towards a Mozambican social
protection floor: consolidating a comprehensive social protection system in Mozambique: analysis of
policy alternatives and costs,” International Labour Office, Geneva

Department of Social Development, South African Social Security Agency and UNICEF (2012) “The South
African Child Support Grant Impact Assessment: Evidence from a survey of children, adolescents and
their households,” Pretoria: UNICEF South Africa

Devarajan, S., Tuan Minh, L., and Raballand, G. (2010) “Increasing Public Expenditure Efficiency in Oil-
rich Economies: A proposal,” Policy Research Working Paper, World Bank: Washington DC.

Devarajan, S., and Giugale, M. (2013) “The Case for Direct Transfer of Resource Revenues in Africa,”
Center for Global Development Working Paper 333, Washington, DC: World Bank

Evans, David K., Hausladen, S,. Kosec, K., and Reese, N., (2014) “Community-Based Conditional Cash
Transfers in Tanzania: Results from a Randomized Trial. World Bank Study,” Washington, DC: World
Bank

Ferreira, F., H., G., Messina, J., Rigolini, J., López-Calva, L., Lugo, M., A., and Vakis, R., (2013) “Economic
Mobility and the Rise of the Latin American Middle Class,” Washington, DC: World Bank



                                                       34
Fiszbein, A. and Schady, N., (2009) “Conditional Cash Transfers Reducing Present and Future Poverty,”
World Bank, Washington DC.

Fox, L., Santibanez, L., Nguyen, V., and Andre, P. (2012) “Education Reform in Mozambique: Lessons and
Challenges,” World Bank, Washington DC.

Fritz, V. (2014) “Dealing with a Resource Economy Shock: Political Economy Analysis and Its Impacts in
Mongolia,” in Problem Driven Political Economy Analysis: The World Bank’s Experience eds. Fritz, V.,
Levy, B., and Ort, R. World Bank: Washington DC.

Garcia, M., and Moore, C. (2012) “The Cash Dividend: The Rise of Cash Transfer Programs in Sub-
Saharan Africa,” World Bank: Washington DC.

Gertler, P., Martinez, S. and Rubio-Codina, M., 2006. Investing cash transfers to raise long-term living
standards, Report WPS 3994-IE, Washington DC: World Bank

Gillies, Alexandra (2010) “Giving Money Away? The Politics of Direct Distribution in Resource-Rich
States,” Center for Global Development Working Paper 231, Washington DC.

Goldsmith, S. (2002) “The Alaska Permanent Fund Dividend: An Experiment in Wealth Distribution,” The
Basic Income European Network, Geneva

Gupta, S., Segura-Ubiergo, A., and Flores E., (2014) “Direct Distribution of Revenues: Worth
Considering?” IMF Staff Discussion Note: Washington DC.

Haushofer, J. and Shapiro, J. (2013) “Policy Brief: Impacts of Unconditional Cash Transfers,” Abdul Latif
Jameel Poverty Action Lab (J-PAL), Massachusetts Institute of Technology

IMF (2014) “Bolivia: Staff Report for the 2013 Article IV Consultation,” IMF Country Report No. 14/36:
Washington DC.

Isakova, A., A. Plekhanov, and J. Zettelmeyer (2012) “Managing Mongolia’s Resource Boom,” Working
Paper No. 138 (London: European Bank for Reconstruction and Development)

Jones, S., Tarp, F. 2012. “Jobs and Welfare in Mozambique. Country case study for the 2013 World
Development Report,” Copenhagen: UNU-WIDER

Lustig, Nora, López-Calva, L., and Ortiz-Juarez, E., (2011) “The Decline in Inequality in Latin America: How
Much, Since When and Why?” Economics Working Paper 1118, Tulane University, New Orleans

McGuirk, E., Rajaram, A. and Giugale, M. (2014) “On the Political Economy of Direct Dividend Transfers
in Resource-Rich Countries: A Theoretical Consideration,” unpublished manuscript

Miller, C., Tsoka, M. and Reichert, K., (2008) “Impact Evaluation Report: External Evaluation of the
Mchinji Social Cash Transfer Pilot,” Boston University and Zomba: Centre for Social Research, University
of Malawi



                                                    35
Moore, M. (2004) “Revenues, State Formation and the Quality of Governance in Developing Countries,”
International Political Science Review 25 (3): 297-319

Moss, T. and Majerowicz, S. (2013) “Oil-to-Cash Won’t Work Here: Ten Common Objections,” Center for
Global Development Policy Paper 024, Washington DC.

Moss, T. and Young, L. (2009) “Saving Ghana from Its Oil: The Case for Direct Cash Distribution,” Center
for Global Development Working Paper 186, Washington DC.

Repulic of Mozambique: Instituto Nacional de Acção Social (2014) “Economic and Social Plan 2014,”
Maputo: INAS

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier and A. Subramanian, 2003, “Addressing the Natural Resource Curse: An Illustration
from Nigeria” IMF Working Paper No 03/139, International Monetary Fund: Washington DC

Samson, M., Lee, U., Ndlebe, A., Mac Quene, K., van Niekerk, I., Gandhi, V., Harigaya, T. and Abrahams,
C., (2004) “The social and economic impact of South Africa’s Social Security System,” Commissioned by
the Department of Social Development, Cape Town: EPRI

Sandbu, M. (2005) “Natural Wealth Accounts: A Proposal for Alleviating the Natural Resource Curse,”
Philadelphia, Wharton School of Business: University of Pennsylvania

Seidenfeld, D., Handa, S. and Tembo, G. (2013) “Zambia Social Cash Transfer Scheme: 24-Month Impact
Report for the Child Grant Programme,” American Institute for Research: Washington DC.

Selvester, K., Fidalgo, L., Ismael, C. 2014. “Nutrição, Saúde Materna e Protecção em programas de
Protecção Social em Moçambique,” Maputo: OIT

The Kenya CT-OVC Evaluation Team (2012) The impact of the Kenya Cash Transfer Program for Orphans
and Vulnerable Children on household spending, Journal of Development Effectiveness, 4:1, 9-37

UK Department for International Development (2011) “Cash Transfers Literature Review,” DFID: UK

Unidad de Analisis de Politicas Sociales y Economicas (2014) “Impact Evaluation of Renta Dignidad,” La
Paz: Bolivia

World Bank. (2012) “Mozambique Social Protection Assessment: Review of Social Assistance Programs
and Social Protection Expenditures,” Washington DC: World Bank

World Bank (2013a) “Project appraisal document on a proposed credit to the Republic of Mozambique
for a Social Protection Project,” Washington DC: World Bank

World Bank (2013b) “Africa’s Pulse,” Volume 7, April 2013, Washington DC: World Bank

World Bank (2014a) “Mozambique Public Expenditure Review. Addressing the Challenges of Today,
Seizing the Opportunities of Tomorrow,” Washington DC: World Bank



                                                   36
World Bank. (2014b). “Mozambique Service Delivery Indicators,” Washington DC: World Bank

World Bank (2014c) “Generating Sustainable Wealth from Mozambique’s Natural Resource Boom,”
World Bank Policy Note




                                                37
