                             99279 v4
Final Report                            1




               Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                  and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                                                                                 1


      Contents

      1.       Executive summary ......................................................................................................................... 10
           1.1.       Introduction ............................................................................................................................ 10
           1.2.       Activity 1 : Evaluation of the vulnerability of road sections.................................................... 14
               1.2.1.         The applied methodology.............................................................................................................. 14
               1.2.2.         Step 1 : Inventory of the basic data available ............................................................................... 14
               1.2.3.         Step 2 : Evaluation of the hazard of climate change ..................................................................... 16
               1.2.4.         Step 3 : Diagnosis of the current configuration of the 4 road sections.......................................... 18
               1.2.5.         Step 4 : Evaluation of the possible impacts of the climate change. .............................................. 22
               1.2.6.         Definition of the vulnerability of the road sections ....................................................................... 23
               1.2.7.         Limits of the study – activity 1....................................................................................................... 27
           1.3.       Activity 2 : Recommendations to adapt the infrastructures ................................................... 28
               1.3.1.         Recommendations concerning the evaluation and the taking into account ................................. 30
               1.3.2.         Technical recommendations concerning the hydrologic and hydraulic risks................................. 33
               1.3.3.         Technical recommendations regarding the geotechnical and pavement risks.............................. 40
               1.3.4.         Conclusion ..................................................................................................................................... 41




                                                                                                                                Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                                                                      and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                               2

      Abbreviations and acronyms
         th
      10 p : 10th percentile
         th     th
      90 p : 90 percentile

      a, b: Montana’s parameters

      AAC : Agriculture and Agribusiness Canada

      AHA : Agency of Hydraulic Activity

      ACB : Analysis Cost Profit

      ADM : Autoroutes du Maroc (Morocco’s Motorways)

      BLU : bande latérale unique (unique lateral band)

      BM : Banque Mondiale (World Bank)

      BMS : bulletins météorologiques spéciaux (special weather forecasts)

      BVR : Bulletins de Viabilité Routière (report on road viability)

      CC : Changement Climatique (climate change)

      CDF-T : Cumulative Density Function - Transformation

      CETE : Centres d’Etudes Techniques de l’Equipement, France ( centers of technical studies of the
      equipment)

      CIP : Climate Information Portal

      CMIP : Coupled Model Intercomparison Project

      CNP : Centre National des Prévisions (national center of forecasts)

      CORDEX: Coordinated Regional Climate Downscaling Initiative

      Cv : Coefficient de variation (S/M) (rating change)

      CW : Climate Wizard

      ΔF: variation du facteur de sécurité (change of the security factor)

      DCE : Dossier de Consultation d’Entreprises (dossier of companies consultation)

      DGH : Direction Générale de l’Hydraulique (General Direction of the Hydraulic)

      DHS : DirHamS marocains (Moroccan DirHamS)

      DMN : Direction de la Météorologie Nationale (Direction of the National Meteorology)

      DPETL : Direction Provinciale de l’Equipement, du Transport et de la Logistique (Provincial Direction of
      the Equipment, Transport and Logistic)

      DPH : Domaine Public Hydraulique (public sector of the hydraulic)

      DPV : Direction de la Production Végétale (Direction of the Vegetable Production)

      DR : Direction des Routes (Direction of the Roads)




                                                                                 Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                    and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                    3

      DR : Précipitation journalière moyenne annuelle (daily rainfall)
      DRETL : Direction Régionale de l’Equipement, du Transport et de la Logistique (Regional Direction of
      the Equipement, Transport and Logistics)
      DRPE : Direction de la Recherche et de la Planification de l’Eau (Direction of the Research and the
      water planning)
      EHTP : Ecole Hassania des Travaux Publics (Hassania’s school of the public works)
      F : Facteur de sécurité (security factor)
      F : Fréquence au non dépassement [(rang-0.5)/n], dite de Hazen (frequency at the non- overtaking
      [(range-0.5)/n], called Hazen
      F0 : Facteur de sécurité initial (initial security factor)
      FAO : Food and Agriculture Organization
      FM : Modulation de fréquence (frequency modulation)
      Ft : Forfataire (fixed)
      GEE : Global Environment Facility
      GES : Gaz à Effet de Serre (greenhouse gas)
      GEV : Generalized Extreme Value
      GIEC : Groupe d'experts International sur l'Evolution du Climat (intergovernmental panel on climate
      change)
      GIZ : Gessellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
      HCP : Haut Commissariat au Plan (office of the plan high commissioner)
      HF : Bande des hautes fréquences (high frequency band)
      Hmax : Altitude maximale du plus long talweg (mNGM) (maximal height of the longest thalweg)
      Hmin : Altitude de l’oued au niveau de l’exutoire (mNGM) (height of the wadi at the level of the drain)

      I(T, tc) : Intensité de la pluie (mm/h) (rainfall intensity)
      IAV : Institut Agronomique et Vétérinaire (agronomic and veterinary institute)
      Ic : Indice de consistance (index of consistency)
      IDF : Intensité – Durée – Fréquence (intensity – duration – frequency)
      INRA : Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (national institute of the agronomic research)
      Ip : Indice de plasticité (index of plasticity)
      LCPC: Laboratoire Central des Ponts et Chaussées (central laboratory of the Ponts et Chaussées)
      Lmax : Longueur du plus long thalweg (Km) (length of the longest thalweg)
      M : Moyenne (average)
      MAPAQ : Ministère de l’Agriculture, des Pêcheries et de l’Alimentation de Québec (Ministry of
      agriculture, fishery and alimentation of Quebec)
      MAPM : Ministère de l’Agriculture et de la Pêche Maritime (Ministry of agriculture and maritime
      fishing




                                                                                  Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                       and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                4

      MASEN : Morocco Agency for Solar ENergy

      Max : Maximum

      MCG (GCM) : Modèle de Circulation Générale (Global Circulation Model)

      MCR (RCM) : Modèle Climatique Régional (Regional Climate Model)

      Me/MED : Médiane (median)

      MEMEE : Ministère de l’Energie, des Mines, de l’Eau et de l’Environnement. (Ministry of energy, mines,
      water and environment)

      METL : Ministère de l’Equipement, du Transport et de la Logistique (Ministry of equipment, transport
      and logistics)

      Min : Minimum

      mNGM : Unité métrique par rapport au Nivellement Général du Maroc (metric unit in relation to the
      general leveling of Morocco)

      MRC (RCM) : Modèle de Climatique Régionale (Regional Climate Model)

      MRd : Précipitation journalière maximum (Maximum daily rainfall)

      MTETM: Ministère des Transports, de l’Equipement, du Tourisme et de la Mer, France (Ministry of
      transports, equipment, tourism and sea, France)

      MUSD: Millions de Dollars (millions of dollars)

      n: Taille de l’échantillon ou nombre d’années d’observation (size of the sample or number of years of
      observation)

      N°: Numéro du poste de pluie (number of the rain post)

      NF : Norme Française (French norm)

      P : Pente du thalweg (m/m ou en %) (gradient of the thalweg (m/m or in %)

      Pan : Pluie annuelle (mm) (annual rainfall)

      PHE: Plus hautes eaux calculées (highest water calculated)

      PK: Point Kilométrique (kilometer markers)

      PNUD: Programme des Nations Unies pour le Développement (United Nations development program)

      PR: Point de Référence (reference point)

      OA: Ouvrages d’art (road structure)

      OH : Ouvrage hydraulique (hydraulic structure)

      ONEE: Office Nationale de l’Eléctricité et de l’Eau potable (National Office of electricity and drinkable
      water)

      ORMVA: Office Régional de Mise en Valeur Agricole (Regional Office of agricultural development)

       : Diamètre (mm) (diameter)

      Pjmax : Pluie journalière maximale annuelle (mm) (maximal annual daily rainfall)
                                                    3
      Qjmax : Débit journalier maximal annuel (m /s) (maximal annual daily flow)
                             3
      Qp : Débit de pointe (m /s) (peak flow)


                                                                                   Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                      and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                 5

      RCP : Representative Concentration Pathways – scénarios d'émissions de GES du projet CMIP5

      RIMAROCC : Risk Management for Roads in a Changing Climate

      RN: Route Nationale (national road)

      RP: Route Provinciale (provincial road)

      RQD: Rock Quality Designation

      RR: Route Régionale (regional road)

      S : Ecart type (standard deviation)

      Sbv : Surface du bassin versant (size of the drainage basin) (Km²)

      SDSM : Statistical DownScaling Model

      SEEE: Système d’Evaluation de l’Etat des Eaux (system of evaluation of the state of the water)

      SEGMA : Service géré de manière autonome (service managed independently)

      SIG: Système d’Information Géographique (system of geographic information)

      SNC : Seconde Communication Nationale à la Convention Cadre des Nations Unies sur les Changements
      Climatiques (second national communication at the united nations framework convention on climate
      change)

      SOMD: Self-Organizing Map Downscaling

      SRES : scénarios d'émissions de GES du projet CMIP3 issus du « Special Report on Emissions Scenarios »
      (emission scenarios of the GES of the project CMIP3, from the « special report on emissions scenarios)

      T : Période de retour (ans), [T = 1/(1-F)] (return period (years))

      tc : Temps de concentration (time of concentration)

      TMJA: Trafic Moyen Journalier Annuel (average annual daily traffic)

      TR : Précipitation totale annuelle (Total rainfall)

      TRm : Précipitation totale mensuelle (Total monthly rainfall)

      TVA: Taxe sur la Valeur Ajoutée (value-added tax)

      u : Variable réduite de Gumbel (Gumbel’s reduced value) (u = -Ln (-Ln (F)))

      UHF : Bande des ultras hautes fréquences (ultra high frequency band)

      UNISDR: United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction

      USCS: Unified Soils Classification System

      VHF : Bande des très hautes fréquences (very high frequency band)

      WEGE : Weather Generator

      wl : Limite de liquidité (liquid limit)

      wp : Limite de plasticité (plastic limit)

      WRF : Weather Research & Forecasting Model




                                                                                    Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                       and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                 6

      Glossary

      Anchorage : area allowing the fixing of the end of a passive reinforcement, in the concrete.

      Annual maximal daily flow Q jmax : maximal sample value consisted of daily flows during a hydrological
                3
      year (in m /s).

      Climatic hazard : Event likely to happen, which might carry damages on the populations, the activities
      and the environment. It is a question of or climatic extremes, or evolutions in more or less the long
      term (GIEC).

      Climate scenario : Plausible and often simplified representation of the future climate, based on a
      logical set of internal climatological relations, which have been established to study the potential
      consequences of the human activity on the climate change, and often used as entry for impact models
      (GIEC).

      Concentration time tc : time at the end of which the water particle fell in the furthest drain area, will
      reach it (in minutes).

      Conveyance : hydraulic capacity of a hydraulic structure.
                                                                    3
      Daily flow Qj : volume of water observed during a day (in m /s).

      Disorder : anomaly likely to modify the mechanical functioning of the work.

      Drainage : collection and discharge of internal water.

      Drainage basin : part of a waterway, representing the topographical area drained by the waterway and
      its upstream tributaries, so that any runoff appearing inside this area has to cross this section, called
      drain, to continue its way to the downstream.

      Dynamic downscaling : Use of regional climatic model of finer spatial resolution, forced by the general
      circulation model (couple MCR/MCG).

      Elastic modulus : number that characterizes the rule of a material elastic deformation.

      Elasticity : property of a deformed element momentarily by the action of an external strength, to
      regain its initial state as soon as the strength stop acting.

      Emission of greenhouse gas scenario : Plausible representation of the future development of
      substance emission, having a radiative potential (greenhou se gas, aerosol,…) based on a logical set of
      hypothesis on the internal forcing (like the development of the demography and the economy, the
      technological evolution) and the key relations (GIEC).

      Flow Q : total volume of water which flows through a straight section of the waterway during a
                                3
      considered time unit (in m /s).

      Frequency at the excess F : probability that a value is at least equal to a given value will occur.

      Frequency of Hazen : empirical formulation to represent the frequency at the non-excess F’
      (F’ = 1 – F).

      Gabion : cage of mesh or of metal fence, filled with stones or pebbles, designed for the creation of a
      protection or shoring device.




                                                                                    Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                        and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                  7

      General circulation pattern (MCG) : Atmospherical models and oceanic general circulation coupled,
      which represent the physical process of the atmosphere, the ocean, the cryosphere and the land
      surface, to simulate the response of the global climatic system to the increase of the greenhouse
      effect. (GIEC).

      Gumbel distribution : rule of statistical adjustment used to represent the extreme events.

      Gumbel’s reduced variable : reduced variable combined to the adjustment law of Gumbel, it can be
      defined by U = - Ln (-Ln (F)).

      Highway drainage : set of measures applied for the collection and the drain of superficial and internal
      water in the highway right-of-way, as well as for the re-establishment of the external superficial runoff
      off the road.

      Hydrologic year i : year which begins at the beginning of september of the calendar year i and which
      ends at the end of august of the calendar year i+1.

      IDF or Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves : curves giving the intensity of the rainfall during the
      different return periods, and the different time steps. They are the result of the counting of the rainfall
      recorders information.

      Instability of the rock : sudden uncoupling of the geological structure on a large surface, and which
      comes with a massive drop of materials.

      Landslide : geological phenomenon, where a mass of earth fall on a slope, in other words a more or
      less continued sliding plane, more or less curved or flat.

      Maxi-annual daily rainfall Pjmax : maximum value of the sample made of daily rain, during a
      hydrological year (in mm).

      Median : value which allows to share a numeric serial organized in two parts of the same amount of
      elements.

      Micropile : pile of a diameter of less of about 300mm, reinforced or not, which can resist under certain
      traction conditions.

      Modelling mesh : Spatial resolution of a given model (also called ‘’railings’’).

      Montana’s parameters : regional parameter, a et b, enabling the estimation of the rain intensity during
      a given frequency and time step.

      Multi-model set : Use of a set of many models. It allows drawing more information like the multi-
      model average, which give the tendency by smoothing the differences between the models. It also
      allows to compare the results of each model and to analyze their convergence, their dispersion, the
      extreme projections, etc.

      Nailing : technique of strengthening an existing soil using nails.

      Outlet of a pond : the most downstream point of the river system, by which all the runoff waters
      drained by the pond pass.

      Pile : buried beam, usually vertically, made of steel, reinforced concrete or wood, set up in the land
      sinking or drilling, and used in the deep foundations.

      Plasticity (or plastic field) : behaviour field of a material, beyond the elastic limit, when the
      deformations are no more proportional to the applied strength.




                                                                                    Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                         and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                   8

      Purge : intervention during which we remove materials considered too instable to help to maintain the
      pavement, on a limited area.

      Quantiles : value taken by a variable for probability values, worthing a remarkable value. In hydrology,
      we usually take value corresponding at the return periods 2, 5, 10, 20, 50 and 100 years.

      Radio link-up : time range during which a user can broadcast.

      Rain gauge : measuring equipment of the amount of water fell in a given time.

      Rainfall intensity : quantity of rain fell during a time interval (in mm/hr).

      Rainfall recorder : recording device for rainy events.

      Regional climatic model (MCR) : Climatic model at the highest resolution on a limited geographical
      area (GIEC).

      Regionalization or downscaling : Method to extract from local to regional information (10 to 100 km),
      based on templates or a larger scale data base (GIEC).

      Return period T : average interval of recurrence, defined as the opposite of the excess probability F to
      observe a rain or a rise event (in years).

      Rockfill : set of boulders or concrete prefabricated elements placed at the bottom of the pond or as a
      cladding for the banks to protect the bases or the surroundings of a work.

      Runoff coefficient Cr : often used grade in surface hydrology to quantify the part of rain which flowed
      by the drain compared to the average rain collected by the pond.

      Safety factor : concept in civil engineering to appreciate the acceptable risk or the state of operating
      limit.

      Settling : vertical deformation of the ground due to the external pressure application, like the backfills,
      the foundations or its own weight.

      Statistic downscaling : Use of empirical method to establish the statistic relations between the
      atmospheric variables of large scale and the local or regional climatic variables.

      Standard deviation S : notion of dispersion, defined as the square root of the variance. The variance
      being the arithmetical average of the squares of the difference in relation with the average.

      Synoptic station : weather station, which measures representative parameters of atmospheric
      phenomenon at a synoptic scale (from some thousands of kilometers for the horizontal dimensions,
      from some kilometers for the vertical dimensions and from some days for the duration).

      Time horizon : year of maturity, which represents the time period (20 or 30 years) during which the
      data will be regarded, generally in the middle of the period.

      Time step : time interval in minutes, considered during the creation of the IDF curves (generally 5, 10,
      15, 30, 60, 120, et 360 minutes).

      Support structure : structure meant to maintain the lands.

      Uncertainty : State of incomplete knowledge, which might result from a lack of information or a
      disagreement about what is known, or even what it is possible to know. It might be due to many
      sources, to the vagueness of the data, to the ambiguous definition of concepts or terminology. It might
      be quantitative (for example : a probability density function) or qualitative (for example : «according to
      experts ») (GIEC).



                                                                                      Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                         and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                               9

      Variation coefficient Cv : coefficient characterizing the importance of the dispersal around the average
      M (Cv = S / M).

      Vegetal engineering : stabilization technique of the waterway banks, based on the vegetals fixing
      power by means of their roots.

      Vulnerability : susceptibility of a concern system to suffer damages under the action of a danger.




                                                                                 Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                     and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                10



      1. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
      1.1.INTRODUCTION
      Morocco meets extreme climate events, which rhythm and intensity seem to have increased these last
      years, because of the climate change. The repairs of exceptional damage, suffered by the road
      infrastructure cost 4 billions dirhams since 2009, from which about 3 billions taken from the budget
      allocated to the road maintenance. The intense rainfalls lead to large-scale mudslide, as well as flood
      and road erosion, causing the cut of main strands, such as the Rabat-Casablanca motorway, and the
      isolation of some communities. The mountainous terrain of the country increases the consequences of
      the flood in the areas of low altitude. These climatic events seriously trouble the economic activity and
      create large direct or indirect losses.

      In 2010, the World Bank conducted a study on the adaptation of the moroccan transport sector
      regarding the climate change. This study diagnosed the adaptation difficulties in Morocco, and offered
      an action plan containing a series of technical, operational and institutional measures. The moroccan
      partners of the Bank welcomed positively the study and expressed their interest for the research of
      specific technical measures allowing to improve the continuity of the road network and for the follow-
      up of the recommendations.

      In this respect, the World Bank entrusted, in 2014, the fulfillment of this project about the roads
      adjustment to the risk and the climate change in Morocco, to the engineering company INGÉROP, with
      the collaboration of two other companies, NOVEC, a moroccan company, specialized in the
      infrastructure field, and ACTERRA, a company which field of expertise is the studies of climate change.

      This study, financed thanks to a donation fo the Korean Green Growth Trust Fund, is a pilot study,
      designed in order to bring an analytical support to the Direction des Routes du Ministère de
      l’Equipement, du Transport et de la Logistique (METL) (Direction of the Roads from the Ministry of
      Equipment, Transport and Logistic), in the evaluation of the vulnerability of some important road
      sections in Morocco, and the suggestion of specific technical recommendations, aimed at improving
      the resistance of the sections to the climate change. The target is to show the feasibility of adaptation
      technical measures of the road infrastructures to the climate change in Morocco, through the detailed
      analysis of some important road sections.

      CONTENT OF THE STUDY


      This study has included three phases :

         Activity 1 : Evaluation of the vulnerability of the road sections.

      The goal of this first step was to evaluate the vulnerability of 4 road sections, on the basis of a
      diagnosis of the current configuration of the 4 sections, an evaluation of the risk under the climate
      change and the potential impacts of the climate change on the 4 road sections.

         Activity 2 : Recommendations to adapt the road infrastructures to climate change.

      The aim of the second step of the study was to present the recommendations allowing to adapt the
      road infrastructures to climate change.

      Therefore, this report offers technical recommendations in hydrology, hydraulic and geotechnics
      (including also the pavements), concerning the types of disorders observed on the 4 studied road



                                                                                 Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                     and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                   11

      sections. It is not question of an exhaustive inventory of practical recommendations for the whole set
      of moroccan road network. After all, these recommendations should allow the Direction of Roads to
      start a more in-depth thinking on the encountered problems and the strategic axes to fix for the next
      years.

         A workshop of participatory work for the attention of the staff of the Direction of the Roads and of
          the METL.

      Apart from the restitution of the activity results of activities 1 and 2, the goal of this workshop was also
      to collect the comments of the participants, in order to possibly integrate them to the final version of
      the report.

      Finally, it can be noted that a simplified guide going to the Direction of the Roads has been devised. Its
      purpose was to complete the study from some practical procedures, which can be applied by the
      services of the Direction of the Roads, in order to better adapt the infrastructures they manage, to
      extreme events due to the rain, which takes place nowadays, as well as to the potential risk tied to the
      climate change. The guide is therefore organized in 3 parts :

              Part 1 : Method of defining the vulnerability of road sections, due to hydraulic and geotechnical
               risks ;
              Part 2 : Method of hierarchization of repair works and/or strengthening concerning the
               hydraulic or geotechnical phenomenon ;
              Part 3 : The «good practices » for the designing of works.



      THE PERIMETER OF THE STUDY


      The 4 road sections chosen by the Direction of the Roads for this study are the following :

              DPETL of Chefchaouen : National Road 2 between Chefchaouen and Issaguen on 95 km (PK
               116 to 211) ;
              DRETL Taza : Regional Road 508 between Saka and Outabouabane on 157 km (PK 15 to 172).
              DPETL of Midelt : Regional Road 706 between Rich and Imilchil on 120 km (PK 0 to 120) ;
              DPETL Taroudant : Regional Road 106 between Ighrem and Assaki on 45 km (PK 75 to 120) ;

      The map on next page illustrates the location of the studied road sections.

      These 4 road sections were chosen because they are characteristic of the natural disasters, Morocco
      had to cope with these last years (2008, 2009 and 2010) : flood, landslide, gully erosion, crumbling and
      snowy episode.

      These disasters, which produced important damages on the populations and the road infrastructures,
      are essentially due to two leading climatic factors, such as rain and snow.

      The relating studies to the climate change carried out these last years confirm that the rain factor is
      leading, because this parameter generates the most important repair costs :

         Study of the World Bank «Kingdom of Morocco – Adaptation of the transport sector to the climate
          change » - June 2010 : « In any event, probably the increase previsions of frequency and intensity of
          stormy precipitations and torrential flooding deserve the greatest attention, in regard to the
          problematic of adaptation to the climate change» ;
         Study of the World Bank in Ghana «Making Transport Climate Resilient » - 2010: « Rainfall will have
          the most significant cost impact on Ghana’s road network. Temperature and wind will have minor


                                                                                    Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                       and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                  12

          cost implications that should be dealt with during the design phase, and will not have an overall
          large influence on the cost of a climate resilient road. For this economic analysis, only the influence
          of increased rain is investigated ».



      In this way, this study first concentrate on these two climatic factors, in regard to their aptitude to at
      best characterize the different climatic phenomenon observed on the 4 chosen road sections.

      Consequently, the other climatic factors likely to affect the road infrastructures, which are the wind,
      the temperature (frost/thaw and heat), silting and the marine submersions (because of the rise of the
      sea level) have not been treated in this study. Despite everything, the review conducted as part of this
      pilot study could be completed later on, by the study of road sections characterized by these climatic
      factors (roads located in a desert and/or on the edge of coastal zones).



      THE LIMITS OF THE STUDY

      The conclusions of activity 1 pertaining to the evaluation of the hazard under climate change and to the
      potential impacts of the climate change, on the 4 road sections not having allowed to bring to light the
      variation of extreme rainfalls (daily and intra-day rains), further to the climate change (only slight
      variations were brought to light for the annual average rains), it was therefore chosen to retain the
      current situation as the reference situation with an upkeep of the current risk for the future, and this
      especially as the analysis of design method brought to light that the hydrological uncertainty (definition
      of rainfall and hydrological parameters, as well as the evaluation method of the flows) presented
      uncertainties well above these of the climate change.

      In this way, in the frame of activity 2, the study headed towards the adaptation of the road, in the
      current situation, and in the definition of recommendations to, on one hand, reduce the hydrological
      uncertainties and on the other hand, conceive the repair works and/or strengthening.




                                                                                   Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                       and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                    13


                                                                             1

                                                                                    2

                                                                                   3


                                                                  4




               Figure 1 : Location of the studied road sections



                                                                      Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                         and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                  14



      1.2.ACTIVITY 1 : EVALUATION OF THE VULNERABILITY OF ROAD SECTIONS

                1.2.1. The applied methodology
      The evaluation method of the road sections vulnerability is based on the collection and using of the set
      of existing data about the current climatic conditions, the climate change and the situational analysis of
      the road sections. In this way, this evaluation consists in 4 principal steps :

         Step 1 : the collection and validation of the data ;
         Step 2 : the evaluation of the hazard of climate change ;
         Step 3 : the diagnosis of the current technical configuration of the 4 road sections ;
         Step 4 : the evaluation of potential impact of the climate change for the 4 road sections.

      Finally, a methodology of definition and hierachization of the road sections vulnerability is suggested.
      This pragmatic method presents the advantage of being easy to implement and practical to new
      projects like existing infrastructures. For the administrator of the road infrastructures, this method will
      allow to define, in a first phase, the necessity of works to bringing up to standard, and in a second
      phase, to plan them.




                1.2.2. Step 1 : Inventory of the basic data available
      The collection of data concerned the 4 following themes :

      THE DATA RELATED TO THE CURRENT CLIMATIC CONDITIONS

      The two climatological factors retained by the Engineering were the rain and the snow. They have been
      chosen in regard to their ability to characterize at best the different phenomenon observed on the 4
      road section to be studied : flood, landslide, gully erosion, crumbling and snow.

      The climatological data to collect at the reference stations of these 4 sections in order to study them
      are the following :

              Pluviometry :
                Annual maximum daily rain (Pjmax) : The Engineering has available pluviometric data
                 thanks to other studies made in the Kingdom of Morocco, which have been completed with
                 data acquired from « la Direction de la Météorologie Nationale (DMN) » the Direction of
                 the National Meteorology;
                Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves (IDF) : the Engineering has also available a database
                 on the Intensity – Duration – Frequency (IDF) curves, acquired from the DMN as part of the
                 different hydrologic, hydraulic and road drain surveys, it conducted, for the account of the
                 « Direction des Routes (DR) » (Direction of the Roads), as well as for the « Société des
                 Autoroutes du Maroc (ADM) » (Society of Motorway of Morocco).




                                                                                      Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                         and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                   15


              Snow :
                Number of snowy day per month : data not available. The Engineering contacted the DMN,
                 which confirmed that the inventory was not yet quantified ;
                Maximum period of time of snow : data not available. The unique available information is
                 the one passed for the different DPETL during the field visits. Another source of information
                 is supplied by the « Bulletins de Viabilité Routière » (Reports on Road Safety) which reflect
                 the days the sections were cut because of the snow cover.



      THE DATA RELATED TO CLIMATE CHANGE


      The inventory work was based on two principal sources :

              A review of the existing documentation , especially the studies and research work of reference
               in the field of the climate change pattern, and the analysis of the impacts at the local level, in
               direct link with the hazards and section to be studied ;
              An utilization of two reference databases at an international level likely to supply the
               regionalized estimation data from models of the GIEC (CMIP3 and CMIP5) with the parameters
               and scale of work of the study.

      After the inventory and the analysis of sources, the available data were :

              Pluviometry :
                Annual maximum daily rains (Pjmax) : the Engineering found the studies, as well as
                 estimations with reference to this parameter ;
                Intensity-Duration-Frequency curves (IDF) : up to now no collected study nor estimation
                 ever deals with this parameter.
              Snow : No study nor regionalised estimation could be found on the snow parameter.



      THE DATA RELATED TO THE INVENTORY OF FIXTURES OF THE SECTIONS


      The inventory work was based on two principal sources :

              Meetings : as soon as the project started, the Engineering drew up an inventory of the data and
               studies of interest, ant this for many thematics (hydraulic, geotechnic, pavement, traffic,
               climate change, etc…). The Engineering contacted the DR, DPETL, ant the DRETL in order to
               obtain the available data to use them. During the meetings, the Engineering could have noted
               that there is a problem with the data archiving, which was the reason why the data available
               were so limited.
              Field visits with supervisors of DRETL/DPETL of each section, who showed a true knowledge of
               the existing problems, and who constituted an essential information source for the realization
               of this study. These field inspections enabled to soak up with the special features of the studied
               sites, the right of the hot spot indicated by the directions, and to notice the types of hydraulic,
               geotechnic and pavement structures disorders, which these sections suffer. These visits were
               the subject of a detailed report, with a photo-reportage (Annex 1 – Report of visits) and
               enabled to draw a table of types of disorders, with their distribution by theme. It is not an
               exhaustive list.




                                                                                      Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                         and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                    16

      THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC DATA


      The engineering identified some parameters enabling to establish the strategic nature of each section :

              Served population : in the « Recensement Général de la population et de l’habitat 2004 »
               (General Census of the population and of the environment 2004) published by the High
               Commissioner for the Plan (HCP). The number of inhabitants is taken a census by town.
              Economic activity : through the number of industrial establishments with their workforce and
               turnover (website of the moroccan observatory of the Industry) and the employment rate
               (HCP). The agricultural inventory from 1996, the Green Morocco Plan organizes an inventory
               which will take place from 2014 until 2020. The Engineering did not include the agricultural
               activity as a parameter, because of the lack of updated data
              Traffic : through the document « Recueil Trafic Routier 2012 » (Collection Road Traffic 2012) of
               the Direction of the Roads. The Engineering has been able to take an inventory of a daily
               average traffic, as well as the percentage of the different types of vehicles. This information
               was available for all the sections except the RR106 one (Ighrem-Assaki). The Engineering
               assimilated its traffic to the one of the section Imilchil-Rich (RR706), which serves similar lands.


                1.2.3. Step 2 : Evaluation of the hazard of climate change
      The aim of this evaluation is to define the extent of the awaited climate change, as well as the level of
      uncertainty linked to these estimations. For this purpose, the studied parameters were the pluviometry
      (annual average precipitation and maximum daily rain) and the snow.

      Two data sources were used, to wit, on one hand, a number of studies and existing research works and
      on the other hand, two databases of online simulations. The study examines two time horizons : 2035
      and 2050.

      The used data come from the downscaling works. It is question of « regionalized » data, from the
      global modelisation results, which allows to reach a finer solution, in the order of some ten kilometers.
      They are more appropriate to study the future moroccan climate, and to recommend some pertinent
      adaptation measures. In order to be able to estimate a part of uncertainty, many future climatic
      scenarios were considered (from optimistic to pessimistic). Furthermore, each scenario, a set of model
      is used, in order to compare their results and chart the inter-model dispersion. By means of
      observation data of the DMN, the results of the climatic estimations could be compared on historical
      durations. This also inform on the modelisation fiability.

      ANALYSIS OF DATA


         The existing climatic studies : many reference studies on the climate modelisation and its impacts at
          local, regional and national scales exist in Morocco. The efforts of information research are
          concentrated on the works judged the most pertinent in regard to the needs of the study.
              The studies differentiate according to the geographic coverage (national or regional), to the
               model of downscaling (dynamic and/or statistic), to the resolution of the study grid (25km, 250
               km, etc..), to the reference period and the projection horizons. The other characteristic to
               remember concerns the data on which the climatic estimation are based (daily, monthly,
               annual precipitations…) ;
              According to the parameters of each study, it is proved that only the studies called CC7
               (concerning the RR706) and CC9 (concerning the RR106) present an adequate degree of
               accuracy, allowing their using for the purpose of the study.




                                                                                      Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                          and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                    17

         The online information portal : the two chosen portals are based on the multi-model estimation
          and cover the whole world’s surface. They enable, via proven downscaling statistics, to have data
          on the sections or on the nearest stations of the DMN. These methods do not totally replace the
          dynamic regionalization method, but offer, nevertheless, a satisfactory level of reliability, as a result
          of, particularly, the use of a great number of model-scenario couples.
              Climate Information Portal (CIP) :
                Provides data by station : Al Hoceima, Taza, Errachidia and Agadir have been taken on.
                The two retained parameters were : total monthly precipitation (TRm) to reconstitute the
                 total annual precipitation (Pan) and the maximum daily precipitation (MRd)
              Climate Wizard (CW) :
                Provides the data by interpolated grid.
                The two retained parameter were : total annual precipitation (TR) and the annual daily
                 average precipitation (DR).
          From the analysis of data of these two portals, the following observations come up :
              Total annual precipitation (Pan) : the two portals highlight a decrease of this parameter,
               variable from -12 to -34% by 2050 and 2055 ;
              Maximum daily precipitation (Pjmax) : only the portal CIP give information on this parameter.
               Globally, we observe the decrease of heights average maxi-annual daily precipitations, by two
               dates (2035 and 2050), except for the Errachidia’s post, where no tendency emerges (no
               decrease nor increase). This decrease is included between 9% and 22%. However, for the
               extremes of precipitations (maximum value of the maxi-annual daily precipitation on the
               simulated periods), by 2035 and 2050, no tendency of increase or decrease emerges, except for
               the AGADIR post, where a very light decrease of precipitation heights is observed (-1 to -10%).



      SUMMARY


      From the analysis of bibliographic data (prior studies) and portals of climatic estimations, the
      Engineering remembered the following data :

              Total annual precipitation (Pan) : the Engineering chose for each section data to remember for
               the next phase, generally : dynamic downscaling, if it exists ; after CIP, if the station is
               sufficiently representative ; otherwise, the CW data (only available by 2055) ;
              Maximum daily precipitation (Pjmax) : only the tool CIP gives information on this parameter.

      From the bibliographic analysis, it is noticed that the whole of works agree on a decrease of the annual
      average pluviometry. Nevertheless, the extent of the evolution greatly varies according to one scenario
      and model or another, it is consequently difficult to estimate a more reliable estimation. As for the
      extreme rains, only the Midelt section has the data, and only in winter, no tendency is identifiable. The
      documentary review does not enable to give all the information about the wished parameters, it is
      completed by the use of two online climatic data portals (CIP and CW). This enables to confirm the
      general decrease of annual average precipitation for the four sections.

      The analysis of daily maximal rains shows that, globally, the rains should also decrease in the future for
      all the sections (however, some models show an increase of the quantiles by the considered dates).
      However, these results contain a greater part of uncertainty, because of the difficulty to modelize the
      extremes. A more extensive work of dynamic downscaling and of statistic treatment of the extremes,
      particularly from the Cordex program’s data, could enable to reduce a part of th is uncertainty, without
      hoping an absolutely perfect and certain information.




                                                                                      Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                          and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                    18

                1.2.4. Step 3 : Diagnosis of the current configuration of the 4 road sections

      THE CONTENT OF THE DIAGNOSIS

      This step consisted in drawing up a report of the current technical situation of the 4 studied sections,
      on the following aspects : hydro-climatic, configuration of the road infrastructure, hydraulic,
      geotechnic (including the pavement structure), maintenance and socio-economic. The report has been
      based on field visit and available data collection.

      For each section, this chapter contains :

              Hydrographic context : localization of the section, in relation to hydrologic units ;
              Climatic context : from the available climatic data really observed (according to the reference
               posts, the observation years change for each section), the Engineering characterized :
                 From the data of the pluviometers, the annual maximum daily rains (Pjmax) and the annual
                  rains (Pan);
                 From the data of the rainfall recorders, the pluviometric intensity.
              Road infrastructure :
                 Geographic context ;
                 Type of the road platform ;
                 Analysis of days of cut ;
                 Allocated budgets for the road maintenance.
              Hydraulic and sanitization :
                 Hydrographic and hydrologic context : characterization of the networks and characteristics
                  of the watershed ;
                 Diagnosis of the problems raised with a synthesis table of the noted hydraulic disorders
                  during the visits.
              Geotechnics and pavements :
                 Geological context : geological characterization of the grounds crossed by the section ;
                 Diagnosis of the problems raised with a synthesis table of the noted geotechnical
                  disorders ;
                 Analysis of the maintenance made on the road, for the available sections.
              Socio-economic context : analysis of four selected parameters for the evaluation of the
               strategical character of the road.

      THE RESULTS OF THE DIAGNOSIS


      This diagnosis enabled :

              To establish, for the 4 studied road sections, types of reported disorders during the field visits :
               see the tables in the following pages.
               For the hydraulic and sanitization part, the encountered problematic concern :
                 The crossing of the wadis, via submersible rafts and submersible bridges ;
                 The road sections following the wadis and affected by the fluvial erosion ;
                 The crossing of the chaaba ;
                 The rain erosion of the watershed and road embankment (rubble and ballast) ;
                 The collection and evacuation network of the road platforms ;
                 The maintenance of the works and sanitization network.



                                                                                       Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                           and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                     19


               For the geotechnical part, the encountered problematic concern :
                 The landslides ;
                 The rocky instability (crumblings and fall of blocks) ;
                 The pavement deterioration (cracking, collapse, etc.).

              To bring to light the main dysfunctions in the right to the four road sections, like the located
               and examined nerve center confirm it during the field survey ;

              To bring to light the persistence of the major part of the instability, despite the intervention
               made by the different managements. Indeed, the started repair works were limited to the re-
               establishment of the traffic and of the road rehabilitation urgently, without attacking the origin
               of the problems suffered by the sections.


      The analysis of the «Bulletins de Viabilité Routière » (Report of the Road Viability) (BVR) enabled to
      establish, by sections, the cuts that affected the roads, as well as their cause (snow, rise) and their
      duration. This piece of information, originally very useful for the study, is also partial. In this way, it is
      noticed, on one hand, that the BVR’s records are not systematical ly created, and on the other hand,
      that the DR does not have an archiving or tracking system enabling its statistical analysis.
      Consequently, the analysis of the information source cannot lead to reliable conclusions.

      The analysis of the maintenance budget, allocated to each section, also shows a lack of maintenance of
      the roads, which shortens their lifetime. This analysis is despite everything incomplete, because the
      obtained information is not workable in its entirety, and the data of some years are missing.




                                                                                       Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                           and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                                                                                                                    20
                                      Synthesis of the types of the encountered problematic : hydraulic - sanitation part
                                                                                                                                                    Assessment of the encountered disorders
                                                    Types of encountered problematics
         Themes                                                                                                                         RN 2             RR 508                RR 706             RR 106       Total 4 sections

                              Principal                                           secondary                                      Number        %   Number         %     Number          %   Number         %   Number     %
                                               Degradations in the right of a submersible bridge
                                               Scouring in the upstream of a submersible raft
                         Crossing structure Haulage of boulders or sediment transport
                                                                                                                                   4       8,3%      7       18,9%         11      16,2%      17      45,9%      39     21,3%
                             of a wadi      Degradations or scouring in the right of a bridge
                                               Scouring in the right of a former submersible raft
      River hydraulic
                                               Absence of adjoining developments (plan of protection of backfill)

                        Road at the outskirt
                                              Erosion of the bank/base of backfill by the attack of the current and variations
                         of a wadi : fluviale                                                                                      0       0,0%      5       13,5%         7       10,3%      2        5,4%      7       3,8%
                                              of the water levels (flooding and deflooding)
                               erosion
                                                                         Total                                                     4       8,3%      12      32,4%        18       26,5%      19      51,4%      46     25,1%
                                               Absence of network of collection and evacuation of rain waters
                             Sanitation        Absence of network of internal clearing drainage                                    10      20,8%     11      29,7%         18      26,5%      5       13,5%      44     24,0%
                                               Absence of protective devices at the end of the crossing structures
                        Maintenance of the
                                           Absence of maintenance of moat                                                          6       12,5%     3        8,1%         1        1,5%      0        0,0%      10      5,5%
                             network
                                               Degradations of the backfill bund at the end of the structure
                                               Absence of protective devices of the road backfill at the end of the crossing
                                               structures
                         Crossing structure Degradation of the hydraulique structure
                                                                                                                                   27      56,3%     3        8,1%         13      19,1%      9       24,3%      52     28,4%
      Road Sanitation       of a Chaaba     Problem of hydraulic blocking in the upstream
                                               Absence of upstream harnessing devices or connection to the upstream lateral
                                               network
                                               Absence of structure maintenance and upstream adjustment
                                               Erosion of the clearing bund and lateral moat
                                               Erosion of the backfill bunds
                            Rain erosion                                                                                           1       2,1%      8       21,6%         18      26,5%      4       10,8%      31     16,9%
                                               Erosion of the upstream watersheds
                                               Erosion of the clearing bunds
                                                                         Total                                                     44      91,7%     25      67,6%        50       73,5%      18      48,6%     137     74,9%

                                       Total fluvial hydraulics and road sanitation                                                48          -     37           -       68            -     37           -    183        -



                                                                                                                                                             Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                                                                                                      and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                                                                                              21


                                          Synthesis of the types of the encountered problematics : geotechnical part
                                                                                                                                    Assessment of the encountered disorders
                                                Types of encountered problematics                                                                                                       Total of the 4
         Themes                                                                                                        RN 2           RR 508            RR 106           RR 706
                                                                                                                                                                                          sections
                          Principal                                           secondary                         Number        %    Number     %      Number    %      Number     %      Number     %

                                           Degradations et deformations of the pavement
                                           Deformation of the strengthening systems (gabion or concrete wall)
                                           Cracking of concrete structures (moat and concrete shoulder)
                          Landslide        Absence of retaining means                                             12     1200,0%     14     175,0%      0     0,0%      2      50,0%      28     90,3%
       Geotechnics                         Bund of clearing or backfill in negative gradient
                                           Predominance of the altered and jammed marl
                                           Instable slope with negative topography and absence of drainage

                      Rocky instability    Degradation of the pavement by the tumbled boulders
                         (blocs fall,      Absence of appropriate protective means                                4      400,0%      1      12,5%       4     26,7%     5      125,0%     14     45,2%
                        crumbling)         Clearing of fracked rock with steep grade
                                                                     Total                                        16     1600,0%     15     187,5%      4     26,7%     7      175,0%     42     135,5%
                                           Deformation and undulation of the pavement
                                           Lowering of the pavement
                                           Longitudinale cracking
                     Degradation of the
                                        Destruction of the pavement                                               11      40,7%      20     57,1%      11     61,1%     17     425,0%     59     190,3%
        Pavement     pavement Structure
                                           Shoulder concreted broken or ruined
        Structure
                                           Shoulder clearing side filled by scree
                                           Evolution of the potholes
                                                                     Total                                        11      40,7%      20     57,1%      11     61,1%     17     425,0%     59     190,3%

                                  Total Geotechnics and Pavement Structure                                        27          -      35        -       15        -      24        -      101       -




                                                                                                                                            Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                                                                                   and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                22



                1.2.5. Step 4 : Evaluation of the possible impacts of the climate change.
      During this step, the Engineering tried to analyze the possible impacts of the climate change on the
      risks laid open to the four sections. This analysis was about the three parts : hydrology-hydraulic,
      geotechnics-pavement, and snow, and was based on the results of the step 2, which resulted in a
      partial quantification of the effects of climate change on the annual rain and maxi-annual daily rain.

      HYDROLOGY-HYDRAULIC PART


      For this part, the Engineering presented the estimation methods of design flow, as well as a qualitative
      evaluation of the impact of the climate change on phenomena such as flooding, scouring, erosion, etc…
      The Engineering also underlined uncertainties sullying this evaluation, the introduced calculation
      methods, as well as the calculation of the quantiles issued from the statistic adjustments. The
      confrontation of results of the climate change with the uncertainties highlighted the difficulty to
      appreciate the evolution of the risk incurred by the 4 sections, on the basis of considered climatic
      parameter.

      In conclusion, the noted disorders and the damages caused by the rises and/or the localized storms are
      directly dependant of the extreme precipitations, as the last recent events of november 2014 showed
      it ; these extremes could be characterized by maxi-annual daily rain and hourly or infra-hourly
      pluviometric intensities.

      It emphasizes that the evolution of the hazard of the climate change brought to light, primarily for
      the annual rain (decrease more or less noted), are not enough to conclude at a decrease of
      hydrologic and hydraulic risks in the future. Indeed, the analysis conducted clearly shows that the
      current hydrologic uncertainties are largely above the pluviometric variations brought to light in the
      study about the hazard of climate change, and especially that they are also subjected to uncertainties.

      So it is desirable to give the priority :

              On one hand, to characterize the vulnerability of the road sections : see in next chapter the
               proposition of a pragmatic method of the vulnerability definition ;
              On the other hand, to make more reliable the hydro-pluviometric parameters and the
               evaluation methods of the peak flow, the flow condition (speed of flow) and the erosion and
               scouring phenomena : see the recommendations of the activity 2.

      GEOTECHNICAL- PAVEMENT PART

      For this part, the Engineering presented different disorders noted on the field, underlining their types,
      their probable appearance causes, and their different manifestations. This part also brought to light
      the complexity of the phenomena, which are the results of the convergence of many factors in bonds
      with the mechanic characteristics of the grounds, the crossed unstable slopes, as well as the climatic
      factors.

      In regard to the evolution of the climate change, brought to light on one hand the annual pluviometry
      (tendency to decrease) and on the other hand, for the maxi-annual daily rains (no significant tendency,
      except for the section of the RR106, where a slight decrease has been brought to light), nothing
      enables to conclude to a decrease or an increase of geotechnics risks in the future . Indeed, the
      disorders noted depend also on other factors, which evolution are unknown : particularly, the hourly
      our infra-hourly pluviometric intensities characterizing the storms, the temperatures and the rotation
      of frost/thaw.




                                                                                   Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                       and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                               23

      SNOW PART

      For the aspect related to the snow, the lack of data (present and future) has not allowed to define the
      impact of the climate change on this parameter, which concerns specially the RN2 and the RR706.
      Consequently, the analysis of the impact of the climate change on the snow risk could not have been
      done.




                1.2.6. Definition of the vulnerability of the road sections
      A definition method of the vulnerability of the road sections about the hydraulic and geotechnical risks
      has been suggested.

      This method aims to order the road sections on the basis of 4 classes of vulnerability and a set of
      characteristic indicators of the hydraulic and geotechnical disorder observed for the 4 road sections.

      These elements form guidelines and a decision support tool for the managers of these roads, to
      identify the possible vulnerable areas.

      The tables in the next pages present a grid of definition of the vulnerability classes for the following
      themes :

              Fluvial hydraulics ;
              Road sanitation ;
              Geotechnics ;
              Pavement structure.




                                                                                   Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                      and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                                                                              24

       FLUVIAL HYDRAULICS


                                      Table 1 – Grid of definition of vulnerability classes – Fluvial erosion

          Vulnerability                       Presence of a concave bank
                                                                                                      Absence of a concave bank (parallel to the road9
           indicator                              (meander or bent)
                               Distance between the base of the road bund and the                      Distance between the base of the road bund and the
       Parameters taken                          wadi bank (d)                                                           wadi bank (d)
         into account
                                d≤1m*             1<d≤5m           5 < d ≤ 10 m         d > 10 m        d≤1m*              1<d≤5m        5 < d ≤ 10 m        d > 10 m

       Vulnerability of the
                            Very High                High           Average         Low to Zero              High          Average       Low to Zero Low to Zero
          road section
                              * base of a road backfill in the bottom of the wadi
                                  Table 2 – Grids of definition of vulnerability classes – Crossing a junction

          Nature of the
                                                                                    Non submersible bridge
           structure
          Vulnerability    Scourign in the right of the piles and/or Air draughts for the flooding project                    Dispositifs de protection contre les
           indicators                     abutment                                  (TA) *                                        érosions et affouillements
                                                                              Revenge between the PHE** and the
                                   Scouring bed                                                                             Piles and abutments    Adjoining backfills
                                                                              dimension of the downstand beams
       Parameters taken                                           Non
         into account                        Foundation       scouring bed
                            Superficial
                                           buried and/or on                   TA < 0,5 m    0,5 < TA < 1 m     TA > 1 m      Absence    Presence   Absence     Presence
                            foundation
                                             substratum

       Vulnerability of the                                                                                                             Low to                 Low to
                            Very High            High         Low to Zero        High        Average         Low to Zero      High                  High
          road section                                                                                                                   Zero                   Zero
                                                                             * threshold values of air draughts to double in the presence of tree trunks

                                                                             ** Highest Waters for the reference flooding


           Nature of the
                                                                                        Submersible bridge
            structure

                                                                                                      Protective devices
          Vulnerability                                                                                                     Level of the pavement in
                                      Scouring at the bottom of the bed                            against the erosions and
           indicators                                                                                                       scourable site (blocking)
                                                                                                           scourings

                                             Scourable bed
        Parameters taken                                    Sparcely              Lit non                                                 Bridge of       Bridge of
                                                                                                    Absence               Presence
          into account          Large scouring             important            affouillable                                            great height     low height
                                h > 2,5 to 3 m              scouring
                                                         h < 2,5 to 3 m
       Vulnerability of the
                                   Very High                    High           Low to Zero             High          Low to Zero Very High Low to Zero
          road section
                               h : depth of scouring or depth of the unscourable substratum


           Nature of the
                                                                                           Submersible raft
            structure

                                                                                Protective devices against the
          Vulnerability           Upstream and downstream                                                                            Level of the pavement in
                                                                                 erosion and scouring on the
           indicators                     low wall                                                                                    scouring site (blocking)
                                                                                      downstream side

                                                                                                                                 Raft blocked  Raft blocked at
        Parameters taken
                                     Absence                  Presence               Absence                 Presence          over the bottom the bottom of
          into account
                                                                                                                                  of the bed      the bed

         Vulnerability of
                                          High           Low to Zero                    High             Low to Zero                   High             Low to Zero
          road section




                                                                                                                                  Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                                                                        and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                                                                                                                            25

      ROAD SANITATION
                                                                       Table 3 – Grid of definition of vulnerability classes – Sanitation and maintenance

                                                                      Presence of a significant      Presence of a significant
                                      Network of collection and
           Vulnerability                                             external watershed which       external watershed which                                       Protective devices at                Maintenance de
                                     evacuation at the base of the
            indicators                                             runoff is oriented towards the runoff is oriented towards the                                    the rejection points              sanitation networks
                                           bank of clearing
                                                                          bank of clearing                bank of backfill
                                                                                    Network of collection and              Network of collection and
        Parameters taken                                                           evacuation at the crest of the         evacuation at the base of the
                                        Absence              Presence                        clearing                               backfill                       Absence           Presence        Absence         Presence
          into account
                                                                                    Absence           Presence             Absence           Presence

       Vulnerability of the
                                           High            Low to Zero                High          Low to Zero               High            Low to Zero             High       Low to Zero             High      Low to Zero
          road section

                                                                             Table 4 – Grid of definition of vulnerability classes – Crossing a Chaaba

                                                                                                                   Degradation of the hydraulic                                 Harnessing device in
          Vulnerability       Degradation of the backfill bund at the ends of the Protective devices against                                       Downstream hydraulic                                     Maintenance of the
                                                                                                             structrure(upstream/downstream ends                             clearing and joining to the
           indicators                             structure                         erosions and scouring                                        blocking or solid transport                                    structure
                                                                                                                           and/or raft)                                         longitudinal network
                        - Start of the adjoining                                                              Start from
       Parameters taken backfill                        Start of                                               the head  Start of
                                                                      Absence        Absence    Presence                                Absence      Presence      Absence      Absence       Presence     Absence     Presence
         into account   - creation of the fall         apparition                                            downstream appatition
                        - pit of scouring                                                                    or upstream

       Vulnerability of the
                                    Very High             High       Low to Zero      High     Low to Zero      High       Average    Low to Zero      High      Low to Zero        High     Low to Zero    High     Low to Zero
          road section


                                                                                   Table 5 – Grid of definition of vulnerability classes – Rain erosion

                                                                    Erosion of the clearing
                                          Vulnerability                                              Erosion of the backfill         Erosion of the upstream Erosion of the clearing
                                                                     bunds and the lateral
                                           indicators                                                        bunds                          watershed                bunds
                                                                             pits
                                      Parameters taken
                                                                    Presence          Absence        Presence          Absence         Presence         Absence          Presence           Absence
                                        into account
                                     Vulnerability of the
                                                                      High          Low to Zero         High        Low to Zero           High        Low to Zero            High          Low to Zero
                                        road sections


                                                                                                                                                                        Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                                                                                                             and climate change in Morocco
 Final Report                                                                                                                                                                                  26

             GEOTECHNICS



                                                           Table 6 – Grid of definition of the vulnerability classes – Landslide

   Nature of
                                                                                                                   Landslide
  the disorder
  Vulnerability                                                                                                    Plant place                                                        Saturation of the ground/Sensibility
                         Lithology         "Soap" Coat                         Height / slope                                                        Annual average rain
   indicators                                                                                                        setting                                                                   towards the water
    Parameters                                                                      Average                                                                 Average        Weak      Strong      Average     Low to zero
                       Loose  Rocky                       High                                       Bass                                  High
    taken into                      Presence Absence                                (trays or                  Absence Presence                          (between 300      (<300      (fine  (heterogeneous (rocky sandy
                      ground ground                  (in mountain)                                (in plain)                            (>600 mm)
      account                                                                       colines)                                                              and 600 mm)      mm)      grounds)    grounds)      grounds)
   Vulnerability
                                 Low to              Low to                                                                                                                Low to
    of the road        High                High                      High           Medium       Low to zero      High      Medium            High          Medium                     High         Medium        Low to zero
                                  zero                zero                                                                                                                  zero
     sections




                                                     Table 7 – Grid of definition of the vulnerability classes – Rocky instability

  Nature of the
                                                                                                               Rocky instability
    disorder
                                                                                                                    Temperature
   Vulnerability                                             Cycles                                                                                                                        Change and erosion of the
                               Type of rock                                            Height/Slope                variation (day                          Extreme rains
    indicators                                            frost/thaw                                                                                                                        matrix including blocks
                                                                                                                     and night)

                                        Non     High Low to                                                                                                   Average
     Parameters                                              High (in Average                                                                   High                         Weak                                    Low to
                        Fracturable fracturable (>3 zero (<3                   Bass (in                             High           Low                       (between                     Strong      Average
      taken into                                             mounta (trays or                                                                   (>60                         (<40                                     zero
                         / unstable    / non   month months/                    plain)                             (>25°)         (<25°)                     40 and 60                    (>60%)    (30 to 60%)
       account                                                 in)    colines)                                                                 mm/hr)                       mm/hr))                                  (<30%)
                                     altérable s/year) year)                                                                                                  mm/hr)

  Vulnerability of
                                          Faible à               Faible à                           Faible à                                                                                                        Faible à
     the road                 Forte                      Forte                 Forte    Moyenne                    Forte          Faible        Forte        Moyenne         Faible        Forte     Moyenne
                                           nulle                  nulle                              nulle                                                                                                           nulle
     sections




             PAVEMENT STRUCTURE



                                                   Table 8 – Grid of definition of the vulnerability classes – Pavement structure


  Nature of
                                                                                 Structure of the pavement: Fissuring/Collapse/Potholes/Puddle
the disorder
Indicators of                                                                                                   Temperature
                                                                                                                                      Saturation of the ground suppport
     the               Cycles frost/thaw             Drainage                     Height/Slope                 variation (day                                                                       Traffic
                                                                                                                                              (clayey and marly)
vulnerability                                                                                                    and night)
                                                                                                                                                                      Low to zero                Average
 Parameters                                                                                                                        High (Plastic      Average (lp
                     High (>3 Low to zero (<3                   High (in Average (trays            Bass (in     High      Low                                        (grounds few   Intense       (TMJA     Low to zero
 taken into                                   Absence Presence                                                                       grounds          between 30
                   months/year) months/year)                   mountain)  or colines)               plain)     (>25°)    (<25°)                                        plastiques (TMJA>4500) between 2000 (TMJA<2000)
   account                                                                                                                            lp>40)            and 40)
                                                                                                                                                                         lp<30)                 and 4500)
Vulnerability if
                                                            Low to                                 Low to                Low to
   the road           High        Low to zero     High                  High           Medium                  High                    High            Medium        Low to zero        High        Medium    Low to zero
                                                             zero                                   zero                  zero
    section




                                                                                                                                                      Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                                                                                           and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                    27


                1.2.7. Limits of the study – activity 1
      The aim of the activity 1 was the evaluation of the vulnerability of the road sections.

      This evaluation is based on the collection and the use of all the existing data related to the current climatic
      conditions, to the climate change and to the current report of the road sections.


              Concerning the current report of the road sections, the analysis leaned in particular on the site visits, in
               the absence of other documents such as the project of conception, of execution, of topographic
               bottom in a suitable scale, of lists of OH with its sizes, of geological studies, etc. ;
              The analysis of the « Bulletins de Viabilité Routière » (Bulletins of Road Viability) (BVR) should have
               enabled to establish, by section, the statistics of cuts (number, duration), as well as the causes (snow,
               flooding). This information, potentially very useful for the study, is also incomplete. So, we notice, on
               one hand, that the index forms of BVR are not systematically established, and on the other hand that
               DR has no system of archiving or tracking-up allowing his statistical analysis. Therefore, the analysis of
               this potential information source cannot bring to exploitable conclusions ;
              The analysis of the budget of maintenance assigned to every section is with difficulty exploitable
               because of incomplete information and missing years.




                                                                                      Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                          and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                   28

      1.3.ACTIVITY 2 : RECOMMENDATIONS TO ADAPT THE INFRASTRUCTURES
       With regard to the conclusions of the activity 1, the working hypothesis taken into account for the activity 2
      consists in considering that the climatic phenomena keep their potential of current risks in the future.

      As established in the reference terms, the aim of this activity is the presentation of the technical and
      economically advantageous recommendations for the renovation, the improvement and the maintenance of
      the selected sections.



      The stages to be able to determine these recommendations are:

              Characterization of the vulnerability of the road sections: through a pragmatic method of a vulnerability
               definition (activity 1);
              Hierarchization of the measures: the analysis "costs-profits" allow to choose the best solution with a
               technico-economic point of view. This analysis requires the realization of extensive studies, because it is
               the last stage to realize. The study presents a method allowing to rank the disorders. The objective is to
               supply at the DR and to the departments of operation and maintenance a method of global and reliable
               hierarchization in order to enable them to define a management policy of the observed disorders;
              Technical Recommendations: the lack, even the absence of data and preliminary studies do not allow to
               establish one-to-one couples "disorder-solution". The abolition of this practice, moreover very wide-
               spread, is the first recommendation of our study;
               Our recommendations will thus limit, in this second activity, to present a range of the possible solutions
               which could be practical according to input data. Studies carried out from complete input data would
               allow a correct choice from a technical point of view ;
               The analysis of the studies provided to us, as well as the field visits, allowed to establish the origin of
               certain noticed disorders and to adapt the recommendations to the problems we met ;
              Estimate of associated costs: for every possible technical solution, it is necessary to establish an
               estimate of associated costs. The cost estimate was realized for some scenarios. Nevertheless, all the
               proposed technical solutions are rather common. The DR has a wide experience in order to be able to
               estimate the costs of the solutions. Therefore, we did not give particular recommendations and limited
               this stage to give some unit prices and some comparative examples ;
              Comparative economic advantage: once the different technically viable solutions are found, it is
               necessary to analyze which one is the most advantageous from a financial point of view. The
               establishment of analysis "cost-profit" of the projects is a rather common method, nevertheless, it
               requires also certain input data which could not be obtained during the previous phase. Our services
               are limited to the adaptation of this method to this study in order to allow the DR to apply it to every
               case, once the input data will be available.




                                                                                      Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                         and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                29




               CHARACTERIZATION OF
                                         INDICATORS OF THE VULNERABILITY
                THE VULNERABILITY



                HIERARCHICAL             INDICATION OF TECHNICAL PRIORITY
               ORGANIZATION OF           SOCIOECONOMIC INDICATION
                THE DISORDERS            INDICATION OF PRIORITY




                                         TECHNICAL SOLUTIONS
               TECHNICAL STUDIES         ESTIMATION COST




                 ANALYZE COST
                                         BETTER ECONOMIC TECHNICAL SOLUTION
                   PROFIT

                            Figure 2 : Steps for the establishment of the most favorable solution




                                                                                    Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                        and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                   30
      1.3.1.      Recommendations concerning the evaluation and the taking into account


               1.3.1.1. Assessment

      The data analysis of climatic estimation which the Engineering could reach brought only a partial answer to the
      questions set down by the study. If a clear tendency to the decrease of the annual pluviometry emerges of
      analyzed projections, this one is less marked as regards the extreme pluviometric events. As for the future
      evolution of the snow parameter, no information could be collected, or exploited.

      One of the issues is to be able to produce and to put at the service of the designers and the administrators of
      the roads the data which allow to enlighten the way the climate change is going to come to perturb
      infrastructures and their environment (superficial flows, stability of grounds,…). The sizing of the latter and the
      measures of risk mitigation is at present made on the basis of reference hazards among which the intensity and
      the frequency are calculated from past meteorological chronicles. Yet, as the experts of the GIEC showed it, the
      hypothesis of stationarity of the climate is not valid any more, and the knowledge of the past climate turns out
      insufficient to comprehend the climate of tomorrow.

      One of the main deficiencies observed by the study lives in the weakness of the knowledge related to the
      evolution of the extreme phenomena, in the front row of which appear the forecasts of increase of frequency
      and intensity of the stormy precipitation and the torrential rises which are at the origin of most of the disorders
      and the damage caused in infrastructures.

      With regard to the uncertainties and the inaccuracies surrounding the available data of climate change for the
      study, the Engineering recommends, at least in the short term, to keep the current level of risk as basis of
      decision, which means adopting a position relatively protective and in compliance with the precautionary
      principle.

      Nevertheless, it is important in the next 3 or 5 years to set up studies, even more complete researches on the
      evolution of the hydro-climatic extremes (rain, snow and frost in particular) susceptible to disrupt most
      severely and most durably the integrity and the feature of the road network in the right of the selected
      sections. It will be about in particular of improving the provision and the reliability of the studied climatic
      parameters and to confirm or deny the tendencies to the decrease of some extreme pluviometric events as
      seem to indicate it the data of estimations from the CIP platform.

      In particular, these researches should specify the possible adjustments to be brought to the methods of
      calculation of the events of ten-year or centennial frequency which condition the sizing of the main works of
      engineering. It will be about, in particular, estimating if necessary to decrease, to keep or to increase the safety
      margins currently applied in the sizing of infrastructures with regard to the future climate change.




                                                                                     Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                         and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                          31
               1.3.1.2. General recommendations


                1.3.1.2.1. Elaboration of regionalized climatic estimation at high definition spatial

      It seems unavoidable to establish a scientific partnership between the DMN and the DR, in order to provide
      evolution scenarios of the extremes from, as far as possible, the dynamic downscaling techniques, for the
      reasons mentioned in the Activity 1. The use of output of regional models of the CORDEX program, based on
      the MCG of the CMIP5 should be given priority in order to obtain all the multi-models and realize the
      uncertainty of an inter-model.

      The DMN have available the technical and human capacities enabling to treat these data and to proceed to the
      calculation of a large range of climatic indications able to characterize the extreme phenomena of major
      interest for the studied sections. A working group gathering the DMN, the DR and the DGH could be organized
      in order to produce these evaluations and to provide the accurate input data for the analysis of the impacts.




                1.3.1.2.2. Decision support tool for the analysis and the anticipation of the climatic risks

      In parallel of the hazards evaluation, the Engineering recommends to invest the field of anticipation support
      tool and decision support tool, regarding the risks related to the climate change. These tools should allow to
      shed light on the stages of planning but also the preparation of the reaction in crisis situation. The
      recommendations are of two types :

         To develop the type SIG tools, capable of giving a repo rt on the different components’ vulnerability of the
          infrastructures sensitive to exceptional meteorological phenomena. The tools could be developed in the
          sections, or sub-sections with high stakes. They could allow to integrate a digital and easily viewable format
          for the administrators of the acquired information on the critical point of the network, as well as the major
          sources of vulnerability. Being based on the critical values mentioned before, they could enable to inform
          on the answer of the road infrastructure at an event of a given intensity and to anticipate the corresponding
          counter.
         To apply the analysis methods of proven risks in the field of road infrastructure. At an international level,
          there are many methodological references enabling to lead probabilistic analysis of risks and to organize
          the different sections of a road section according to the vulnerability grade to some kinds of hazards. The
          methods generally define the associated risk to an extreme climatic phenomenon with its probability of
          occurrence and the severity of the caused damages, approached, most often, in terms of human and/or
          economic loss. An example of this type of tool is the RIMAROCC method, elaborated in 2010 by a european
          technical consortium (Road ERAnet). RIMAROCC allow to objectivize the hazard risks on the road
          infrastructures, from a multicriteria analysis based on three major measurement :
              The exposure of the infrastructure to the climatic threats (hazards) ;
              The sensitivity, which changes according to the intrinsic characteristics of the infrastructure and its
               environment ;
              The consequences of the risk, in terms of human and economic loss.




                                                                                              Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                                  and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                       32
               1.3.1.2.3. To adopt a climatic prism and to adapt the infrastructures to the uncertainties

      If it is possible, and desirable, to improve the precision of the climatic estimations and, finally, the evaluation of
      the impacts of the climate change resorting, in particular, to the described methods and tools, it will be illusory
      to think that they will allow to totally eliminate the inherent uncertainties, about the modelisation of the
      climate and its impacts. There is no information absolutely perfect and certain about the climate. So it matters
      to develop the care of the administrators for a « culture of uncertainty » and to help them to integrate a new
      order in their decision-making process. Indeed, the uncertainty should not be an excuse to inaction. It is
      possible to prepare by adopting, in particular, some action principles :

         To adopt an adaptative management of the infrastructures, taking care not to decide prematurely of the
          irreversible step. The climate change is a dynamic and continuous process, and any action of adaptation fits
          into a climatic context particularly uncertain and unstabilised. Therefore the adaptation is not a one-time
          action aiming at passing from a stable situation to another stable situation. A good care of favouring, in the
          conception and adaptation of the infrastructures, the flexible and reversible strategies, in opposition to
          solutions involving important investments, which no one could ensure the effectiveness, in case of
          evolutions more pronounced than expected (example : it may seem imprudent to build protective structure
          calibrated on the most unfavorable climatic future, which it will be difficult to make evolve in case of a
          different evolution of the storm phenomena would happen).
         To favour the actions called «no-regrets », that is the ones which will prove to be beneficial independently
          of the evolution of the climate or the extent of its change. Finally these actions do not imply costs which will
          prove to be useless if the climate estimations were partly incorrect (under-estimation or overestimation).
          The treatment of disorders and technical deficiency in the current conception of the infrastructures
          typically falls under this category.
         To take into account the time deadline of the impacts and actions to apply. In front of questions such as
          « do we have to act as of now ? », or « can we wait for the estimations to improve or for the changes to
          begin to be apparent ? », that the administrators ask, the answers are complex. In a general way, we should
          begin to prepare to the climate change as of now, but it should be done progressively, gradually, setting
          priorities. The adaptative management is an imperative. This a progressive adaptation mode resting on the
          application of flexible measures, regularly assessed and corrected, as the scientific knowledge develop, and
          as the climatic conditions reveals itself. In the field of road infrastructures, it means to define, beforehand,
          many paths of adjustment, which take into account contrasting climatic scenarios, and which costs and
          profits had previously been estimated. This also requires to build indicators, allowing to decide the gradual
          deployment of the identified adaptation measures, when, in the future, some vulnerability thresholds are
          exceeded, systematically or irreversibly. However, when the uncertainties about the future changes are too
          high, or the knowledge about the risks are too low, it is, sometimes, preferable to differ the adaptation, in
          the meantime to have available a more reliable information, and to concentrate on the treatment of the
          deficiencies and bad practice observed, independently of the climate change. This is what is advised in this
          study.




                                                                                           Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                               and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                    33
                1.3.2. Technical recommendations concerning the hydrologic and hydraulic risks


                    1.3.2.1. The principles and calculation methods


                         1.3.2.1.1. Pluviometric parameters

      From the analysis of the studies provided, it stands out that the definition of pluviometric parameters is very
      summary and does not constitute a priority for the design offices. Indeed, they are satisfied with only the data
      from former studies. In this way, no actualization of former chronicles, nor investigation to take an inventory of
      relevant information on the extreme rains are carried out.

      In regard to this analysis, and knowing the pluviometric parameters are important input data for the estimation
      of design rate, we advise three types of recommendations for the definition of pluviometric parameters :

         A local approach.

      This approach is to be favoured for the one-time studies, in attendance of at least a measuring post
      representing a substantial number of years of observation, in regard to the chosen reference return period. For
      this approach, the recommendations are the following :

              verification and critical analysis of the origin of the pluviometric data ;
              minimum length of the chronicle = 25% of the reference return period ;
              systematical actualization of the chronicles ;
              for the statistic adjustments :
                 estimation of the quantiles of return period ≤ 10 years : the different available adjustment rules
                  give comparable results if there is a chronicle of at least 10 years of measure available ;
                 estimation of the extreme quantiles of return period ≥ 100 years : the exponential and Gumbel’s
                  rules should be banned, particularly when one or many exceptional values stand out of the other
                  observations, because they underestimate the quantiles. It is preferable to use the GEV rules
                  (Generalized Extreme Value distribution) or the GP rule (Generalized Pareto distribution).
         A regional approach.

      This approach should be favoured for the studies related to the important road sections (many tens of km) and
      the regional studies (for example the definition of the hydrologic parameters).

      It consists in resting on a more important number of pluviometric posts, which consists in increasing the size of
      the analysis sample by enlarging the spatial field of observation and analyzing simultaneously the observation
      of the different posts of measure on a homogeneous pluviometric area.

         A partnership with the DMN (Direction of the National Meteorology) and/or other organisms (universities,
          research laboratories,..........) in order to develop the knowledge of extreme pluviometric events :
              Inventory of remarkable pluviometric events, observed in Morocco ;
              Densification of the network of the measure posts ;
              Studies of historical events.




                                                                                        Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                             and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                  34



                         1.3.2.1.2. The estimation methods of flood discharge

         We offer to limit the number of methods. Indeed, it seems favourable to apply only one method, for which
          the choice of parameters will be finely analyze and justified, rather than applying many methods whose
          parameters were not subjected to blocking and/or verification. In this way, for the smaller watersheds of a
          surface < 20 km², we advise the application of a rational formula, whereas fort the watersheds > 20 km², we
          prescribe the use of regional formulas, scaled on the observations from the hydrometric stations.
         Actualization of the hydrologic parameters by homogeneous pluviometric area. Indeed, for all the empirical
          formulas, the choice of parameters is determining in the flow calculation. In this way, the choice of
          parameters to use in the formula should be subjected of a blocking with one or many gauged similar basins.
          Indeed, most of the formulas currently used have been defined in different locations in Morocco, with
          parameters, which could be out of date today.
         For the application of the rational formula, we prescribe to take into account the variable run-off coefficient
          in relation to the return period. Indeed, the run-off coefficient varies with the rain intensity, but this
          variation differs according to the permeability and the soil retention degree forming the watershed.
         Finally, as for the extreme pluviometric events, we offer to develop the knowledge of the historical flood
          rising, via the inventory of remarkable events (rises of 2008, 2009, 2010, 2014, .......) going along with
          calculations of the historical flood rising flow, in the right of the counted vulnerable areas.




                         1.3.2.1.3. The definition of hydraulic development

      Based on the fact that, currently, the offered measures, concerning the reinstatement of the superficial runoff,
      consist in replacing systematically the existing structures by new works, we prescribe to make a diagnosis of
      the hydraulic functioning of the existing structures, in order to define the most adapted technical solution,
      from a technical and economical point of view :

              Replacing the existing structures ;
              Strengthening of the ends upstream/downstream ;
              Setting up a new structure in parallel with an existing one.




                    1.3.2.2. River hydraulics :


                         1.3.2.2.1. Case of wadi crossing

      The wadi crossings, encountered on the 4 road sections, are carried out whether with bridges called unsinkable
      or with structures called sinkable such as bridges or raft.

      THE HYDRAULIC RISKS TO TAKE INTO ACCOUNT


         The logjam (floating obstruction)

      The consequences of the accumulation of floating fragments are the following :

              Significative reduction of the wet section and of the capacity of the structures ;


                                                                                      Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                          and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                        35
              Significative heightening of the speed around the abutments and the piles which cause phenomena of
               scouring able to drag away the decline of the structure ;
              Extra horizontal thrust force against the structure ;
              Risk of wave in the upstream, in case of breach in the dam, caused by an accumulation of floating
               fragments.
         The evolution phenomena of the wadi morphology
         The upright mobility of the beds (evolution of the movable bottom) . In this way, it is important to define
          the depth of the scouring, which correspond to the height on which these phenomena occur (height to
          bottom disrupted) ;
         The mobility of bed plans ; definition of the space of the mobility of the bed (loitering space) and definition
          of the strategy of the wadi crossing (crossing of the totality of the loitering space or bed fixing on the
          outskirts of the crossing).

      THE PRELIMINARY TECHNICAL STUDIES


      Before listing the technical recommendations to apply for the conception of the crossing structures of the
      wadis, it is first necessary to define the technical studies to carry out which should be applied either to design
      the new crossing structures (new-build structure), or to repair the damages caused by the floods (actions on
      the existing structures).

      The table below summarizes the principal technical recommendation for each kind of structures.


                    Case of crossing the wadis                                       Proposed actions


                                                                    - Base the low walls up to the unsourable ground level
                                                                    - When the unscourable layer (substratum) is in great
                                                                   depth : realisation of low walls with flexible materials
                                The rafts
                                                                   like gabions
                                                                    - Setting up at the immediate downstream of the raft a
                                                                   mat of gabions or rip-raps


                                                                    - The submersible bridges present an interest only if the
                                                                   conditions of foundation are good and the scouring little
                                                                   important
                                The submersible bridges
                                                                    - In unscourable site or in attendance of substratum at
         The technical
                                                                   shallow depth : to solidly anchor the foundations until
       recommendations                                             the level of unscourable substratum,


                                                                   - Implementation of the lateral beacons
                                Rafts and submersible bridges
                                                                   - Implementation of warning signs

                                                                    - Plan the release of a minimum air draught between
                                                                   the water level estimdated during the flooding of the
                                                                   project and the lower vein of the lower surface of the
                                Insubmersible bridges              road structure
                                                                    - Set up the protective devices of the supports
                                                                    - Plan, if necessary the protection of the access backfill
                                                                   in flood plain


                              Table 9 : The main technical recommendations – Case of crossing the wadi

                                                                                        Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                            and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                           36



                        1.3.2.2.2. Case where the road platform goes along a wadi : fluvial erosion


      THE RISK INCURRED BY THE ROAD


      When a road platform goes along a wadi and is situated in floodplains or at the outskirts of them, there are
      some risks, according on one hand to the stability of the banks of the wadi, and on the other hand, the stability
      of the backfill under the action of the water.

      The erosion phenomena of the banks of a wadi are likely to cause important disorders at the level of the road
      backfill, when this one is situated at the outskirts of the bank or when the embankment of the backfill is
      situated on the crest of the bank (case encountered on the 4 studied road sections). Indeed, on account of the
      plan progression of the bank, it will cause either the decline of the road backfill, or landslide.

      THE TECHNICAL STUDIES AND TECHNICAL SOLUTIONS TO APPLY

      In order to define the pertinent technical solutions to apply for the protection of the road backfills going along
      the wadi, it is first necessary to define the technical studies to carry out to conceive the adapted strengthening
      solutions. These studies have to include the 3 components which are the environmental engineering, the
      hydraulics and the geotechnics.

      The table below summarizes the technical studies and the conceivable technical solutions.


                                                                                        Proposed actions

                              The studies of environmental             - Diagnosis of the causes of the bank degradations
                              engineering                              - Analysis of the stability of the bed and banks


                                                                       - morphological study : analysis of the mobility of the
           Preliminary                                                 beds in plan, long and profile
                              The hydraulic studies
             studies                                                   - morphodynamic study : characterisation of the erosion
                                                                       and scouring phenomena


                                                                       - characterisation of the geological formations, by the
                              The geotechnical studies
                                                                       means of a ground recognition, if necessary

                                                                        - protection by vegetable techniques
                              The technical solutions to strengthen     - protection by mineral techniques
                              teh banks                                 - combined protection (vegetable techniques + mineral
           Technical                                                   techniques)

       recommendations                                                 - Setting up anti-erosive mat with or without
                              The technical solutions to strengthen    vegetalisation
                              the backfill in floodplain               - Setting up of gabions mats
                                                                       - Setting up of rip-raps

                     Table 10 : Technical studies and main technical recommendations – Case going along a wadi




                                                                                         Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                             and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                                   37
                    1.3.2.3. The road sanitation

      The road sanitation concerns the following parts :

         The reinstatement of the external superficial runoff to the road platform. It should be noted that in the part
          of road sanitation, only the hydraulic structures of crossing not considered as road structure, that is to say
          with an opening < 3 m, are taken into account. On the other side, the crossing structures are considered as
          road structures and are treated in the chapter before, pertaining to the crossing of the wadis ;
         The collection and the evacuation of the superficial waters in the road right-of-way, called thereafter
          « sanitation of the road platform » ;
         The collection and evacuation of the internal water, that is to say the road drainage.

      THE REINSTATEMENT OF THE EXTERNAL SUPERFICIAL RUNOFF TO THE ROAD PLATFORM


      For the existing crossing structures of the Chaaba and the hydraulic crossing structures dealing with the
      evacuation of the road rain waters under the road, we offer to adopt a specific approach. Indeed, the existing
      hydraulic structures have not always been designed according to the rules : undersizing and/or lack of
      protective device. Some existing structures present consequently risks for the durability of the road, during
      important or exceptionally rainy events.

      It is out of question to reconsider all the existing structures, but to check in a first phase their hydraulic
      functioning and to define, in a second phase, the measures to be taken to improve the runoff conditions and/or
      allow the transit of higher flow than the ones taken into account during the design of the structure, while
      guaranteeing the durability of the road platform.

      The table below summarizes the offered approach and the technical recommendations.


                                                                                            Proposed actions

                                 Step 1 : Control of the hydraulic
                                                                          Setting up of preliminary studies
                                 functioning of the existing structures


                                                                          Reemplacement of the existing crossing hydraulic
                The proposed     Step 2 : Choice of the construction      structure, by a new structure or the conservation of the
                  approach       scenario                                 preserved existing structure and construction in the
                                                                          right of the surroundings of the existing structure


                                 Step 3 : Definition of the measures to
                                                                          Detailed studies of the construction
                                 apply


                                                                           - Setting up a protective device of the backfills adjoined
                                                                          to the structure
                                 The technical recommendations for the
                                 protection of the adjoining backfills to - Setting up, if necessary, of a structure of drumming or
                                 the structure (upstream and              an improvement of the existing drumming
                                 downstream)
                                                                           - In attendance of high drops betweekn the end of the
                 The technical
                                                                          structrure and the drain : construction of a water descent
               recommendations                                            such as a waterfall

                                                                          - Setting up a mat anti-erosive, with or without
                                 The technical recommendations for the vegetalisation
                                 protection of the road bund, in the case
                                 of overflow on the road
                                                                          - Setting up a gabions mat


                                       Table 11 : Suggestion for the protection of the backfill

                                                                                               Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                                    and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                             38
      THE SANITATION AND THE ROAD DRAINAGE


      The table below summarizes the technical recommendations to apply to assure a collection and evacuation of
      superficial water and internal waters to the platform in the road right-of-way.

                               Type of network of
               Section                                                             The recommendations
                           collection and evacuation

                                                             Setting up the networks of crest of clearing bund in the following
                                                             cases :
                           Networks of the crest of clearing
                                                              - if there is a significative external watershed, which runoff is
                           bund
                                                             oriented towards the clearing,
                                                              - and if it is necessary to protect the clearing bund from the runoff

                           Networks of base of the clearing
                                                              Systematical setting up
                           bund

       Sanitation of the                                      Setting up the network of the crest of the backfill bund only to
                           Networks of crest of backfill bund evacuate the water of the platform in a privileged point, in the right
        road platform                                         of specific sensitive area to the water inlets

                                                              Setting up a network at the base of the backfill in the following
                                                              cases :
                                                               - in attendance of a significative external watershed which runoff is
                           Networks of base of the backfill   oriented to the backfill bund,
                           bund                                - at the end of the networks of the crest of backfill bund,
                                                               - at the end of the crossing hydraulic structures in absence of drain,
                                                               - when the vague runoff are susceptible to damage the lower
                                                              bottoms

        Road sanitation    Deep ditch or draining trench*     Necessity to define in dialogue with geotechnical engineer

                           * major drain devices

                           Table 12 : Recommendations related to the sanitation and the road drainage




                                                                                            Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                                and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                                39
                     1.3.2.4. The maintenance

      THE STAKES

      The maintenance of the sanitation network of roads and crossing hydraulic structures enables :

              To maintain in good working condition all the structures of the network ;
              To create or modify some structures to adapt them to the new obligations of the site (problems of
               water stagnation,………).

      The maintenance makes durable the allowed investment during the design and commit the administrator’s
      responsibility ; he is the guarantor of the respect of the following stakes :

              The security of the road user;
              The upkeep of the viability conditions ;
              The durability of the road infrastructure.

      THE MAINTENANCE VISITS

      Two kinds of visits can be distinguished :

              The periodic visits : these visits should be done at least once every year, completely ;
              The occasional visits after every significant flooding.

      These visits have the purpose to determine, as the case may be, the maintenance and/or repair works to carry
      out.

      THE MAJOR MAINTENANCE SERVICES

           Nature of            Type of inspections during the
                                                                                             Type of intervention
           structures           periodical maintenance visits
                              - capacity of the ditch and state of           - cleaning the ditch
               Ditches
                             congestion                                      - mower the vegetation

                                                                              - release of the end of the structure : cleaning and
                              - State of obstruction of the structure and
                                                                             removal of materials
                             the bed in the immediate upstream and
                             downstream                                      - flushing and cleaning of the crossing
        Crossing hydraulic
            structures                                                       - repair of the waterproofness and the structure of the
                             - State of work of civil engineering
                                                                             work

                              - Presence or no of localised erosion and/or
                                                                             - setting up protective devices
                             scouring phenomena

                                            Table 13 : Maintenance of the sanitation structures

      OFFER OF THE CREATION OF A TECHNICAL GUIDE

      Because of the stakes of the maintenance of the road sanitation network, we suggest the preparation of a
      technical guide related to the observation, the maintenance and the using of the road sanitation.




                                                                                               Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                                   and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                  40
                1.3.3. Technical recommendations regarding the geotechnical and pavement risks
      The diagnosis made by the Engineering brought to light a set of geological, or of pavement, disorders, which
      causes could vary from one site to another.

      At this stage of the study, it is not possible to offer a proper solution for each site, in preparation to solve on
      one hand the observed disorders, and on the other hand, to value the cost of its implementation, and this
      resting only on the field visits done.

      In this way, apart from the array of strengthening solutions suggested in the following chapters, the
      Engineering insists on the following points :

              The importance of in-depth studies to be started by the DPETL, in order to have available precise input ;
              In case of development of the study directly by the companies, the MOA must demand the
               development of technical studies by the company. To avoid the design or realization errors, it is advised
               to resort to an external control, carried out by an authorized control desk, and a technical audit by
               experts, during the project realization in order to avoid that the applied strengthening to be badly
               performed or inappropriate for the disorders to be treated.

      The geotechnical disorders spotted during the activity 1, concern the landslide, the rocky instabilities, the
      erosion of the alluvial layers and the gully erosion. For each disorder, first of all, a presentation of different
      types and causes of instabilities is performed, then follow a presentation of the strengthening solutions.

         For the landslide, the strengthening methods of the ground are classified in four categories and the study
          lists the solutions with resisting elements at the base of the embankment, with geometrical, drainage and
          water management modifications as well as the vegetation.
         For the gully erosion, we present a study allowing to establish the basis for the application of vegetalisation
          technics in the future.

      The types of disorders of the pavement are numerous and complex according to the type of pavement, and
      may have different origins. In this chapter, there is description of this problematic adapted to the encountered
      problems during the performed visits.




                                                                                     Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                        and climate change in Morocco
Final Report                                                                                                     41
                1.3.4. Conclusion
      During the field visits, the Engineering noted that some disorders remain, even if they have been the target to
      many interventions, without resolving completely the problem. These disorders are often located in
      unfavourable contexts : mountain range, unstable slopes, water-sensitive geological formations and their
      permanent solution can prove to be complex.

      On one hand, appropriate solutions should be found, from a technical point of view, with the necessary
      preliminary studies. On the other hand, the array of possible technical solutions should be known, but also the
      most advantageous solution from a technico-economic point of view, through a « cost-profit » analysis. The
      encountered limitations during the realization of the study did not allow us to go further in our considerations,
      the proposition of an array of technical solutions and the identification of these which could be economically
      more advantageous, has not been possible, in a general way.

      In fact, the objective of this study does not consist in defining the list of works to be done on the 4 road
      sections, but to define the recommendations to adapt the road infrastructure. Besides, as indicated in the
      report, the scenario choice of the adjustment is made after the preliminary studies, which are not the object of
      this mission. However, it can be noted that some preliminary studies require a topographic study or specific soil
      tests.

      Our recommendations to adapt the infrastructures have been divided in many steps :

              Detailed characterization of the vulnerability of the road section, according to the proposed
               methodology of activity 1 ;
              Hierarchization of the disorders according the the methodology proposed in chapter Erreur ! Source du
               renvoi introuvable. of this report ;
              Technical recommendations : the input data, the preliminary studies as well as the technical studies are
               necessary in order to determine in most of the cases the best solution from a technical point of view.
               The estimation of the cost of each solution depends, for the most part, on the localization of the
               structure. The experience of the DRETL/DPETL through the analysis of the DCE of the companies
               remains the best source of information. However, this report gives a brief estimation of the cost of
               some advised recommendations ;
              Analysis cost-profit : the analysis cost-profit depend also of historical data, for the estimation of closing
               days (unknown data) or the estimation of each DEPTL according to its available averages to perform
               some repairs. As an example, some road structures which fell down remains in ruins since 7 years,
               while the road is still functioning (apart from the flooding periods). How much time, in days, should it
               be closed, in this case ? Does it depend on the structure or on the ability of the DRETL /DPETL to make
               the repairs ?

      Otherwise, as well as adapting the most vulnerable infrastructures, the attention should be drawn on the
      necessity of a correct maintenance. Indeed, the lack of maintenance can cause the dysfunction of a well
      designed and built structure, and can therefore lead to important disorders.

      The last point which should be underlined is the absence of awareness-raising policy, of public alert, and of
      markings as well as the education of the users.




                                                                                       Adaptation of roads to climate risk
                                                                                          and climate change in Morocco
