                                           99356 v2



                   Sri Lanka
JOINT
                   (1991–2012)
COUNTRY            Volume 2:
PORTFOLIO          Technical Documents
E VA L UAT I O N




                   D E C E M B E R 2 014
                                    	  

                             	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
Joint	  GEF/Sri	  Lanka	  Country	  Portfolio	  
Evaluation:	  (1991–2012)	  
                             	  
Volume	  2:	  

Technical	  Documents	  

	  

	  

January	  2014	  

	  

                                                        1
Contents	  

A. Country	  Environmental	  Legal	  Framework	  ...............................................................................	  3	  

B. Global	  Environmental	  Benefit	  Assessment	  ............................................................................	  37	  

C. ROtI	  on	  Conservation	  of	  the	  Biodiversity	  in	  the	  Rainforests	  Project	  .....................................	  63	  

D. ROtI	  on	  Protected	  Areas	  Management	  and	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  Project ...........................	  91	  

E. ROtI	  on	  Energy	  Services	  Delivery	  Project	  and	  Renewable	  Energy	  for	  Rural	  Economic	  
Development	  Project	  ................................................................................................................129	  




                                                                                                                                                  2
        TECHNICAL	  DOCUMENT	  A:	  

Country	  Environmental	  Legal	  Framework	  




                                                     3
1. The	  National	  Development	  Agenda

The	   development	   and	   service-­‐centered	  
                                                                               Social	  Wellbeing	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  
efforts	   of	   successive	   governments	   in	   Sri	  
                                                                               Sri	   Lanka	   today	   has	   achieved	   remarkable	   progress	   in	   health	  
Lanka	   since	   independence	   in	   1948	   have	   led	  
                                                                               and	  social	  welfare	  due	  to	  a	  large	  share	  of	  public	  expenditure	  
to	   an	   increase	   in	   the	   standard	   of	   living	  
                                                                               being	  redistributed	  for	  free	  education	  (at	  6.3	  schools	  per	  sq	  
among	   the	   people,	   but	   some	   actions	   have	  
                                                                               km)	   and	   free	   health	   services,	   coupled	   with	   food	   subsidies	  
also	   resulted	   in	   numerous	   environmental	                      and	   subsidized	   credit	   to	   improve	   living	   standards.	  
challenges.	   Sri	   Lanka	   today	   is	   experiencing	              Consequently	  the	  adult	  literacy	  rate	  in	  the	  country	  is	  high	  at	  
rapid	   demographic	   and	   social	   change	   after	                91.4%	   with	   comparable	   literacy	   rates	   for	   men	   and	   women.	  
ending	  a	  debilitating	  30	  year	  internal	  conflict.	           The	  net	  enrolment	  ratio	  for	  primary	  education	  exceeds	  90%,	  
The	   country	   is	   now	   moving	   into	   a	   trajectory	      and	   secondary	   education	   is	   free	   of	   charge	   to	   all	   students	   in	  
of	   aggressive	   development	   with	   ambitious	                     state	   schools	   (numbering	   9,675	   in	   2010)	   since	   1945.	  
targets.	   Consequently	   national	   development	                       University	   education	   in	   15	   state	   universities	   is	   also	   free	   of	  
                                                                               charge.	   	   The	   island’s	   national	   health	   indicators	   are	  
plans	   anticipate	   rapid	   development	   (DoNP	  
                                                                               comparable	   with	   those	   of	   developed	   countries,	   resulting	   in	  
and	   MoFP,	   2010;	   MoFP,	   n.d;	   NPPD	   &	  
                                                                               an	  average	  life	  expectancy	  at	  birth	  of	  70	  yrs	  for	  males	  and	  78	  
MUDSAD,	   2007).	   This	   includes	   urbanization	                    yrs	   for	   females.	   The	   Government	   provides	   free	   health	   care	  
and	   growth	   of	   satellite	   towns	   and	   connecting	         services	   through	   an	   extensive	   network	   of	   health	   care	  
rural	   area	   (ibid).	   The	   government	   has	   plans	          institutions	   –	   dispensing	   both	   western	   and	   traditional	  
to	  strategize	  Sri	  Lanka	  as	  a	  knowledge	  hub,	  a	        medicines.	   However,	   malnutrition	   remains	   a	   problem	   for	  
commercial	  hub,	  a	  naval	  &	  maritime	  hub,	  an	              poor	   and	   vulnerable	   groups.	   	   While	   western	   medication	   is	  
aviation	  hub,	  and	  an	  energy	  hub,	  taking	  into	            widely	   used,	   there	   are	   presently	   over	   20,000	   traditional	  
account	   Sri	   Lanka’s	   strategic	   location	   &	                 Ayurvedic	   physicians	   in	   the	   country	   who	   depend	   almost	  
resources	   (CB,	   2011).	   Recognizing	   the	   vast	               entirely	   on	   biological	   resources	   for	   their	   medicines,	   and	  
                                                                               many	   who	   live	   near	   forests	   collect	   their	   raw	   materials	   from	  
potential	   for	   tourism	   in	   post	   war	   Sri	   Lanka,	  
                                                                               natural	  forests.	  	  
expanding	   tourism	   is	   given	   high	   priority	  
(MoE,	  2010a).	  	                                                                                                                              Source:	  (CB,	  2011)	  

The	   government	   is	   also	   committed	   to	  
increasing	   external	   trade	   competitiveness,	   creating	   an	   enabling	   environment	   for	   private	   sector	  
investment,	   and	   facilitating	   power	   sector	   and	   infrastructure/reconstruction	   development	   projects	   to	  
sustain	   the	   momentum	   for	   economic	   growth	   (FD,	   2012)	   while	   meeting	   the	   domestic	   needs	   of	   a	  
population	  exceeding	  21	  million	  (CB,	  2011).	  	  Accordingly	  Sri	  Lanka	  faces	  the	  critical	  challenge	  of	  ensuring	  
that	  national	  development	  is	  systematic,	  equitable	  and	  environmentally	  sustainable.	  	  

The	   government	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   also	   made	   commitments	   to	   achieve	   the	   Millennium	   Development	   Goals	  
(MDGs)	  at	  national	  level	  with	  the	  support	  of	  various	  Ministries	  and	  UN	  agencies	  (IPS/NCED/UNDP	  2010).	  
Targets	   with	   regard	   to	   goals	   1-­‐6	   were	   well	   on	   track	   during	   reporting,	   while	   progress	   was	   being	   made	  
with	  regard	  to	  goal	  #7:	  to	  ensure	  environmental	  sustainability	  by	  increasing	  protected	  areas,	  reduction	  
of	   green-­‐house	   gasses	   and	   CFCs,	   and	   formulating	   and	   initiating	   a	   range	   of	   policies	   plans	   and	  
programmes	  (ibid).	  	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                                   4
2. Constitutional	  provisions	  for	  environmental	  management

With	  regard	  to	  natural	  resources,	  sovereignty	  is	  given	  to	  the	  State,	  but	  it	  is	  vested	  in	  the	  hands	  of	  the	  
people	  and	  the	  State	  cannot	  contravene	  the	  interests	  of	  citizens.	  This	  means	  that	  the	  “State	  shall	  hold	  
all	   natural	   resources	   in	   guardianship	   for	   the	   people	   and	   ensure	   that	   it	   be	   used	   in	   a	   cautionary	   manner.”	  
(interpreted	   in	   MoENR,	   2007a)1.	   Thus,	   the	   constitution	   vests	   “sovereignty”	   in	   the	   “people”	   which	   is	  
inalienable	  (Article	  3),	  and	  sovereign	  rights	  are	  exercised	  and	  enjoyed	  (according	  to	  Article	  4)	  	  by:	  (a)	  the	  
legislative	   power	   of	   the	   people	   exercised	   by	   Parliament	   consisting	   of	   representatives	   elected	   by	   the	  
people	  and/or	  by	  the	  people	  at	  a	  Referendum;	  (b)	  the	  executive	  powers	  exercised	  by	  a	  President	  elected	  
by	   the	   people,	   and	   (c)	   judicial	   power	   of	   the	   people	   exercised	   through	   courts	   and	   other	   institutions	  
recognized	   by	   the	   constitution	   (Guneratne,	   2005).	   This	   makes	   the	   state	   the	   trustee	   or	   guardian	   of	   all	  
natural	   resources	   which	   are	   vested	   in	   the	   people,	   rendering	   the	   executive,	   the	   legislature	   and	   the	  
judicial	  system	  merely	  the	  instruments	  through	  which	  “sovereignty”	  is	  expressed	  (interpreted	  in	  MoENR,	  
2007a).	  

Chapter	   IV	   of	   the	   constitution	   titled	   “Directives	   Principles	   of	   State	   Policy	   and	   Fundamental	   Duties	  
(Guneratne,	   2005;	   MoENR,	   2007a)	   declares	   State	   Policy	   to	   “protect,	   preserve	   and	   improve	   the	  
environment	  for	  the	  benefit	  of	  the	  community”	  while	  Article	  28	  in	  the	  same	  chapter	  “states	  that	  it	  is	  the	  
duty	   of	   every	   person	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   to	   protect	   nature	   and	   conserve	   its	   riches”	   (Guneratne,	   2005).	   While	  
these	  provisions	  do	  not	  confer	  legal	  rights	  to	  either	  State	  or	  citizen,	  they	  have	  been	  used	  in	  cases	  where	  
environmental	  protection	  has	  been	  contravened	  (ibid).	  	  	  

The	   Constitution	   guarantees	   fundamental	   civil	   and	   political	   rights	   to	   all	   citizens	   Article	   14(1)	   (g)	  
guarantees	   the	   right	   of	   a	   citizen	   to	   engage	   in	   any	   lawful	   occupation	   and	   Article	   14	   (1)	   (h)	   guarantees	  
freedom	  of	  movement	  and	  choosing	  one’s	  residence	  within	  Sri	  Lanka	  (Guneratne,	  2005).	  The	  latter	  has	  
been	  invoked	  when	  environmental	  damage	  prevents	  people	  from	  residing	  in	  a	  particular	  locality	  (ibid).	  	  	  	  	  

Provisions	  for	  devolution	  
Within	  the	  unitary	  state	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  devolution	  of	  powers	  is	  provided	  via	  the	  13th	  Amendment	  to	  the	  
Constitution	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   in	   1987,	   which	   introduced	   Provincial	   Councils	   (PCs)	   as	   a	   new	   level	   of	  
governance	  between	  the	  Central	  and	  Local	  Government	  levels	  	  (Guneratne,	  2005).	  This	  caused	  a	  major	  
shift	  in	  government	  policy.	  While	  some	  subjects	  are	  only	  under	  the	  Central	  Government	  in	  the	  ‘Reserved	  
List’,	   some	   are	   in	   the	   ‘Concurrent	   List’	   for	   which	   both	   the	   Parliament	   and	   the	   PCs	   can	   legislate	   in	  
consultation	  with	  each	  other.	  A	  PC	  can	  legislate	  on	  subjects	  in	  the	  ‘Provincial	  Council	  List’	  with	  regard	  to	  
its	   own	   province	   (ibid).	   Environmental	   conservation	   and	   also	   intra-­‐provincial	   projects	   relating	   to	  
irrigation,	   land	   development,	   road	   development,	   transport,	   agricultural	   services,	   health	   and	   education	  
are	   among	   the	   subjects	   that	   PCs	   have	   legislative	   and	   executive	   powers	   within	   their	   provincial	  
boundaries	   (FD,	   2012).	   However,	   this	   is	   only	   “to	   the	   extent	   permitted	   by,	   or	   under,	   any	   law	   made	   by	  
Parliament	   (Guneratne,	   2005).	   In	   addition,	   ‘protection	   of	   the	   environment	   is	   also	   in	   the	   Concurrent	   List,	  
so	   that	   the	   powers	   of	   PCs	   to	   legislate	   regarding	   environmental	   matters	   is	   somewhat	   uncertain	   (ibid).	  
Further,	   forest	   and	   wildlife	   related	   policies	   are	   the	   responsibility	   of	   the	   Forest	   Department	   and	   the	  


1
 There a several documents/report as the outcome of the National Capacity Needs Self-Assessment - NCSA (GEF project ID #
2417) that are used in this section - referred as MoENR, 2006 a & d and MOENR 2007 a,b,c,d.


                                                                                                                                                                            5
Department	   of	   Wildlife	   Conservation	   (and	   their	   respective	   Ministries),	   and	   are	   thus	   under	   the	   central	  
government.	  	  	  

Provisions	  for	  gender	  equality	  
With	  regard	  to	  gender,	  men	  and	  women	  are	  granted	  equal	  status	  under	  the	  Constitution	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.	  
Even	   in	   rural	   societies	   women	   have	   a	   distinct	   role	   in	   the	   community	   and	   play	   a	   significant	   part	   in	  
livelihood	   activities.	   Their	   activities	   are	   not	   limited	   to	   domestic	   chores,	   although	   this	   constitutes	   an	  
important	   aspect	   of	   their	   daily	   lives.	   Rural	   women	   play	   a	   major	   role	   in	   agricultural	   activities,	   rural	  
development	   and	   cottage	   industries,	   and	   in	   general	   are	   not	   overly	   undervalued	   in	   their	   communities	  
and	  families	  (MoENR,	  2007a).	  	  	  


3. Incorporating	  environment	  into	  the	  development	  agenda

As	  an	  island	  nation	  with	  high	  biodiversity	  and	  considerable	  reliance	  on	  agriculture	  and	  tourism,	  Sri	  Lanka	  
is	  vulnerable	  to	  the	  loss	  of	  biodiversity,	  land	  degradation,	  and	  the	  negative	  impacts	  of	  climate	  change	  
and	   pollution,	   as	   they	   retard	   socio-­‐economic	   development,	   and	   affect	   human	   health	   and	   wellbeing	  
(MoE	   2010	   a,	   b	   &	   c).	   Environmental	   considerations	   are	   being	   incorporated	   into	   plans	   and	   policies	  
governing	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  national	  development	  agenda.	  Notably,	  the	  Mahinda	  Chinthana:	  A	  10	  Year	  Horizon	  
Development	   Framework	   envisions	   “an	   economy	   with	   a	   green	   environment	   and	   rapid	   development”	  
(DoNP	   and	   MoFP,	   2010).2	   It	   recognizes	   the	   need	   for	   “sustainable	   development	   principles	   to	   avoid	   costly	  
remediation	   measures”	   and	   concurs	   that	   enhancement	   of	   rural	   economies	   with	   natural	   resources	   will	  
contribute	  towards	  reduction	  of	  poverty	  related	  environmental	  degradation	  (MoFPn.d.).	  The	  vision	  for	  
‘Environment’	  conservation	  is	  to	  promote	  sustainable	  development	  in	  close	  liaison	  with	  the	  land,	  fauna	  
and	   flora	   and	   to	   bestow	   this	   natural	   heritage	   to	   future	   generation	   -­‐	   to	   be	   achieved	   through	  
administration	   based	   on	   policies	   aimed	   at	   conserving	   the	   environment,	   both	   nationally	   and	  
internationally.	   Specific	   emphasis	   is	   given	   for	   activities	   in	   the	   following	   areas,	   some	   of	   which	   are	   also	  
relevant	  to	  GEF	  focal	  areas:	  	  

       •     Development	  of	  forest	  cover	  and	  forest	  conservation
       •     Conservation	  of	  biodiversity,	  threatened	  species	  and	  endemics
       •     Mitigation	  of	  the	  human-­‐elephant	  conflict
       •     Air	  quality	  management
       •     Solid	  waste	  management
       •     Disaster	  management
       •     Watershed	  and	  water	  resources	  and	  water	  services
       •     Coastal	  conservation	  and	  management


The	   policy	   vision	   in	   other	   sectors	   such	   as	   agriculture,	   fisheries,	   energy,	   industry,	   transport,	   tourism,	  
urban	   development,	   and	   housing,	   have	   taken	   into	   account	   environmental	   considerations.	   The	   overall	  
policy	  for	  science	  and	  technology	  addresses	  the	  need	  to	  entrench	  sustainability	  principles	  in	  all	  spheres	  
of	  scientific	  activities,	  and	  to	  ensure	  environmental	  sustainability	  in	  all	  areas	  of	  such	  work.	  While	  seeking	  


2
    Previously communicated via the Presidential election manifestos Mahinda Chintana: towards a New Sri Lanka (2005) and
     Mahinda Chintana: vision for the Future (2010).

                                                                                                                                                                      6
to	   establish	   regionally	   equitable	   economic	   development,	   the	   Mahinda	   Chintana	   envisages	   a	   healthy	  
nation	  that	  contributes	  to	  its	  economic,	  social,	  mental	  and	  spiritual	  well-­‐being.	  	  

The	  environmentally	  sensitive	  concepts	  in	  the	  Mahinda	  Chintana,	   are	  reflected	  in	  the	  National	  Physical	  
Planning	  Policy	  and	  Plan	  (NPPP&P),	  which	  provide	  a	  broad	  framework	  for	  economic	  growth	  to	  secure	  Sri	  
Lanka's	   place	   in	   the	   global	   economy	   by	   2030.	   This	   Plan	   provides	   vision	   and	   direction	   for	   structural	  
physical	   development	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   up	   to	   2030,	   with	   the	   underlying	   theme	   of	   preserving	   equilibrium	  
between	   conservation	   and	   production,	   such	   as	   encouraging	   urban	   centre	   development	   while	   protecting	  
areas	  of	  environmental	  and	  archaeological	  significance.	  Notably,	  the	  Plan	  concurs	  that	  preservation	  of	  
fragile	  areas	  and	  the	  natural	  environment	  is	  important	  for	  the	  sustainable	  development	  of	  the	  country	  
(DoNP	   and	   MoFP,	   2010).	   In	   conformity,	   the	   National	   Road	   Master	   Plan	   (2007-­‐2017)	   of	   2007	   considers	  
the	   path	   of	   minimum	   environmental	   damage	   and	   adherence	   to	   EIA	   procedures	   (MoH&RD/RDA,	   2007b).	  
The	   Randora	  National	  Infrastructure	  Development	  Programme	  complements	  the	  development	  vision	  of	  
the	   Mahinda	   Chintana	   and	   provides	   details	   of	   plans	   and	   financing	   requirements	   for	   all	   major	  
infrastructure	  investment	  across	  the	  country	  between	  2006	  and	  2016	  (MoFP,	  n.d.).	  

The	   “HarithaLanka”	   programme	   chaired	   by	   the	   President	   provides	   high-­‐level	   support	   to	   coordinate	  
sectoral	   and	   cross-­‐sectoral	   environmental	   activities	   in	   keeping	   with	   the	   Mahinda	   Chintana	   (NCSD	   and	  
PS,	  2009).	  A	  National	  Council	  for	  Sustainable	  Development	  has	  beenestablished	  under	  this	  Programme	  
(within	   the	   Sustainable	   Development	   Division	   of	   the	   MoE&RE).	   This	   Council	   is	   responsible	   for	   policy	  
integration	  and	  overseeing	  and	  guiding	  the	  implementation	  of	  the	   Haritha	  Lanka	  Programme	  to	  ensure	  
sustainability	   of	   socio-­‐economic	   development	   programmes.	   A	   large	   number	   of	   state	   institutions	  
engaged	   in	   a	   participatory	   process	   to	   develop	   the	   framework	   and	   the	   specific	   sectoral	   activities	   that	   are	  
the	  backbone	  of	  the	  Haritha	  Lanka	  programme.	  	  	  



4. Institutional	  background	  for	  environmental	  management

The	   creation	   of	   a	   separate	   Cabinet	   Ministry	   for	   environmental	   affairs	   in	   1990	   was	   a	   landmark	  
achievement	   for	   environmental	   management	   and	   conservation	   in	   a	   holistic	   manner.	   The	   Ministry	  
dealing	   with	   Environment	   (currently	   termed	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Environment	   and	   Renewable	   Energy	   or	  
MoE&RE3)	   is	   mandated	   with	   preparing,	   monitoring	   and	   reporting	   progress	   of	   the	   National	  
Environmental	  Action	  Plan	  (NEAP)	  and	  its	  periodic	  revision	  to	  facilitate	  sustainable	  development,	  ensure	  
sound	   environmental	   management,	   and	   formulate	   policies	   at	   the	   national	   level	   for	   environmental	  
protection,	   management	   and	   monitoring	   (MoENR,	   2007a).	   The	   MoE&RE	   currently	   is	   structured	   as	  
shown	   in	   figure	   1.	   Thus	   far	   a	   new	   division	   has	   not	   been	   suggested	   to	   handle	   renewable	   energy.	   This	  
ministry	  also	  services	  the	  large	  number	  of	  international	  conventions	  related	  to	  the	  environment.	  	  




3
  Over time the Ministry responsible for the environment has been integrated with other areas such as transport, women and most
recently – in 2013, with renewable energy.

                                                                                                                                                                      7
Figure	  1:	  Current	  structure	  of	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Renewable	  Energy	  




Source:	  Ministry	  website	  

Overall	  there	  are	  about	  50	  state	  institutions	  involved	  with	  some	  aspect	  of	  management	  and	  protection	  
of	   the	   environment	   and	   natural	   resources	   in	   Sri	   Lanka(Table	   1).	   Chief	   among	   them	   are	   the	   Central	  
Environmental	   Authority,	   Department	   of	   Forest	   Conservation	   and	   Marine	   Environment	   Protection	  
Authority	   (MEPA)	   that	   function	   under	   the	   MoE&RE;	   the	   Department	   of	   Wildlife	   Conservation	   (DWLC)	  
located	   under	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Wildlife	   Resources	   Conservation;	   the	   Coast	   Conservation	   Department	  
(CCD)	   located	   under	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Ports	   and	   Aviation;	   and	   the	   Urban	   Development	   Authority	   (UDA)	  
which	  is	  under	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Defense	  and	  Urban	  Development.	  The	  Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Fisheries,	  the	  
Department	   of	   Fisheries	   and	   Aquatic	   Resources	   (DFAR),	   the	   Department	   of	   Agriculture	   (DOA),	   the	  
Department	   of	   Animal	   Production	   and	   Health	   (DAPH)	   and	   the	   Veterinary	   Research	   Institute	   (VRI)	   also	  
have	  major	  roles	  to	  play	  in	  environmental/biodiversity	  conservation	  and	  management	  (MoENR,	  2007a;	  
MoE,	  2010,	  a,	  b,	  c,	  d).	  	  	  

The	  Sri	  Lanka	  Land	  Reclamation	  &	  Development	  Corporation	  (SLLRDC)	  is	  mandated	  with	  some	  aspects	  of	  
wetland	  conservation	  while	  land	  related	  policy	  is	  the	  responsibility	  of	  the	  Department	  of	  Land	  Use	  Policy	  
Planning	   established	   under	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Lands	   and	   Land	   Development.	   Land	   management	   falls	   within	  
the	   purview	   of	   about	   30	   institutions,	   such	   as	   the	   Land	   Commissioners	   Department,	   The	   Hadabima	  
Authority,	   The	   Mahaweli	   Authority,	   The	   Department	   of	   Agriculture	   (mainly	   its	   Natural	   Resources	  
Management	   Centre),	   Agrarian	   Services	   Department,	   and	   the	   Land	   Settlement	   Department.	   The	  
Activities	   and	   mandates	   of	   the	   DWLC,	   FD,	   CEA,	   UDA	   and	   CCD	   also	   impact	   on	   the	   use	   of	   land	   in	   the	  
country.	  	  	  	  

The	  Ministry	  of	  Finance	  and	  Planning,	  which	  deals	  with	  policy	  planning	  and	  implementation,	  is	  the	  key	  
agency	  responsible	  for	  formulation	  of	  national	  development	  policies.	   Many	  non-­‐state	  sector	  groups	  also	  

                                                                                                                                                                           8
influence	   Sri	   Lanka’s	   environment,	   such	   as	   media	   institutions	   and	   personnel	   (press,	   TV,	   radio),	   civil	  
society	   organizations,	   national	   and	   regional	   environmental	   NGOs	   and	   Community	   Based	   Organizations	  
(CBOs).	   Several	   private	   sector	   business	   organizations	   also	   support	   environmental	   and	   biodiversity	  
conservation	  mainly	  under	  their	  CSR	  projects	  and	  programmes	  (MoENR,	  2007a;	  MoE,	  2010b).	  	  

Within	  the	  Provinces,	  there	  is	  a	  decentralized	  administrative	  system	  to	  accommodate	  the	  devolution	  of	  
powers	  vested	  by	  the	  Constitution.	  This	  comprises	  District	  Secretariats	  (for	  each	  district	  in	  a	  Province),	  
and	   under	   them	   Divisional	   Secretariats	   which	   reach	   out	   to	   communities	   via	   Grama	   Niladharis	   or	   “village	  
officers”	  (MoENR,	  2002;	  2007a).	  	  At	  the	  local	  level,	  coordination	  of	  all	  activities	  is	  addressed	  through	  the	  
District	   Coordinating	   Committees	   chaired	   by	   the	   District	   Secretaries	   and	   attended	   by	   representatives	  
from	   a	   range	   of	   departments	   (i.e.	   administration,	   services,	   environment	   etc).	   Inadequate	   understanding	  
of	   environmental	   needs	   during	   regional	   and	   local	   coordination	   often	   cause	   conflicts	   of	   interest	   between	  
state	  agencies	  (FD,	  2012).	  	  

Many	   state	   departments	   have	   also	   decentralized	   their	   activities	   for	   greater	   effectiveness:	   notably	   the	  
FD,	   DWLC,	   CEA,	   UDA,	   DoA	   and	   MEPA	   (MoENR,	   2007a).	   The	   CEA	   has	   stationed	   staff	   in	   the	   Divisional	  
Secretariats	  (DSs)	  to	  facilitate	  local	  level	  environmental	  management	  and	  the	  CCD	  has	  officers	  working	  
with	  coastal	  DS	  Divisions	  (MoENR,	  2007a).4	  

Devolution	   of	   environmental	   management	   is	   also	   achieved	   through	   Local	   Authorities	   (LAs)	   with	  
representatives	   elected	   by	   the	   people	   (ibid).	   They	   comprise	   Municipal	   Councils	   and	   Urban	   Councils	   in	  
urban	   areas,	   and	   Pradeshiya	   Sabhas	   in	   rural	   areas.	   LAs	   have	   a	   key	   role	   to	   play	   in	   management	   and	  
improvement	  of	  the	  environment,	  especially	  in	  relation	  to	  the	  built	  environment,	  public	  health,	  waste	  
collection	   and	   disposal	   (ibid).	   LAs	   have	   been	   awarded	   the	   authority	   to	   issue	   Environmental	   Protection	  
Licenses	  (EPLs)	  for	  15	  low	  polluting	  industries	  by	  the	  Central	  Environmental	  Authority	  (MoENR,	  2007a).	  	  	  

Coordination	  and	  monitoring	  
While	   it	   is	   a	   positive	   factor	   that	   many	   institutions	   are	   mandated	   for	   environmental	   management	   and	  
conservation,	   this	   requires	   a	   very	   efficient	   and	   effective	   coordination	   mechanism	   for	   environmental	  
policy	   and	   plan	   formulation	   and	   implementation	   of	   activities	   and	   projects.	   	   The	   GEF	   funded	   National	  
Capacity	  Needs	  Self-­‐Assessment	  (NCSA	  –	  GEF	  	  ID	  2417)	  clearly	  showed	  the	  need	  for	  capacity	  building	  to	  
effectively	  integrate	  actions	  to	  address	  biodiversity	  conservation,	  land	  degradation	  and	  climate	  change	  
into	   (a)	   plans,	   policies	   and	   programmes	   of	   development	   sector	   agencies,	   and	   (b)	   sectoral	   plans	   at	  
regional	  and	  local	  levels	  (MoENR	  2007a,b,c,d).	  This	  was	  reiterated	  during	  consultations	  for	  preparation	  
of	   the	   4th	   National	   Report	   to	   the	   CBD	   (MoENR,	   20095).	   However,	   the	   remedial	   measures	   identified	  
through	  wide	  consultation	  during	  the	  NSCA	  have	  not	  been	  adequately	  addressed	  so	  far	  mainly	  due	  to	  
funding	  constrains.	  	  

Formerly,	  the	   Ministry	   dealing	   with	   environment	   monitored	   and	   coordinated	   the	   implementation	   of	   the	  
National	   Environmental	   Action	   Plan	   (NEAP)	   through	   Committees	   on	   Environment	   Policy	   and	  
Management	  (CEPOMs)	  established	  as	  per	  the	  National	  Environmental	  action	  Plan	  (NEAP)	  of	  1998-­‐2001.	  
The	  CEPOMs	  were	  linked	  to	  an	  apex	  Committee	  on	  Integrating	  Environment	  and	  Development	  (CIEDP)	  
and	   the	   decision	   of	   the	   CEPOMS	   were	   conveyed	   to	   the	   sectoral	   agencies,	   a	   National	   Environmental	  

4
  From institutional assessments carried out through the National Capacity Needs Self-Assessment Project (GEF ID 2417)
5
 The reports to the CBD state that they were funded by GEF, however no further details of GEF IDs, project details are known, and
are not shown in the GEF database.

                                                                                                                                                                    9
Legislation	  Enforcement	  Committee,	  the	  Provincial	  Councils	  and	  Local	  Authorities	  (MoENR	  2006a).	  While	  
not	   all	   CEPOM	   were	   functional,	   this	   structure	   did	   provide	   a	   means	   of	   coordinating	   environmental	  
policies,	  plans	  and	  programmes	  at	  the	  national,	  regional	  and	  local	  levels	  (MoENR,	  2003).	  However,	  much	  
of	  the	  inter-­‐institutional	  coordination	  relied	  (and	  continues	  to	  rely)	  on	  membership	  of	  advisory,	  expert	  
committees	   and/or	   steering	   Committees	   for	   environment	   related	   projects,	   programmes	   and	   activities	  
(MoENR	  2006a).	  	  

The	   CEPOM	   system	   had	   mixed	   success.	   It	   has	   been	   replaced	   by	   the	   National	   Council	   for	   Sustainable	  
Development	   under	   the	   Haritha	   Lanka	   programme.	   This	   relies	   on	   each	   sector/department/institution	  
deciding	   how	   to	   incorporate	   environmental	   aspects	   into	   their	   work,	   while	   the	   MoE&RE	   provides	  
guidance.	   The	   Action	   Plan	   for	   the	   Haritha	   Lanka	   programme	   includes	   short	   term,	   medium	   term,	   and	  
long	  term	  targets	  spanning	  2009	  to	  2016,	  with	  comprehensive	  achievable	  and	  measurable	  82	  strategies	  
and	   375	   actions.	   The	   Plan	   is	   implemented	   by	   36	   Ministries	   and	   70	   governmental	   and	   non-­‐governmental	  
institutions.	  	  Coordinating	  Committees	  have	  been	  established	  to	  cooperate	  in	  activities	  identified	  under	  
the	  10	  missions	  of	  the	  Haritha	  Lanka	  Programme.	  	  It	  has	  been	  suggested	  that	  the	  National	  Action	  Plan	  
for	   this	   Programme	   be	   revised,	   as	   the	   activities	   of	   the	   line	   agencies	   have	   now	   changed	   with	   the	  
introduction	   of	   new	   actions	   (MoE,	   2012)	   One	   major	   impediment	   in	   the	   implementation	   of	   this	  
programme	   has	   been	   the	   absence	   of	   a	   separate	   financing	   mechanism	   for	   these	   activities	   which	   are	  
intended	  to	  be	  incorporated	  in	  the	  annual	  budgets	  of	  the	  respective	  state	  institutions.	  Additionally	  the	  
NEAP	  is	  now	  replaced	  by	  the	  Haritha	  Lanka	  Programme.	  	  

Overall,	   the	   National	   Physical	   Plan	   provides	   the	   policy	   framework	   for	   integrated	   physical	   planning	   in	   the	  
country.	  As	  its	  principles	  and	  strategies	  are	  implemented	  by	  a	  number	  of	  line	  ministries	  and	  specialist	  
authorities,	  the	  National	  Physical	  Planning	  Department	  has	  to	  ensure	  that	  any	  new	  or	  amended	  policy	  or	  
plan	   of	   Government	   takes	   account	   of,	   and	   is	   consistent	   with,	   the	   National	   Physical	   Plan	   (DoNP	   and	  
MoFP,	   2010).	   Inconsistency	   of	   policies	   and	   laws	   with	   the	   National	   Physical	   Plan	   are	   required	   to	   be	  
amended	   in	   consultation	   with	   the	   National	   Physical	   Planning	   Department,	   and	   issues	   that	   may	   result	  
have	  to	  be	  resolved	  by	  the	  National	  Physical	  Planning	  Council	  (ibid).	  	  	  

                                   Key	  elements	  of	  the	  National	  Physical	  Policy	  and	  Plans	  
 •      Incorporating	  potential	  internal	  development	  opportunities.
 •      Implementing	  environmentally	  friendly	  sustainable	  development	  across	  the	  country.
 •      Strengthening	  the	  ethnic	  integration	  between	  the	  communities.
 •      Introduction	  of	  a	  planned	  settlement	  net-­‐work.
 •      Conservation	  of	  valuable	  environmentally	  sensitive	  areas.
 •      Mitigating	  the	  natural	  disasters	  by	  limiting	  development	  in	  areas	  prone	  to	  natural	  disasters.
 •      Evolving	  compact	  cities	  with	  modern	  urban	  facilities	  and	  utilities
 •      Transforming	  small	  urban	  centers	  into	  strong	  service	  centers.
 •      Development	  of	  sufficient	  services	  and	  infrastructure	  facilities	  to	  cater	  the	  expected	  population.
 •      Providing	  proper	  linkages	  among	  land	  use,	  transport	  and	  economic	  activities.
 •      Reducing	  regional	  disparities.
 •      Reducing	  income	  disparities	  and	  increasing	  employment	  opportunities
 •      Protecting	  valuable	  rural	  areas	  along	  with	  agricultural	  lands.
 •      Protecting	  the	  forest	  reserves,	  wildlife	  sanctuaries	  and	  archaeological	  reserves.
                                                                                                 (Source:	  	  NPPD	  &	  MUDSAD	  ,	  2007).	  


                                                                                                                                                               10
Table	  1:	  	  	  Institutions	  connected	  with	  environmental	  conservation	  and	  management	  

 Ministries	  	  with	  a	  role	  to	  play	  in	  environmental	              Key	  agencies	  involved	  with	  environmental	  
         conservation	  and	  management	                                                       management	  and	  conservation	  
Key	  ministries	                                                             Key	  Departments	  

•     Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Renewable	  Energy               •    Department	  of	  Forest	  Conservation	  (FD)
•     Ministry	  of	  wildlife	  Resources	  and	  Conservation            •    Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  (DWLC)
•     Ministry	  of	  	  Agriculture                                         •    Urban	  Development	  Authority	  (UDA)
•     Ministry	  of	  	  Lands	  and	  Land	  Development                 •    Central	  Environmental	  Authority	  (CEA),
•     Ministry	  of	  	  Fisheries	  and	  Aquatic	  Resources            •    Coast	  Conservation	  Department	  (CCD)
      Development                                                               •    Department	  of	  Fisheries	  &	  Aquatic	  Resources	  (DFAR)
•     Ministry	  of	  Ports	  and	  Aviation                                •    Marine	  Environmental	  Protection	  Authority	  (MEPA)
•     Ministry	  of	  	  Indigenous	  Medicine                              •    National	  Aquatic	  Resources	  Research	  and	  Development
•     Ministry	  of	  	  External	  Affairs                                      Agency
•     Ministry	  of	  	  Finance	  and	  Planning                          •    Sri	  Lanka	  Ports	  Authority	  (SLPA)
•     Minister	  of	  Botanical	  Gardens	  and	  Public                   •    Department	  of	  Agriculture	  (DOA)	  and	  associated	  research
      Recreation.                                                                    institutions	  plus	  other	  divisions	  including:	  The	  	  Seed
•     Ministry	  of	  Irrigation	  and	  Water	  Resources                      Certification	  and	  Plant	  Protection	  Centre	  (SCPPC),	  Natural
      Management                                                                     Resources	  Management	  Centre	  (NRMC),	  Field	  Crops
•     Ministry	  	  of	  	  Water	  Supply	  and	  Drainage                   Research	  and	  Development	  Institute	  (FCRDI),	  Horticultural
                                                                                     Crops	  Research	  and	  Development	  Institute	  (HORDI),	  Rice
•     Ministry	  	  of	  	  Technology,	  	  Research	  and	  Atomic
                                                                                     Research	  and	  Development	  Institute	  (RRDI),	  Plant	  Genetic
      Energy
                                                                                     Resources	  Centre	  (PGRC),	  Registrar	  of	  Pesticides.
•     Ministry	  of	  	  Disaster	  	  Management
                                                                                •    Department	  of	  National	  Zoological	  Gardens	  (DNZG)
•     Ministry	  of	  	  Power	  &	  Energy
                                                                                •    Department	  of	  National	  Botanic	  Gardens	  (DNBG)
                                                                                •     The	  National	  Science	  Foundation	  (NSF)	  
Other	  ministries	  with	  impact	                                         •     Department	  of	  National	  Planning
                                                                                •     National	  Agricultural	  Diversification	  and	  Settlement
• Ministry	  of	  Economic	  Development                                           Authority	  (Hadabima)
• Ministry	  of	  Defense	  and	  Urban	  Development                      •     Mahaweli	  Authority	  of	  Sri	  Lanka
• Ministry	  of	  	  Livestock	  and	  Rural	  Community                  •     Irrigation	  Department
      Development                                                               •    Water	  Resources	  Board
•     Ministry	  of	  Construction,	  Engineering	  Services,               •    Department	  of	  Land	  Use	  Policy	  Planning
      Housing	  and	  Common	  Amenities                                     •     Department	  of	  Land	  Settlement
•     Ministry	  of	  Industry	  and	  Commerce                             •     Land	  Reform	  Commission	  (LRC)
•     Ministry	  of	  	  Education	  (and	  relevant	  institutions       •     Land	  Commissioner	  General’s	  Department
      under	  it)                                                              •     Department	  of	  Meteorology
•     Ministry	  of	  Defense                                                 •     Disaster	  Management	  Centre	  (DMC)
•     Ministry	  of	  Resettlements                                           •     National	  Disaster	  Relief	  Services	  Centre
•     Ministry	  of	  Coconut	  Development	  and	  Janatha                •     Sri	  Lanka	  Land	  Reclamation	  Development	  Authority
      State	  Development                                                            (SLRDA)
•     Ministry	  of	  Petroleum	  Industries                                 •     Geological	  Survey	  and	  Mines	  Bureau	  (GSMB)
•     Ministry	  of	  Social	  Services
•     Ministry	  of	  Justice
•     Ministry	  of	  Minor	  Export	  Crop	  Promotion
•     Ministry	  of	  Transport




                                                                                                                                                                    11
 Ministries	  	  with	  a	  role	  to	  play	  in	  environmental	               Key	  agencies	  involved	  with	  environmental	  
         conservation	  and	  management	                                                        management	  and	  conservation	  
                                                                                Other	  departments	  with	  impact	  

                                                                                •    Department	  of	  Agrarian	  Development
                                                                                •    Department	  of	  Export	  Agriculture	  (DEA)
                                                                                •    Department	  of	  Animal	  Production	  &	  Health	  (DAPH)
                                                                                •    National	  Livestock	  Development	  Board	  (NLDB)
                                                                                •    The	  Veterinary	  Research	  Institute	  (VRI)
                                                                                •    Sri	  Lanka	  Sustainable	  Energy	  Authority
                                                                                •    Attorney	  General’s	  Department
                                                                                •    Legal	  Draftsman’s	  Department
                                                                                •    Sri	  Lanka	  Customs
                                                                                •    Sri	  Lanka	  Standards	  Institute	  (SLSI)
                                                                                •    National	  Housing	  Development	  Authority	  (NHDA)


                                                                                Institutions	  carrying	  out	  research	  with	  relevance	  to	  
                                                                                     environmental/biodiversity	  conservation	  

                                                                                •    National	  Aquatic	  Resources	  Research	  and	  Development
                                                                                     Agency	  (NARA)
                                                                                •    Coconut	  Research	  Institute	  (CRI)
                                                                                •    Tea	  Research	  Institute	  (TRI)
                                                                                •    Rubber	  Research	  Institute	  (RRI)
                                                                                •    Sugarcane	  Research	  Institute	  (SRI).
                                                                                •    Veterinary	  Research	  Institute	  (VRI)
                                                                                •    Universities
                                                                                •     National	  Building	  Research	  Organization	  (NBRO)

                                                                                Regional/local	  level	  institutions:	  

                                                                                • Provincial	  Councils	  (PCs)
                                                                                • District/Divisional	  Secretariats
                                                                                • Local	  Authorities	  (LAs)
                                                                                • Provincial	  Environmental	  Authority	  of	  the	  North-­‐western
                                                                                     Province
                                                                                •    Provincial	  Environmental	  ministries	  and	  Agricultural
                                                                                     Ministries



Source:	  Adapted	  from	  MoENR,2007a,b,c	  and	  	  MoE,	  2010	  a,b,c,	  &	  d	  




                                                                                                                                                             12
5. International	  Environmental	  Commitments

Sri	   Lanka	   made	   a	   significant	   international	                                Managing	  conventions	  
commitment	   for	   environmental	   conservation	   and	                                 The	   Air	   Resources	   Management	   &	   International	  
management	   by	   adopting	   Agenda	   21	   and	   Rio	                              Relations	   Division	   of	   the	   MoE&RE	   manages	   the	  
Principles	   of	   the	   United	   Nations	   Conference	   on	                        international	   liaisons	   with	   conventions	   in	   general.	  
Environment	   and	   Development	   (UNCED)	   during	   the	                            They	  also	  oversee	  the	  Stockholm	  POPs	  Convention	  
                                                                                                and	   the	   Basel	   Convention	   on	   the	   Control	   of	  
Rio	   Earth	   Summit	   in	   1992.	   The	   political	   commitment	  
                                                                                                Transboundary	   Movements	   of	   Hazardous	   Wastes	  
to	   environmental	   conservation	   is	   also	   reflected	   by	  
                                                                                                and	  Their	  Disposal	  (1989).	  	  	  
the	   fact	   that	   Sri	   Lanka	   has	   actively	   participated	   in	  
global	   environment	   partnership	   process	   and	   has	                            The	   Biodiversity	   Division	   deals	   with	   all	   aspects	   of	  
ratified	  more	  than	  40	  MEAs.	  	                                                   policy	   and	   plans	   related	   to	   national	   biodiversity	  
                                                                                                conservation	  and	  national	  responses	  to	  obligations	  
Among	  the	  key	  environmental	  related	  treaties	  (Table	                         under	   the	   Convention	   on	   Biological	   Diversity	   and	  
2) are	  the	  three	  Rio	  Conventions:	  the	  United	  Nations                       the	  Cartagena	  Protocol.	  	  
Framework	  Convention	  on	  Climate	  Change	  (UNFCCC),	  
                                                                                                The	   Climate	   Change	   Division	   houses	   the	   Climate	  
the	  United	  Nations	  Convention	  on	  Biological	  Diversity	  
                                                                                                Change	   Secretariat	   to	   service	   the	   United	   Nations	  
(UNCBD),	   and	   the	   United	   Nations	   Convention	   to	  
                                                                                                Framework	   Convention	   on	   Climate	   Change	   and	   its	  
Combat	   Desertification	   (UNCCD)	   which	   were	   ratified	                        related	  protocols.	  	  
by	   Sri	   Lanka	   in	   1993,	   1994	   and	   1998	   respectively.	   The	  
Government	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   accords	   high	   priority	   for	                 The	   Natural	   Resources	   Division	   services	   the	   World	  
implementation	   of	   these	   international	   conventions	                             Heritage	   Convention	   and	   the	   United	   Nations	  
and	   the	   designated	   national	   focal	   points	   are	                          Convention	   to	   Combat	   Desertification	   and	   is	  
                                                                                                engaged	   in	   developing	   policies	   and	   plans	   to	  
responsible	  for	  servicing	  the	  requirements	  of	  each	  at	  
                                                                                                prevent	   land	   degradation	   and	   to	   promote	   better	  
the	  national	  level	  (MoE,	  2012)	  	  	  
                                                                                                land	  management.	  	  
Several	   other	   conventions	   ratified	   by	   Sri	   Lanka	   too	   The	   Marine	   Environment	   Protection	   Authority	  
have	   a	   strong	   bearing	   on	   national	   and	   global	   (MEPA)	  is	  the	  focal	  point	  for	  MARPOL	  (Convention	  
biodiversity.	   They	   are	   the	   Bonn	   Convention	   to	   for	   the	   Prevention	   of	   Pollution	   from	   Ships)	   and	  
protect	   species	   of	   wild	   animals	   that	   migrate	   across	   or	   several	   other	   international	   conventions	   dealing	  
outside	  national	  boundaries,	  the	  CITES	  Convention	  to	   with	   offshore	   waters,	   and	   is	   responsible	   for	   some	  
protect	   certain	   endangered	   species	   from	   over-­‐ functions	  under	  the	  Basel	  Convention	  for	  control	  of	  
exploitation	   through	   trade	   by	   a	   system	   of	   transboundary	   movements	   of	   hazardous	   wastes	  
import/export	                   permits,	                 the	          World	   and	  their	  disposal.	  	  
HeritageConvention	   	   which	   establishes	   an	   effective	   The	  Foreign	  Ministry	  is	  the	  focal	  point	  for	  UNCLOS	  
system	   for	   collective	   protection	   of	   the	   cultural	   and	   (United	  Nations	  Convention	  on	  the	  Law	  of	  the	  Sea).	  
natural	   heritage	   of	   outstanding	   universal	   value,	   the	  
Ramsar	   Convention	   which	   seeks	   to	   stem	   the	                                                                Source:	  MoENR	  2009	  

progressive	   encroachment	   on	   and	   loss	   of	   global	  
wetlands,	   and	   the	   Cartagena	   Protocol	   on	   Biosafety	   (stemming	   from	   Article	   19	   of	   the	   CBD)to	   ensure	   the	  
safe	   handling,	   transport	   and	   use	   of	   living	   modified	   organisms	   (LMOs)	   resulting	   from	   modern	  
biotechnology	  that	  may	  have	  adverse	  effects	  on	  biological	  diversity	  and	  human	  health	  (MoENR,	  2007b,	  
MoENR	  2009).	  



                                                                                                                                                                              13
Sri	   Lanka’s	   commitment	   to	   contribute	   towards	   the	   control	   of	   global	   pollution	   is	   demonstrated	   by	  
ratifying	   the	   Basel	  Convention	  on	   Control	   of	   Trans-­‐boundary	   Movement	   of	   Hazardous	   Wastes	   and	   for	  
sound	   in-­‐country	  management	  of	  such	  wastes,	  and	  the	   Stockholm	   Convention	   to	  eliminate	  or	  restrict	  
the	   production	   and	   use	   of	  persistent	   organic	   pollutants	  (POPs).	   Sri	   Lanka	   is	   also	   a	   Party	   to	   the	   Vienna	  
Convention	   to	  help	  protect	  human	  health	  and	  the	  environment	  against	  adverse	  effects	  resulting	  from	  
modification	   of	   the	   Ozone	   layer,	   and	   the	   Montreal	   Protocol	   (as	   well	   as	   the	   London,	   Copenhagen	   and	  
Montreal	  amendments)	  to	  protect	  the	  Ozone	  layer	  by	  taking	  precautionary	  measures	  to	  control	  global	  
emissions	  from	  Ozone	  Depleting	  Substances.	  Since	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  a	  non-­‐Annex	  1	  developing	  nation,	  there	  is	  
no	   direct	   commitment	   under	   the	   Kyoto	   protocol	   to	   the	   UNFCCC,	   but	   Sri	   Lanka	   acceded	   to	   it	   and	  
volunteered	   to	   participate	   in	   several	   CDM	   projects,	   especially	   through	   the	   renewable	   energy	   sector	  
(MoENR,	  2007b).	  

Being	  an	  island	  nation,	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  also	  a	  Party	  to	  the	  United	  Nations	  Convention	  on	  the	  Law	  of	  the	  Sea	  
(UNCLOS)	   which	   helps	   set	   up	   a	   comprehensive	   legal	   regime	   for	   the	   sea	   and	   oceans	   and	   to	   establish	  
material	   rules	   concerning	   environmental	   standards	   and	   enforcement	   provisions	   dealing	   with	   pollution	  
of	   the	   marine	   environment.	   Sri	   Lanka	   also	   ratified	   the	   MARPOL	   Convention	   to	   preserve	   the	   marine	  
environment	   by	   eliminating	   international	   pollution	   by	   oil	   and	   other	   harmful	   substances	   and	   to	   minimize	  
the	  accidental	  discharge	  of	  such	  substances.	  	  

Table	  2:	  Most	  important	  international	  environmental	  conventions	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  party	  to	  

                               Name	  of	  Convention	                                       Year	  *	                         Focal	  Point	  
  Convention	  on	  International	  Trade	  in	  Endangered	  Species	  Of	            1979	           Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  
  Wild	  Fauna	  and	  Flora	  (1973)-­‐	  CITES	  
  Convention	  concerning	  the	  	  protection	  of	  the	  World	  Cultural	        1980	           Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Environment	  and	  
  and	  Natural	  Heritage	  (1972)	                                                                        Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Cultural	  Affairs	  
  Vienna	  Convention	  for	  the	  Protection	  of	  the	  Ozone	  Layer	            1989	           Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Environment	  
  (1985)	  	  
  Montreal	  Protocol	  on	  Substances	  that	  Deplete	  the	  Ozone	  Layer	       1989	           Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Environment	  
  (1987)	  	  
  Bonn	  Convention	  on	  the	  conservation	  of	  Migratory	  Species	  of	        1990	           Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  
  Wild	  Animals	  (1979)	  
  Ramsar	  Convention	  on	  Wetlands	  of	  International	  Importance	                1990	           Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  
  Especially	  As	  Waterfowl	  Habitat	  (1971)	  
  Basel	  Convention	  on	  the	  Control	  of	  Transboundary	  Movements	             1992	          Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Environment	  
  of	  Hazardous	  Wastes	  and	  Disposal	  (1989)	  
  United	  Nations	  Framework	  Convention	  on	  Climate	  Change	                    1993	           Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Environment	  
  (1992)	  -­‐	  UNFCCC	  
  United	  Nations	  Convention	  on	  Biological	  Diversity	  (1992)	  –	  CBD	     1994	           Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Environment	  
  United	  Nations	  Convention	  on	  The	  Law	  of	  the	  Sea.	  (1982)	         1994	           Ministry	  of	  Foreign	  Affairs	  
  The	  International	  Convention	  for	  the	  Prevention	  of	  	  Pollution	      1997	           Marine	  Environment	  Protection	  Authority	  
  from	  the	  ships	  (1973/78)	  –	  MARPOL	  
  United	  Nations	  Convention	  to	  Combat	  Desertification	  (1994)	  –	          1998	           Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Environment	  
  UNCCD	  
  Kyoto	  Protocol	  on	  Climate	  Change	  (2005)	                                     2002	           Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Environment	  
  Cartagena	  Protocol	  on	  Biosafety	  (2000)	                                         2004	           Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Environment	  
  Stockholm	  Convention	  on	  Persistent	  Organic	  Pollutants	  (2001).	            2005	           Ministry	  dealing	  with	  Environment	  
* Year	  refers	  to	  any	  of	  the	  following:	  Ratification/Acceptance,	  Accession/Succession




                                                                                                                                                                         14
Sri	  Lanka	  is	  also	  party	  to	  regional	  agreements	  such	  as	  the	  Dhaka	  Declaration	  and	  SAARC	  Action	  Plan	  on	  
Climate	   Change,	   Male’	   Declaration	   on	   transboundary	   air	   pollution,	   and	   the	   	   South	   Asian	   Seas	   Action	  
Plan.	  A	  SAARC	  Convention	  on	  Cooperation	  on	  Environment	  was	  also	  signed	  by	  Sri	  Lanka	  during	  the	  16th	  
SAARC	   Summit	   in	   Thimphu,	   April	   20106	   to	   provide	   cooperation	   in	   the	   field	   of	   environment	   and	  
sustainable	   development	   through	   exchange	   of	   best	   practices	   and	   knowledge,	   capacity	   building	   and	  
transfer	  of	  eco-­‐friendly	  technology	  in	  a	  wide	  range	  of	  areas	  related	  to	  the	  environment.	  It	  will	  enter	  into	  
force	  when	  ratified	  by	  all	  Member	  States.	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  also	  signatory	  to	  two	  MoUs	  developed	  under	  the	  
Convention	  on	  Migratory	  Species	  for	  protecting	  Marine	  Turtles	  and	  Dugongs.	  


6. Timeline	  analysis

The	  timeline	  showing	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  commitment	  to	  global	  environmental	  related	  conventions,	  formulation	  
of	   national	   environment	   related	   laws,	   policies	   and	   plans,	   and	   GEF	   funded	   projects	   (Figure	   2)	   reveals	  
noteworthy	  links.	  


•     The	  GEF/WB	  project	   for	  Conservation	  and	  Sustainable	  Use	  of	  Medicinal	  Plants	  and	  preparation	  of
      a	  national	  Biodiversity	  Action	  Plan(GEF	  ID	  95)	  followed	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  ratification	  of	  the	  CBD	  in	  1994.	  It
      directly	   enabled	   meeting	   obligations	   under	   Article	   6a	   of	   the	   CBD.	   More	   importantly,	   the	   ensuing
      consultations	   and	   other	   wide	   ranging	   activities	   conducted	   by	   the	   Ministry	   for	   Environment	   during
      preparation	  of	  the	  Biodiversity	  Conservation	  Action	  Plan	  (BCAP)	  catalyzed:
      o The	  establishment	  of	  a	  dedicated	  Biodiversity	  Secretariat	  within	  the	  Environment	  Ministry.
      o Addressing	  sustainable	  use	  of	  terrestrial	  biological	  resources	  and	  coastal	  and	  marine	  resources
             in	   the	   third	   National	   Environmental	   Action	   Plan	   (NEAP)	   of	   1998-­‐2001,	   and	   biodiversity
             conservation	  (as	  per	  the	  BCAP)	  in	  later	  NEAPs7	  (MoENR,	  2003;	  MoENR,	  2008).
      o Attention	  on	  conservation	  of	  traditional	  varieties	  of	  crops	  was	  introduced	  into	  the	  	  Agriculture
             Research	   Plan	   of	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Agriculture	   and	   Lands	   2000-­‐2008	   (DoA/DEA/SLCARP,	   1999),8
             and	  is	  now	  part	  of	  the	  National	  Agricultural	  Policy	  of	  2007	  (MoAAS,	  2007).


•     The	   GEF/UNDP	   funded	   Southwest	   Rainforest	   Conservation	   Project	   (GEF	   ID	   818)	   spanning	   2000-­‐
      2006was	  instrumental	  in	  pioneering	  a	  model	  for	  participatory	  forest	  conservation	  in	  the	  Wet	  Zone.
      This	   model	   was	   also	   used	   in	   the	   Sri	   Lanka	   Australia	   Natural	   Resources	   Management	   Project
      (SLANRMP)	  and	  the	  GEF/ADB/GON	  funded	  Protected	  Area	  Management	  and	  Wildlife	  Conservation
      (PAM&WC)	  project	  (GEF	  ID	  878).	  	  Other	  influences	  of	  rainforest	  conservation	  project	  are	  as	  follows:
      o The	  2009	  amendment	  to	  the	  Forest	  Ordinance	  to	  empower	  the	  Conservator	  General	  of	  Forests
           to	   engage	   with	   stakeholders	   to	   carry	   out	   community	   participatory	   programmes	   for	   forest
           development	  could	  have	  been	  influenced	  by	  this	  project.
      o Attitudinal	   change	   in	   the	   FD	   to	   move	   away	   from	   strict	   protection	   and	   policing	   to	   adaptive
           management	   and	   participatory	   conservation	   for	   long-­‐term	   protection	   of	   the	   reserves	   they
           manage,	  and	  for	  introducing	  this	  to	  the	  DWLC.


•     The	   GEF/WB	   funded	   Development	   of	   Wildlife	   Conservation	   and	   Protected	   Areas	   Management
      Project	  (GEF	  ID	  352)	  carried	  out	  by	  the	  Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  (DWLC)	  from	  1992-­‐1998
      is	   likely	   to	   have	   influenced	   (a)	   the	   Fauna	   and	   Flora	   Protection	   (amendment)	   Act	   of	   1993	   which

6
   http://saarc-sec.org/areaofcooperation/cat-detail.php?cat_id=54
7
   By then referred to as Caring for the Environment: Path to sustainable development.
8
  Personal communication with chief compiler of the document, M AT Silva, Co-Team Leader for preparation of the BCAP.

                                                                                                                                                              15
    ensured	  better	  coverage	  of	  species	  to	  be	  protected	  by	  law,	  and	  (b)	  the	  first	  National	  Wildlife	  Policy	  
    of	  2000	  

•   Protected	   Area	   Management	   and	   Wildlife	   Conservation	   Project	   (GEF	   ID	   878)	   implemented	   from
    2001	  –	  2008	  was	  directly	  responsible	  for:
    o The	   2009	   amendment	   to	   the	   Fauna	   and	   Flora	   Protection	   Ordinance	   (FFPO)	   which	   made	   it
        mandatory	  for	  preparation	  of	  management	  plans	  for	  all	  wildlife	  reserves.
    o Preparation	   of	   the	   2007	   Addendum	   to	   the	   BCAP	   to	   focus	   on	   issues	   that	   had	   emerged	   as
        significant	   national	   and	   global	   issues	   since	   the	   1999	   BCAP.	   These	   include	   threats	   from	   alien
        invasive	   species	   and	   biosafety	   with	   some	   follow	   up	   actions	   funded	   by	   GEF	   (GEF	   ID	   2472	   -­‐
        Strengthening	  Capacity	  to	  Control	  the	  Introduction	  and	  Spread	  of	  Alien	  Invasive	  Species	  and	  GEF
        ID	  875	  -­‐	  Development	  of	  National	  Biosafety	  Frameworks).
    o Institutionalising	   the	   Red	   Listing	   of	   nationally	   threatened	   species	   within	   the	   Ministry	   of
        Environment	  (IUCN	  and	  MoENR,	  2007;	  MoE	  &	  DNBG,2012	  b).

•   It	   is	   noteworthy	   that	   one	   year	   after	   the	   commencement	   of	   the	  Biosafety	   GEF	   enabling	   activity	   (GEF
    ID	  875),	  Sri	  Lanka	  became	  Party	  to	  the	  Cartagena	  Protocol	  on	  Biosafety.	  Sri	  Lanka	  also	  developed	  a
    biosafety	  policy	  in	  2011.

•   GEF	   enabling	   activities	   such	   as	   the	   National	   Capacity	   Self	   Needs	   Assessment	   Project	   of	   2005/06
    (GEF	  ID	  2417)	  directly	  served	  to	  identify	  the	  need	  for	  a	  functional	  Access	  to	  Genetic	  Resources	  and
    Benefit	  Sharing	  (ABS)	  regime	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  which	  led	  to	  it	  being	  	  prioritized	  for	  national	  GEF	  IV	  and	  V
    cycles	  (MoENR,	  2006c;	  	  MoE,	  2012).

•   During	   the	   GEF	   funded	   POPs	   enabling	   activity	   to	   develop	   a	   national	   implementation	   plan	   2002	   –
    2006	   (GEF	   -­‐	   ID	   1777),	   Sri	   Lanka	   ratified	   the	   Stockholm	   Convention	   in	   2005.	   This	   put	   POPs	   on	   the
    environmental	   agenda	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   and	   led	   to	   formation	   of	   a	   POPs	   unit	   in	   the	   Ministry	   of
    Environment.

•   Sri	  Lanka	  ratified	  the	  UNCCD	  in	  1998,	  and	  this	  probably	  led	  to	  the	  commencement	  of	  preparation	  of
    a	  Land	  Use	  Policy	  in	  2002;	  however	  it	  was	  finalized	  only	  in	  2007.

•   The	  GEF	  enabling	  activities	  under	  UNFCCC	  have	  resulted	  in	  a	  stock	  taking	  exercise	  (in	  2000),	  and	  the
    identification	   of	   priority	   areas	   under	   climate	   change.	   However	   the	   climate	   policies	   and	   adaptation
    strategies	   were	   formulated	   much	   later	   (in	   2010)	   –	   without	   GEF	   support.	   Climate	   change	   activities
    were	   initially	   handled	   by	   the	   global	   affairs/air	   resources	   management	   unit	   in	   the	   Ministry	   of
    Environment,	   but	   with	   increasing	   importance	   awarded	   to	   this	   issue,	   a	   separate	   Climate	   Change
    Secretariat	  and	  a	  Sri	  Lanka	  Carbon	  Fund	  was	  created	  in	  2008	  within	  the	  MoE.

•   The	  projects	  addressing	  Renewable	  Energy	  (GEF	  ID	  104,	  425	  and	  1545)	  have	  assisted	  with	  increasing
    the	   use	   of	   renewables	   and	   thereby	   contributing	   to	   reducing	   emissions.	   In	   2004,	   the	   government
    established	   a	   procedure	   for	   tariff	   setting	   to	   facilitate	   selling	   of	   energy	   to	   the	   grid	   (but	   thus	   far	   is	   not
    widely	  used)	  and	  a	  regulatory	  mechanism	  to	  manage	  off-­‐grid	  renewable	  energy	  systems.




                                                                                                                                                                                  16
1979	       1980	  -­‐89	                      1990-­‐91	      1992-­‐	  93	   1994	                1995	           1996	       1997	                        1998	                             1999	                         2000	                           2001	                        2002	                              2003	                         2004	                          2005	         2006	         2007	           2008	            2009	             2010	            2011	  -­‐
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 12	  
CITES	      WHS	                           Bonn	                BASEL	                  CBD*	     	                   	           	      CCD	                                                    	                             	                               	                            Kyoto	                             	                             Cartagena	         	                                        	               	  
	           Vienna	                        Ramsar	              	  	  	               UNCLOS	   	                   	           MARPOL	                                                         	                             	                               	                            	                                  	                             	          Stockholm	                                       	               	                	                 	        CONVENTIONS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            	  
             Montreal	                                            UNFCCC	  
             Law	  /	  sea	  	  	  	                         	  
             	  
	           NEA1	              NEA2	                            	  FPFO/a	  	  	   	               	  	  FO	     Fish.A	     	                            	                                 PPA	                          NEA	  3	                       Fish.	  A	   	                                                 Seed	  A	   	                                               	             	             	               	                FFPO/a	   	                        	  
MASLA	      NHWA	                               	               MASLA	                                 	               	           	                            	                                 WRB                            TCPA	                           	                            Energy	  Supply	  Act	   	                                                                     	             	             	               	                FO/a	             	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ACTS 	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                          A	  
	           CCA	                                                 ADA	                    	             	               	           	                            	                                 	                             	                               	                            	                                  	                             	                                                                             	                	                 	                	  
             NARRDA	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	           MPPA	           	                	                 	                       	             	               	           	                            	                                 	                             	                               	                            	                                  	                             	                              	             	             	               MPPA              	                 	                	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          /a	  
	           Fert	  A	                          	               	                       	             	               SoilCA	                                   	                                 AASA	                         	                               	                            	                                  	                             	                              	             	             	               	                	                 	                	  
             CPA	  
	           	                        	         	               	                       	             	                                                          	                                 	                             	                                                             	                                  	                             	                                             	                              	                	                 	          	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      POLICIES
                                                                                                           Forest	  policy	  	                                                                                                        Wildlife	  policy	  	                                                                           NEPS	  	                     Watershed	                                    Wetlands	                      Energy	          biotec                               	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          	                                                h	                                  Biosafet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 y	  	  
	           	                        	         	               	                       	             	               	           	                            	                                 	                             	                               	                            	                                                                 	                              Sand	  	     	             Land	  use	  	                  	                 	                CC	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 	  
	           	                        	         	               	                       	               	             	           	         	                                                    	                             	                               	                            	                                                                 	                              	         	                 	                                 	                 	                	  
	           	  	  NCS	                        NEAP	  	       	                       NEAP/            FSMP	         	           CZMP/r	   NEAP/                                                 BCAP	                         Solid	                          	                            NAP	                               NEAP	                         CZMP	                          Bio-­‐     	                 BCAP/	   NEAP	                   Harith             	                	  
                                                  CZMP	                                    r	                                                     r	                                                                                  Waste	  	                                                    land	                              CE	                                                           safety	                      addend	   CE/r	                  a	                       PLANS
                                                                                            Strat	  for	                                                                                                                                                                                              deg	                                                                                              Frame	                                                          Lanka	  
                                                                                            BAP	  
	           	                        	         	               	                       	                              	           	                            	                                 	                                                              	                            	                                  Prot.	  of	  marine	  resources	                                          NIP	          	               	                	                 	                NAPCC	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            from	  land	  based	                                                                                                                                              SARC	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            pollution	  
	           	                        	         	                	              	                     	               	           	                            	                                 NAPCC	   	                                                    	                            	                                  	              	           	                                               NOSCOP	                             	                	                 	               	  
	           	                        	         	                	              	                     	               	           	                            	                                 	         	                                                   	                            	                                  	              	           	                                               	                                   	                	                 	               	  
	           EIA	                     	         MOE	             	              	                     	               	           	                            	                                 BD	  Secretariat	                                                                                                               	              	           	                                               	         Red	  List	  Activities	                                    	     ACTIONS   	  
	           	                        	         Report	  to	  UNCED	  	  	   	                                      	           EA1P	                        	                                 	         	                                                                                                                                                  	                                               	         	                        Wetland	  unit	  	                	               	  
                                                  (Rio)	                                                                                                                                                            	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CC	  Secretariat	                  SLSEA	  
	           	                        	         	                	              	                     	               	           	                            	                                 	         	                                 	                                            Pops	  unit	                                                             	                        	             	         	                        	                	                 CDM	            	  
	           	                        	         	                	                                                                                                                                    	         	                                 	                                                                                                                                                                           	                        	                	                 	               	  
                                                                    PA	  management	  	                                                                                                                                                              PAM&WC	  	  	  	                                                                                                                                                                                                     East	  	  	          Nat. GEF PROJECTS
	                                                                  	              	                     	               	           	                  	          	           	                                                                RUK	                                          	              	                                                             	                   	                        	                        	                Coast	  tsunami	                  Ag/BD	  
	           	                        	         	                	              	                     	               	           	                  Med	  plants	          Rainforest	  Project	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	                                                                                                 	         	                        	                	                 	               IAS	  
	           	                        	         	                	              	                     	               	           NCCC	  -­‐1	  	  	          	           	                                                                	                                            POPs	  -­‐NIP	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  NCSA	                                                                                           	               NCCC-­‐	  2	     	  
	           	                        	         	                	              	                     	               	           ESD	               RE	  Capacity	  building	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  RERED	  	  	                                                                                         	             	         	                        PADG              	                 	               	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O	  
	          	                                    	                             	                                       	                             	                                                                                                                             	                                                         	                                               	                         	              	                                                   	                    	  
                                                  GON	  -­‐	  Wetland	        WB/ODA/FINNIDA/UNDP	   ADB	  -­‐	  Upper	  watershed	                                                                                                                                             ADB	  -­‐	  FRMP	                                       Aus	  Aid	  -­‐	                                                                         IFAD	  -­‐	  PTCRRMP	                                   OTHER PROJECTS
                                                  project	                      –	  Forestry	  Development	  	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SLANRMP	                                                                                   	  
	          	                                    	                  ADB/WB/Aus	  Aid	  –              ODA	  -­‐	  Participatory	  Forestry	      	                                                                                                                             	                            	                           	                                               	                         	              	                                UNDP-­‐            	                    	  
                                                                      Participatory	  Forestry	  	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SEA-­‐                                   UNDP/
                                                                      	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NE	                                     Aus	  Aid	  
	          	                                    	                  	         	                                       	                    ADB/GON-­‐	                                                                                                                     	                            	                                  ADB	  -­‐	  NECCD	                     	                           	              	                        	      	                     ADB	  -­‐	  Adaptation	  
                                                                                                                                                CRMP	                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Strategy	  
	           	                                   	               	                       	             	               	           	                            	                                 	                             	                               	                            	                                  	                             	                              	             	             	               	                	                 	                	  
Note:	  This	  time	  line	  diagram	  features	  selected	  Act,	  Policies,	  Plans,	  Actions,	  GEF	  projects	  and	  other	  projects,	  based	  on	  their	  overall	  importance	  to	  conservation	  and	  links	  
to	  the	  GEF	  project	  timelines.	  
7. Overview	  of	  legal	  frameworks,	  policies	  and	  plans

Legal	  aspects9	  
Sri	   Lanka’s	   legal	   framework	   was	   shaped	   by	   years	   of	   foreign	   rule,	   with	   use	   of	   the	   Roman	   Dutch	   Law	  
influenced	  by	  elements	  of	  English	  Law	  and	  systems	  of	  indigenous	  laws	  (Guneratne,	  2005).	  Overall,	  there	  
are	  over	  50	  laws	  that	  facilitate	  management	  and	  monitoring	  of	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  environment	  for	  sustainable	  
development	  (EFL,	  1993,	  2006),	  that	  have	  evolved	  over	  time	  since	  the	  colonial	  era	  (Guneratne,	  2005).	  
The	  main	  enactments	  that	  influence	  environmental	  conservation	  in	  terms	  of	  the	  5	  GEF	  focal	  areas	  are	  
given	  in	  Table	  3.	  	  

The	   most	   important	   with	   respect	   to	   the	   GEF	   focal	   areas	   are	   the	   National	   Environmental	   Act	   (NEA)	  
implemented	   by	   the	   Ministry	   dealing	   with	   environment,	   the	   Flora	   and	   Fauna	   Protection	   Ordinance	  
(FFPO)	   implemented	   by	   the	   DWLC,	   the	   Forest	   Ordinance	   (FO)	   implemented	   by	   the	   FD,	   the	   Coast	  
Conservation	   Act	   (CCA)	   implemented	   by	   the	   Coast	   Conservation	   Department	   (CCD),	   the	   Soil	  
Conservation	   Act	   and	   Plant	   Protection	   Act	   implemented	   by	   the	   Department	   of	   Agriculture,	   and	   the	  
Marine	   Environment	   Protection	   Act	   implemented	   by	   the	   Marine	   Environment	   Protection	   Agency	  
(MEPA)	   (MoENR,	   2007a).	   	   Sri	   Lanka	   has	   also	   enacted	   legislation	   on	   Intellectual	   Property	   Rights	   (MoE,	  
2010b).	  	  

The	   National	   Environmental	   Act	   (NEA)	   No.	   47	   of	         Environmental	  Impact	  Assessments	  (EIA)	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  
1980	   and	   its	   subsequent	   amendment	   in	   1988	  
                                                                                     Environmental	   Impact	   Assessments	   (EIAs)	   to	   all	  
provide	   legal	   provision	   for	   EIAs.	   The	   NEA,	   among	  
                                                                                     development	  projects	  were	  introduced	  in	  1984	  through	  
other	   things,	   also	   makes	   provision	   for	   the	                 a	   Cabinet	   decision.	   The	   NEA	   of	   1988	   empowered	   the	  
protection,	  management	  and	  enhancement	  of	  the	                       CEA	   with	   legal	   provisions	   to	   control	   environmental	  
environment	   and	   for	   the	   prevention,	   abatement	                  pollution	   and	   to	   mitigate	   the	   adverse	   impacts	   of	  
and	   regulatory	   control	   of	   pollution.	   It	   also	               development	   activities	   through	   legally	   binding	   EIA	  
provides	   for	   declaration	   of	   environmentally	                        procedures	   for	   certain	   prescribed	   projects.	   Hence,	  
sensitive	   areas	   as	   Environmental	   Protection	   Areas	              prescribed	   development	   activities	   within	   100	   m	   from	  
(EPAs)	   where	   only	   some	   types	   of	   development	                the	   boundary	   of	   any	   protected	   area	   requires	   an	   EIA.	  
are	   permitted	   by	   the	   CEA	   (MoENR,	   2007a,b).	                 Similarly,	   the	   DWLC	   can	   request	   an	   EIA	   for	  
                                                                                     developmental	   activities	   in	   areas	   within	   one	   mile	   from	  
Eight	  EPAs,	  important	  either	  for	  their	  biodiversity	  
                                                                                     the	   boundary	   of	   any	   National	   Reserve	   declared	   under	  
or	   wetland	   value,	   have	   been	   declared	   to	   date	  
                                                                                     section	   2	   of	   the	   FFPO.	   The	   CCA	   of	   1981	   enables	   the	  
(MoENR,	  2009).	                                                                  Director	   Coast	   Conservation	   to	   call	   for	   an	   EIA	   from	   both	  
                                                                                     private	  and	  state	  agencies	  for	  any	  development	  activity	  
With	   regard	   to	   physical	   planning,	   the	   NPPP&P	  
                                                                                     that	   falls	   entirely	   within	   the	   Coastal	   Zone,	   but	   this	   is	  
prepared	   by	   the	   National	   Physical	   Planning	  
Department	   is	   in	   accordance	   with	   the	   provisions	            often	  limited	  to	  prescribed	  projects	  in	  the	  NEA	  of	  1988.	  
of	   Section	   03	   of	   the	   Town	   and	   Country	   Planning	     The	   CCD,	   UDA,	   FD	   and	   DWLC	   are	   among	   the	   project	  
(Amendment)	   Act	   No.49	   of	   2000.	   	   The	   Urban	              approving	  agencies	  (PAAs)	  named	  in	  the	  NEA.	  
Development	  Authority	  Law	  No.	  41of	  1978	  and	  its	  
                                                                                                              (Source:	  MoENR,	  2007a)	  
amendments	   promotes	   the	   integrated	   planning	  
and	   implementation	   of	   social,	   economic	   and	   physical	   development	   of	   areas	   declared	   as	   “Urban	  
Development	   Areas”	   and	   provides	   for	   the	   development	   of	   environmental	   standards	   and	   schemes	   for	  
environmental	  improvement	  in	  UDA	  areas	  (MoENR,	  2007a).	  	  	  


9
    A comprehensive review of laws that are relevant for biodiversity conservation, climate change and land degradation were made
     during the GEF funded National Capacity Needs Self-Assessment, and this is used in this section extensively.
                                                                                                                                                                                 18
Table	  3:	  The	  most	  important	  environmental	  laws	  and	  their	  relation	  to	  GEF	  focal	  areas	  

                                                     Legislation	                                                                       Focal	  area	  
                                                                                                                       BD	     CC	      LD	       POPs	      IW	  
National	  Environmental	  Act	  (NEA)	  No.	  47	  of	  1980	  and	  the	  amendments	                     •        •         •          •
No.	  56	  of	  1988	  and	  Act	  No.	  53	  of	  2000.	  	  
Fauna	  and	  Flora	  Protection	  Ordinance	  (FFPO)	  No.	  2	  of	  1937,	  and	                         •
amendments	  incl.	  Act	  No.	  49	  of	  1993	  and	  Act	  No.	  22	  of	  2009.	  	  
Forest	  Ordinance	  (FO)	  No.	  16	  of	  1907,	  and	  its	  amendments	  incl.	  the	                  •        •         •
amendment	  Act	  No,	  23	  of	  1995	  and	  Act	  No.	  65	  of	  2009.	  
National	  Heritage	  Wilderness	  Area	  (NHWA)	  Act	  No.	  3	  of	  1988.	                               •                  •
Fisheries	  and	  Aquatic	  Resources	  (FAR)	  Act	  No.	  2	  of	  1996	  and	                            •
amendment	  Act	  No.	  4	  of	  2001.	  	  
Coast	  Conservation	  Act	  (CCA)	  No.	  57	  of	  1981	  and	  amendment	  Act	  No.	                   •        •         •
64	  of	  1988.	  
Maritime	  Zone	  Law	  No.22	  of	  1976	                                                                       •                                     •            •
National	  Aquatic	  Resources	  Research	  and	  Development	  Agency	                                         •
(NARRDP)	  Act	  No.	  54	  of	  1981.	  
Urban	  Development	  Authority	  (UDA)	  Law	  No.	  37	  of	  1978;	  as	  amended,	                      •                  •
the	  Urban	  Development	  Authority	  (Special	  Provisions)	  	  Act	  No.	  44	  	  of	  
1984;	  No.	  49	  of	  1987	  and	  No.	  41	  of	  1988	  	  Act	  No.	  4	  of	  1992.	  	  	  
Town	  and	  Country	  Planning	  (TCP)	  Ordinance	  No	  13	  of	  1946	  as	                             •                  •
amended	  by	  Act	  No.	  49	  of	  2000.	  
Marine	  Pollution	  Prevention	  Act	  (MPPA)	  No.	  59	  of	  1981	  and	  its	                          •                                         •
amendment	  Act	  No.	  35	  of	  2008.	  	  
Mines	  and	  Minerals	  Act	  (MMA)	  No.	  33	  of	  1992	                                                                     •
Plant	  Protection	  Act	  	  (PPA)	  No.	  35	  of	  1999	  (replacing	  Plant	  Protection	              •
Ordinance	  No.	  10	  of	  1924).	  	  
Animal	  Disease	  Act	  (ADA)	  No.	  59	  of	  1992.	                                                        •
The	  Seed	  Act	  No.	  22	  of	  2003.	                                                                       •
Fertilizer	  Act	  No	  21	  of	  1961	  and	  amendment	  Act	  No.	  68	  of	  1988.	                   •                  •          •
The	  Control	  of	  Pesticides	  Act	  (CPA)	  No	  33	  of	  1980,	  and	  its	  Amendment	             •                             •
Act	  No.	  6	  	  of	  1994.	  	  	  
Agrarian	  Services	  Act	  (AGA)	  No.	  58	  of	  1979,	  and	  amendments,	  and	  the	                 •                  •
new	  Agriculture	  and	  Agrarian	  Services	  Act	  of	  1999.	  	  
State	  Lands	  Ordinance	  No.	  8	  of	  1947	  (chapter	  454)	  and	  amendments.	                      •                  •
Sri	  Lanka	  Land	  Reclamation	  and	  Development	  Corporation	  Act	  No.	  52	                         •                  •
of	  1982.	  
Land	  Reform	  Act.	  No	  1	  of	  1979	  (as	  amended)	                                                                      •
Soil	  Conservation	  Act,	  No.	  25	  of	  1951;	  amended	  by	  Acts	  No.	  59	  of	  1953	         •                  •
and	  24	  of	  1996.	  
Mahaweli	  Authority	  of	  Sri	  Lanka	  Act	  (MASLA)	  No.	  23	  of	  1979;	  and	                     •                  •
amendment	  59	  of	  1993.	  
Flood	  Protection	  Ordinance	  No.	  04	  of	  1924	  (chapter	  449)	  amended	  by	                     •        •         •
act	  No.	  22	  of	  1955.	  
                                                                                                                                                                              19
                                                    Legislation	                                                                           Focal	  area	  
                                                                                                                          BD	     CC	      LD	       POPs	     IW	  
Land	  Development	  Ordinance	  No.	  19	  of	  1935	  (chapter	  464);	  and	  its	                          •                  •
subsequent	  amendments.	  
Land	  Acquisition	  Act	  No.	  9	  of	  1950	                                                                    •                  •
Irrigation	  Ordinance	  No.	  32	  of	  1946;	  Irrigation	  Act	  No.1	  of	  1951	  and	  its	            •                  •
amendments.	  
National	  Water	  Resources	  Board	  Act	  (NWRB)	  No.29	  of	  1964	  and	                                  •        •
subsequent	  Act	  No.	  42	  of	  1999.	  	  
Energy	  supply	  (temporary	  provisions)	  Act.	  No	  2	  of	  2002.	                                                  •
Nuisances	  Ordinance	  No	  15	  of	  1962	  (chapter	  230).	                                                                                 •
Motor	  Traffic	  Act	  No.	  14	  of	  1951	  	  as	  amended	  by	  	  Act	  No.	  21	  of	  1981	              •                    •
and	  Act	  No.	  8	  of	  2009	  
Intellectual	  Property	  Act	  No.	  36	  of	  2003.	                                                             •
Customs	  Ordinance	  No.	  17	  of	  1869	  (chapter	  235)	  as	  amended.	               •
* Amendments	  specified	  here	  are	  not	  the	  only	  amendments	  to	  these	  Acts	  but	  are	  key	  to	  conservation

Biodiversity	  conservation	  and	  sustainable	  use	  
The	   Fauna	   and	   Flora	   Protection	   Ordinance	   (FFPO)	   Ordinance	   No.	   2	   of	   1937	   and	   its	   subsequent	  
amendments	  and	  the	  Forest	  Ordinance	  (FO)	  No.	  16	  of	  1907	  (and	  subsequent	  amendments)	  are	  the	  main	  
legal	  instruments	  that	  govern	  biodiversity	  conservation,	  including	  genetic	  resources.	  	  

The	  FFPO	  protects	  animal	  and	  plant	  life	  within	  six	  categories	  of	  national	  reserves	  managed	  by	  the	  DWLC	  
and	   lists	   “Protected	   Species”	   to	   be	   protected	   wherever	   they	   are	   found.	   Both	   the	   FFPO	   and	   the	   FO	  
provide	  measures	  to	  control	  the	  export	  of	  wild	  biodiversity.	  The	  FFPO	  Amendment	  Act	  No	  49	  of	  1993	  
addresses	  “protection	  against	  commercial	  exploitation”	  which	  covers	  commercial	  access	  to	  indigenous	  
genetic	   resources.	   Several	   other	   acts	   enacted	   for	   fisheries	   management,	   plant	   protection	   and	   animal	  
husbandry	   are	   of	   relevance	   for	   conservation	   of	   indigenous	   fish,	   crop	   and	   livestock	   diversity	   as	   well	   as	  
indigenous	  genetic	  resources	  (MoENR,	  2007a).	  	  	  

While	   there	   are	   no	   special	   laws	   concerning	   access	   to	   genetic	   resources,	   consultations	   during	   the	   GEF	  
funded	  NCSA	  project	  identified	  that	  the	  existing	  legal	  framework,	  provided	  by	  the	  FFPO	  and	  the	  FO,	  had	  
adequate	   flexibility	   for	   granting/denial	   of	   a	   legitimate	   application	   made	   to	   the	   Government	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	  
for	  Transfer/Access	  of	  Genetic	  Resources	  and	  for	  benefit	  sharing	  (MoENR,	  2006d,	  2007a).	  Further,	  it	  was	  
felt	  that	  a	  separate	  national	  Access	  Law	  could	  be	  interpreted	  in	  terms	  of	  obligations	  under	  the	  WTO	  and	  
its	  trade	  related	  conventions10	  in	  a	  manner	  that	  runs	  counter	  to	  the	  objectives	  of	  Article	  15	  of	  the	  CBD	  
(MoENR,	  2007a).	  	  Sri	  Lanka	  has	  also	  enacted	  the	  Intellectual	  Property	  Act	  No.	  36	  of	  2003	  which	  provides	  
the	  procedures	  of	  registration,	  control	  and	  administration	  of	  such	  rights.	  It	  is	  also	  relevant	  for	  granting	  
IPR	  protection	  in	  the	  use	  of	  genetic	  resources	  and	  for	  genetic	  engineering	  techniques	  and	  their	  products	  
(ibid).	  

The	  Coast	  Conservation	  Act	  No.	  57	  of	  1981	  and	  the	  Amended	  Act	  No.	  3	  of	  1988	  legislate	  for	  governance	  
of	   the	   coastal	   zone	   and	   development	   in	   it.	   The	   CZMP	   also	   forms	   an	   important	   legal	   instrument	   when	  
gazetted	  after	  receiving	  Cabinet	  approval	  (MoENR,	  2007a).	  	  The	  Fisheries	  and	  Aquatic	  Resources	  Act	  No.	  


10
  Sri Lanka is a signatory to the WTO.
                                                                                                                                                                            20
2	   of	   1996	   deals	   with	   ownership	   and	   protection	   of	   fish	   and	   other	   aquatic	   resources	   in	   marine	   and	   inland	  
areas	  (MoENR,	  2007a).	  	  	  

Pollution	  prevention	  
The	   control	   of	   air,	   land,	   water	   and	   noise	   pollution	   and	   environmental	   degradation	   connected	   with	  
development	   is	   addressed	   by	   the	   NEA	   of	   1988	   which	   makes	   it	   mandatory	   for	   all	   industries	   (including	  
service	   facilities	   such	   as	   vehicle	   service	   stations)	   classified	   as	   low,	   medium	   or	   high	   polluting	   to	   obtain	   an	  
Environmental	  Protection	  License	  (EPL)	  from	  the	  CEA.	  Part	  of	  this	  work	  is	  devolved	  to	  the	  LAs.	  The	  CEA	  
has	   powers	   conferred	   by	   the	   NEA	   to	   issue	   Environment	   Protection	   Licenses	   (EPLs),	   monitor	   industrial	  
discharge	  of	  effluents	  and	  is	  the	  regulatory	  authority	  to	  facilitate	  preparation	  of	  standards	  for	  ambient	  
water,	   air	   quality,	   mobile	   source	   emissions,	   industrial	   emissions,	   and	   stationery	   sound	   emission	   which	  
are	  gazetted	  by	  the	  MoENR	  (Guneratne,	  2005).	  	  

The	   emission	   of	   pollutants	   into	   the	   atmosphere	   is	   prohibited	   under	   section	   23	   of	   the	   NEA	   and	   the	  
National	   Environmental	   (Protection	   and	   Quality)	   Regulations	   of	   1990.	   Further	   regulations	   such	   as	   the	  
Motor	   Traffic	   (Emission	   Control)	   Regulations	   of	   1994,	   Ozone	   Depleting	   Substances	   and	   National	  
Environmental	   (Ambient	   Air	   Quality)	   Regulations	   1994	   and	   the	   Amended	   Regulations	   (Air	   Emission,	   Fuel	  
and	  Vehicle	  Importation	  standards)	  of	  2000	  also	  play	  a	  min	  role	  in	  controlling	  air	  pollution	  (MoE,	  2010a).	  

Preventing	  land	  degradation	  
The	  Soil	  Conservation	  Act	  of	  No.	  25	  of	  1951	  and	  its	  amendments	  help	  address	  land	  degradation.11	  The	  
Director-­‐General	   of	   Agriculture	   can	   declared	   Conservation	   Areas	   under	   this	   Act	   (known	   as	   Erodible	  
Areas	   before	   1996)	   and	   restrict,	   prevent	   or	   even	   order	   certain	   types	   of	   activities	   as	   needed	   in	  
‘Conservation	  Areas’	  to	  address	  land	  degradation	  and	  to	  conserve	  water	  and	  watersheds.	  The	  Minister	  
of	   Agriculture	   can	   also	   acquire	   land	   for	   conservation	   purposes	   under	   the	   Land	   Acquisition	   Act.	   Other	  
important	  laws	  in	  this	  regard	  are	  the	  NEA	  (Section	  22)	  Flood	  Protection	  Ordinance,	  Irrigation	  Ordinance,	  
State	   Lands	   Ordinance,	   The	   Coast	   Conservation	   Act	   and	   the	   Mahaweli	   Authority	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   Act	  
(Gunaratne,	   2005).	   Provincial	   Councils	   too	   can	   legislate	   on	   land	   matters	   within	   the	   areas	   of	   their	  
jurisdiction	  which	  may	  sometimes	  create	  confusion	  (ibid).	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

Main	  gaps	  and	  weaknesses	  in	  the	  legal	  provisions	  
The	   most	   apparent	   gaps	   in	   the	   legal	   framework	   that	   could	   preclude	   implementation	   of	   the	   UNCBD,	  
UNFCCC	   and	   the	   UNCCD	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   were	   identified	   via	   the	   NCSA	   project	   (MoENR,	   2007a,b,c,d).	   Sri	  
Lanka	   has	   also	   not	   adequately	   considered	   the	   legal	   aspects	   of	   Property	   Rights	   covering	   traditional	  
knowledge	   related	   to	   the	   commercial	   use	   of	   indigenous	   (especially	   endemic)	   genetic	   resources.	  
However,	   a	   Task	   force	   has	   been	   established	   on	   “Safeguarding	   Indigenous	   Biodiversity	   and	   Indigenous	  
knowledge”	  (MoENR,	  2009)	  and	  action	  is	  also	  currently	  being	  taken	  to	  collate	  and	  preserve	   information	  
on	  traditional	  knowledge	  while	  promoting	  its	  use	  in	  modern	  technology	  while	  taking	  into	  consideration	  
the	   rights	   of	   such	   knowledge	   holders	   by	   the	   National	   Science	   and	   Technology	   commission	   and	   the	  
National	  Science	  foundation.	  	  

The	  existing	  national	  legal	  framework,	  however,	  does	  not	  provide	  for	  equitable	  benefits	  to	  the	  holders	  
of	  traditional	  knowledge	  when	  such	  information	  is	  used	  for	  genetic	  resources	  or	  other	  components	  of	  

11
     This act provides for necessary action to enhance the productive capacity of soil, restore degraded land for the prevention and
     mitigation of soil erosion, to conserve soil resources and protect land against damage by floods salinity, alkalinizing, water
     logging and drought (MoENR, 2007b).
                                                                                                                                                                             21
biodiversity	   for	   commercial	   use	   by	   others;	   there	   are	   also	   deficiencies	   in	   the	   Mines	   and	   Minerals	   Act	   No.	  
33	   of	   1992	   as	   the	   offences	   under	   it	   are	   not	   cognizable,	   thus	   weakening	   enforcement;	   the	   	   NEA	   lacks	  
provision	   to	   prevent	   biodiversity	   loss	   from	   mining	   through	   EIA	   procedures,	   and	   does	   not	   sufficiently	  
empower	  field	  officers	  of	  the	  CEA	  to	  take	  action	  against	  persons	  contravening	  this	  law	  (MoENR,	  2007a).	  	  

Other	   gaps	   in	   the	   legal	   framework	   are	   absence	   of	   laws	   to	   prevent	   introduction	   and	   spread	   of	   alien	  
invasive	   species	   or	   to	   ensure	   biosafety,	   but	   some	   aspects	   are	   covered	   with	   the	   existing	   laws	   (e.g.	   The	  
Plant	  Protection	  Act,	  the	  Water	  Hyacinth	  Ordinance	  and	  the	  Animals	  Disease	  Act).	  Biosafety	  is	  to	  some	  
extent	   addressed	   through	   the	   Control	   of	   Pesticides	   Act,Consumer	   Affairs	   Authority	   Act	   No.	   9	   of	   2003,	  
and	  the	  Food	  Act,	  No	  26	  1980	  amended	  by	  Act	  No	  20	  of	  1991	  (MoENR,	  2007a).	  Likewise	  there	  is	  eroding	  
of	  the	  exclusive	  authority	  to	  permit	  development	  exercised	  by	  the	  Director	  CCD	  from	  the	  provisions	  of	  
the	  Mines	  and	  Mining	  Act	  No	  33	  of	  1992,	  which	  can	  also	  permit	  mining	  of	  natural	  resources	  in	  coastal	  
areas	  (Gunaratne,	  2005).	  	  	  	  	  

Overall,	   the	   existing	   legal	   framework	   offered	   through	   periodic	   revision	   of	   laws	   are	   adequate	   for	  
conservation	   of	   indigenous	   biodiversity,	   addressing	   land	   degradation,	   pollution,	   and	   for	   some	   aspects	  
relating	   to	   adaptation	   and	   mitigation	   of	   climate	   change.	   While	   some	   laws	   do	   overlap,	   there	   are	   no	  
serious	  contradictions.	  The	  NEA,	  the	  FFPO	  and	  FO	  are	  equal	  in	  status,	  and	  override	  other	  laws	  such	  as	  
the	  CCA,	  the	  UDA	  Law	  and	  the	  Fisheries	  Acts	  (MoENR,	  2007a).	  However,	  there	  are	  serious	  lapses	  in	  the	  
interpretation	   of	   laws	   leading	   to	   considerable	   divergence	   of	   opinion	   and	   inconsistent	   interpretation	  
(MoENR,	  2007a).	  Further,	  weak	  law	  enforcement	  and	  the	  need	  for	  institutional	  and	  individual	  capacity	  
building	  to	  meet	  this	  end	  was	  identified	  by	  the	  GEF	  funded	  NCSA	  project	  in	  2006	  (MoENR,	  2007a,	  b,	  c).	  	  	  

8. Environmental	  policies/plans/actions

The	   main	   environmental	   policy	   framework	   is	   given	   in	   Table	   4.	   Among	   them,	   the	   National	   Environmental	  
Policy	  of	  Sri	  Lankaof	  2003	  responds	  to	  the	  constitutional	  responsibility	  of	  providing	  sound	  environmental	  
management	   within	   a	   framework	   of	   sustainable	   development	   (MoENR,	   2003).	   It	   addresses	  
environmental	   dimensions	   for	   conservation	   and	   management	   of	   four	   basic	   groupings	   of	   natural	  
resources:	  land,	  water,	  atmosphere	  and	  biological	  diversity.	  	  

The	  Cleaner	  Production	  Policy	  supports	  the	  control	  of	  environmental	  pollution	  and	  mitigation	  of	  adverse	  
impacts	  of	  development	  activities	  affected	  through	  legally	  binding	  EPL	  and	  EIA	  procedures12	  respectively	  
(MoENR,	   2007a).	   Further,	   Standards	   for	   effluent	   discharge	   into	   inland	   surface	   waters	   (Gazette	  
Extraordinary	  No.	  559/16	  of	  February	  2nd	   1990),	  Standards	  for	  ambient	  air	  quality	  (Gazette	  notification	  
No.	  850/4	  of	  December	  20	  of	  1994)	  and	  Standards	  for	  mobile	  air	  emissions	  (Gazette	  Extraordinary	  No.	  
1137/35	   of	   June	   23	   2000	   (Gunaratne,	   2005),	   and	   the	   Solid	   Waste	   Management	   Strategy	   of	   2000	   (MoFE,	  
2000)	  serve	  to	  enable	  a	  cleaner	  and	  healthier	  environment.	  

Sri	   Lanka	   was	   one	   of	   the	   first	   countries	   in	   Asia	   to	   prepare	   a	   National	   Conservation	   Strategy	   (NCS)	   in	  
1988,	   as	   a	   response	   to	   the	   World	   Conservation	   Strategy	   of	   1980.	   The	   NCS	   identified	   priority	   areas	   for	  
action	  to	  deal	  with	  environmental	  degradation	  in	  the	  country.	  To	  follow-­‐up	  on	  the	  NCS,	  the	  government	  
prepared	   the	   first	   National	   Environmental	   Action	   Plan	   (NEAP)	   of	   1991	   for	   the	   five-­‐year	   period	   1992–
1996	   (MoENR,	   2002).	   Since	   then,	   there	   have	   been	   several	   revisions	   of	   the	   NEAP	   (MoFE,n.d;	   MoENR,	  
2003).	   The	   current	   2008	   NEAP,	   termed	   Caring	   for	   the	   environment	   Path	   to	   Sustainable	   Development	  

12
  EPL= Environmental Protection License; EIA = Environmental Impact Assessment
                                                                                                                                                                         22
Action	  Plan	  2008-­‐2012,	  has	  separate	  chapters	  on	  biodiversity,	  forests,	  wildlife;	  climate	  change;	  coastal	  
and	   marine	   resources;	   land	   resources;	   waste	   management,	   and	   water	   resources	   with	   mechanisms	   for	  
implementation	  and	  monitoring	  (MoENR,	  2008).	  	  

The	   Haritha	  Lanka	  (Green	  Lanka)	  Action	  Plan	  launched	  in	  2008	  is	  designed	  to	  promote	  a	  holistic	  and	  an	  
integrated	   approach	   to	   tackle	   environment	   related	   issues	   seriously.	   It	   focuses	   on	   addressing	   critical	  
environmental	   issues	   which,	   if	   left	   unattended,	   would	   jeopardize	   the	   nation’s	   economic	   development	  
programme	   under	   10	   missions:	   Clean	   air	   –	   everywhere,	   2.	   Saving	   the	   fauna,	   flora	   and	   ecosystems,	   3.	  
Meeting	   the	   challenges	   of	   climate	   change,	   4.	   Wise	   use	   of	   the	   coastal	   belt	   and	   the	   sea	   around,	   5.	  
Responsible	  use	  of	  the	  land	  resource,	  6.	  Doing	  away	  with	  dumps,	  7.	  Water	  for	  all	  and	  always,	  8.	  Green	  
cities	  for	  health	  and	  prosperity,	  9.	  Greening	  the	  industries,	  and	  10.	  Knowledge	  for	  right	  choices	  (NCSD	  &	  
PS,	   2009).	   	   	   The	   Haritha	   Lanka	   programme	   is	   expected	   to	   be	   implemented	   through	   the	   National	  
Sustainable	  Council	  and	  the	  Coordinating	  Committees	  established	  for	  the	  10	  missions.	  	  

Table	  4:	  The	  most	  important	  environmental	  policies	  and	  plans	  and	  their	  relation	  to	  GEF	  focal	  
areas	  	  
                                                   	  Policy	                                                                   Focal	  area	  
                                                                                                                  BD	      CC	   LD	   POPs	            IW	  
The	  National	  Environmental	  Policy	  and	  Strategies	  of	  2003	                                   •         •        •         •
The	  National	  Physical	  Planning	  Policy	  	  and	  Plan	  of	  2007	                              •         •        •
The	  National	  Forest	  Policy	  of	  1995	                                                               •         •        •
The	  National	  Wildlife	  Policy	  of	  2000	                                                             •
The	  National	  Biosafety	  Policy	  of	  2011	                                                            •
The	  National	  Strategy	  for	  Solid	  Waste	  Management	  of	  2000	                                •         •        •         •
The	  National	  Watershed	  Management	  Policy	  of	  2004	                                              •         •        •
The	  National	  Wetlands	  Policy	  and	  Strategy	  of	  2006	                                          •         •        •
The	  National	  Fisheries	  and	  Aquaculture	  Policy	  of	  2006	  (which	  deals	  with	           •
environmentally	  friendly	  management	  of	  the	  fishery).	  
The	  Ten	  Year	  Development	  Policy	  Framework	  of	  the	  Fisheries	  and	  Aquatic	            •
Resources	  Sector	  of	  2007	  
National	  Livestock	  Development	  Policy	  (-­‐-­‐)	                                                      •         •
The	  National	  Policy	  on	  Agriculture	  of	  2007	                                                    •         •        •
The	  NationalLand	  Use	  Policy	  of	  2007	                                                              •                  •
National	  Policy	  on	  Sand	  for	  the	  Construction	  Industry	  of	  2005	                        •                  •
National	  Climate	  Change	  Policy	  of	  2012	                                                                     •
National	  Air	  Quality	  Management	  Policy	  of	  2000	                                                          •                  •
The	  Cleaner	  Production	  Policy	  of	  2004	                                                            •         •        •         •
National	  	  Policy	  on	  Clean	  Development	  Mechanism	  (CDM)	                                      •         •        •         •
National	  Energy	  Policy	  &	  Strategies	  of	  Sri	  Lanka	  2008	  	  (Updates	  National	                 •
Energy	  Policy	  of	  1997)	  
National	  Industrial	  Pollution	  Management	  Policy	  Statement	  of	  1996	                          •         •        •         •
National	  Transport	  Policy	  of	  2008	                                                                             •
National	  Nutrition	  Policy	  of	  Sri	  Lanka	  	  2010	                                               •                  •




                                                                                                                                                                     23
Biodiversity	  
Upon	   ratification	   of	   the	   UN	   Convention	   on	   Biological	   Diversity	   in	   1994,	   Sri	   Lanka	   prepared	   a	  strategy	   for	  
preparation	   of	   a	   National	   Biodiversity	   Action	   Plan	   (BAP)	   in	   1994,	   followed	   by	   the	   GEF/WB	   funded	  
preparation	   of	   the	   National	   Biodiversity	   Conservation	   Action	   Plan	   (BCAP)	   termed	   “Biodiversity	  
Conservation	   in	   Sri	   Lanka:	   a	   framework	   for	   action”	   (GEF	   ID	   95)	   and	   for	   the	   “Conservation	   and	  
Sustainable	   Use	   of	   Medicinal	   Plants”.	   The	   BCAP	   was	   accepted	   by	   the	   government	   in	   1998	   and	   published	  
in	  1999	  (MoFE,	  1999a).	  Completion	  of	  the	  BCAP13	  was	  reported	  to	  the	  CBD	  in	  1998	  via	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  first	  
National	  Report	  to	  COP	  1	  (MoENR,	  2009).	  It	  was	  said	  at	  the	  time	  that	  “In	  South	  Asia,	  the	  NBSAPs	  in	  Sri	  
Lanka	  and…are	  the	  most	  advanced,	  and	  are	  entering	  the	  implementation	  phase”	  (IUCN,	  2002).14	  

The	   BCAP	   was	   updated	   with	   the	   Addendum	   of	   2007	   (MoENR	   and	   BDS,	   2007)	   under	   Component	   C	   of	   the	  
GEF	  funded	  PAM&WC	  project	  (GEF	  ID	  878)	  to	  cover	  new	  issues	  that	  had	  emerged	  both	  nationally	  and	  
internationally.	   In	   addition,	   this	   project	   funded	   seven	   Provincial	   Biodiversity	   Conservation	   Profiles	   for	  
implementation	  by	  Provincial	  Councils.	  	  The	  recommendations	  of	  the	  BCAP	  and	  Addendum	  are	  meant	  to	  
guide	   national	   implementation	   of	   the	   CBD,	   but	   assessments	   have	   showed	   the	   need	   for	   BCAP	  
implementation	  holistically	  (MoE,	  2003;	  MoENR,	  2007a;	  2009).	  The	  BCAP	  is	  now	  due	  for	  revision.	  	  

Other	  important	  events	  were	  upgrading	  of	  the	  Biodiversity	  Unit	  in	  the	  MoFE	  to	  a	  Biodiversity	  Secretariat	  
(BDS)15	  in	  1999	  following	  acceptance	  of	  the	  BCAP	  by	  government	  (IUCN,	  2002)	  to	  better	  service	  the	  CBD	  
and	   implement	   the	   BCAP;	   establishing	   a	   National	   Experts’	   Committee	   on	   Biodiversity,	   and	   initiating	  
several	   globally	   and	   nationally	   important	   projects	   to	   support	   biodiversity	   conservation	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	  
(MoENR,	  2006c;	  MoENR,2009).	  The	  PAM&WC	  project	  (GEF	  ID	  878)	  enhanced	  capacity	  for	  the	  National	  
Red	   Listing	   Process	   which	   led	   to	   its	   institutionalization	   within	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Environment	   (IUCN	   and	  
MoENR,	   2007;	   MoE,	   2012).	   Sri	   Lanka	   enhanced	   capacity	   for	   biosafety	   through	   the	   UNDP/GEF	   funded	  
Biosafety	  Framework	  Project	  (GEF	  ID	  875),	  which	  led	  to	  ratifying	  the	  Cartagena	  Protocol	  on	  Biosafety	  in	  
2004	  and	  participating	  in	  the	  UNEP/GEF	  regional	  project	  for	  Building	  Capacity	  for	  Effective	  Participation	  
in	  the	  Biosafety	  Clearing	  House	  (BCH)	  mechanism.	  	  	  

The	  GEF	  funded	  National	  Capacity	  Needs	  Self-­‐Assessment	  for	  global	  environmental	  management	  (GEF	  ID	  
2417)	  enabled	  a	  comprehensive	  review	  of	  the	  biodiversity	  related	  legal	  framework,	  plans,	  policies	  and	  
projects.	  This	  revealed	  that	  10	  priority	  areas	  with	  inadequate	  national	  capacity	  to	  implement	  the	  CBD.16	  


13
   The BCAP sets out activities to address biodiversity conservation within the forestry, wetland, coastal ad marine and agricultural
    systems and several cross-cutting areas and issues crucial for biodiversity conservation.
14
    The BCAP preparatory process involved wide consultation through establishment of a network of Biodiversity Liaison Officers in all
    stakeholder agencies by the Ministry of Forestry and Environment (MoFE) for regular consultation, capacity building and training
    to maximize their participation. Awareness programmes were held at various levels ranging from Secretaries of Ministries,
    technical experts, private sector, NGOs and CBOs at grassroots level, later hailed as key feature that gave stakeholders
    ownership of the plan (IUCN, 2002).
15
   Later upgraded to the Biodiversity Division of the MoE.
16
     They are: Sectoral and cross sectoral support for biodiversity conservation and sustainable use; effective enforcement of laws and
      regulations; a national Access (to genetic resources) and Benefit Sharing (ABS) regime for equitable benefit sharing;
      biotechnology using genetic resources for sustainable use of biodiversity; effective inter institutional coordination mechanism for
      identification and monitoring of critical components of biodiversity and threats; a multi-institutional coordinated effort for
      establishing a rational network of protected areas; participatory and integrated in-situ conservation and management of
      ecosystems; multi-stakeholder participation for species specific in situ and ex situ conservation; Negotiating at CBD COP and
      other global fora and communication, education and public awareness for biodiversity conservation. A key cross cutting issue was
      inadequate capacity to prevent entry and establishment of alien invasive species which is addressed through the GEF funded
      project for control of alien invasive species that threaten biodiversity (GEF ID 2472).

                                                                                                                                                                        24
Forestry	  and	  wildlife	  systems	  

Policies,	  plans	  and	  programmes	  in	  the	  forestry	  and	  wildlife	  sub-­‐sectors	  reflect	  concern	  for	  biodiversity	  
conservation,	   and	   significant	   steps	   have	   been	   taken	   to	   better	   manage	   natural	   resources	   and	  
biodiversity.	   Biodiversity	   considerations	   were	   incorporated	   into	   plans	   and	   polices	   prepared	   after	  
ratification	   of	   the	   CBD	   in	   1994:	   (a)	   the	   National	   Forest	   Policy	   of	   1995	   (MALF,	   1995)	   has	   the	   specific	  
objective	   of	   conserving	   forests	   for	   posterity,	   with	   particular	   regard	   to	   biodiversity,	   ...	   	   ”	   and	   (b)	   the	  
Forestry	  Sector	  Master	  Plan	  of	  1995	  (MALF,	  1995)	  devotes	  an	  entire	  chapter	  to	  forest	  biodiversity.	  They	  
also	   followed	   a	   landmark	   moratorium	   on	   state	   mediated	   logging	   in	   all	   natural	   forests	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   in	  
1990,	   and	   the	   Environmental	   Management	   in	   Forestry	   Development	   (EMFD)	   Project	   initiated	   in	   1991	  
through	   which	   the	   Accelerated	   Conservation	   Review	   (ACR)	   of	   Wet	   Zone	   forests	   by	   the	   Forest	  
Department	   (IUCN,	   1994),	   identification	   of	   33	   Wet	   Zone	   forests	   for	   strict	   conservation	   (FD,	   2012),	  
followed	   by	   the	   comprehensive	   assessment	   of	   biodiversity	   in	   natural	   forests	   of	   the	   country	   through	   the	  
National	   Conservation	   Review	   (NCR)	   completed	   in	   1996	   (IUCN/FAO/FD,	   1997)	   were	   carried	   out.	   	   All	  
these	   led	   to	   an	   amendment	   of	   the	   Forest	   Ordinance	   in	   1995	   to	   recognize	   “Conservation	   Forests”	   set	  
aside	   for	   strict	   conservation.	   At	   present	   65	   forests	   (including	   15	   mangrove	   forests)	   are	   declared	   as	  
Conservation	   Forests	   (FD,	   2012).	   Recent	   (2009)	   amendments	   to	   the	   FO	   and	   FFPO	   have	   made	  
preparation	  of	  management	  plans	  mandatory	  for	  all	  forest	  and	  wildlife	  reserves	  managed	  by	  the	  FD	  and	  
DWLC	  respectively	  (MoENR,	  2009).	  

Likewise,	   the	   National	   Wildlife	   Policy	   of	   2000	   addresses	   biodiversity	   conservation	   (DWLC,	   2000),	   and	  
followed	   the	   UNDP/GEF	   project	   for	   Development	   of	   Wildlife	   Conservation	   and	   Protected	   Area	  
Management	   carried	   out	   by	   the	   DWLC	   (1992-­‐1998).	   Both	   Forest	   and	   Wildlife	   Policies	   oriented	   the	   FD	  
and	   DWLC	   to	   a	   major	   shift	   in	   management	   policy	   towards	   a	   participatory	   approach	   involving	   local	  
communities	  in	  lieu	  of	  the	  former	  policing	  approach.	  This	  was	  promoted	  in	  management	  plans	  prepared	  
for	  9	  wet	  zone	  forests	  (IUCN	  1994),	  and	  the	  proposed	  model	  was	  pilot	  tested	  for	  wet	  zone	  forests	  via	  
the	  GEF/UNDP	  southwest	  rainforest	  project	  (GEF	  ID	  818).	  The	  same	  model	  was	  later	  applied	  to	  wildlife	  
reserves	  through	  the	  ADB/GEF/GON	  funded	  PAM&WC	  project	  (GEF	  ID	  878).	  The	  success	  of	  this	  model	  is	  
likely	   to	   have	   influenced	   the	   amendment	   of	   the	   Forest	   Ordinance	   in	   2009	   to	   enable	   engaging	   with	  
stakeholders	   to	   carry	   out	   community	   participatory	   programmes	   for	   the	   development	   of	   forests	   (FD,	  
2012).	  

Positive	  impacts	  of	  forest	  conservation	  efforts	  are	  that	  most	  of	  the	  previously	  logged	  Wet	  Zone	  forests	  
are	  regenerating	  well	  (MoENR,	  2009);	  Illegal	  timber	  felling	  in	  Wet	  Zone	  forests	  is	  minimal,	  particularly	  
where	  a	  good	  rapport	  has	  been	  built	  by	  forest	  managers	  with	  local	  people.	  It	  is	  further	  assisted	  by	  the	  
introduction	  of	  a	  permit	  system	  for	  transportation	  of	  most	  timber	  species	  (FD,	  2012).	  	  Likewise,	  survey	  
and	   marking	   of	   forest	   boundaries	   by	   the	   FD	   (via	   the	   FRMP),	   and	   promotion	   of	   the	   participatory	  
conservation	   model	   by	   local	   people	   as	   pilot	   tested	   in	   two	   forests	   by	   a	   GEF	   project	   (GEF	   ID	   818),	   has	  
minimized	  encroachment	  into	  Wet	  Zone	  forest	  reserves	  (FD,	  201217).	  Both	  FD	  and	  DWLC	  have	  invested	  
heavily	   in	   institutional	   capacity	   building	   for	   better	   management	   and	   conservation	   of	   forests	   under	   their	  
purview,	  mainly	  though	  the	  ADB	  funded	  Forestry	  Resources	  Management	  Project	  (FRMP)	  for	  the	  FD	  and	  
the	   PAM&WC	   project	   (GEF	   ID	   878)	   for	   the	   DWLC.	   The	   latter	   project	   facilitated	   the	   preparation	   of	   a	  


17
  And field information during preparation for the REDD+ project and the ongoing Periodic Review of International MAB reserves.
                                                                                                                                                                             25
Portfolio	   of	   Strategic	   Conservation	   Sites/Protected	   Area	   in	   the	   country	   through	   a	   Gap	   Analysis	   of	   the	  
national	  protected	  area	  system	  (MoENR,	  2006b).	  	  

Coastal	  and	  marine	  systems	  and	  fisheries	  resources	  
Coastal	   resource	   management	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   goes	   back	   to	   the	   early	   1980s	   with	   the	   setting	   up	   of	   the	   Coast	  
Conservation	  Department	  (CCD)	  and	  the	  enactment	  of	  the	  Coast	  Conservation	  Act	  of	  1981.	  Integrated	  
management	  of	  coastal	  resources	   with	   the	   support	   of	   local	   people	  through	   Special	   Area	   Management	  
(SAM)	   planning	   were	   initiated	   by	   the	   CCD	   at	   Rekawa	   and	   Hikkaduwa	   in	   1991,	   via	   the	   USAID	   funded	  
Coastal	   Resources	   Management	   Project	   (CRMP).	   This	   approach	   was	   formalized	   by	   “Coastal	   2000:	  
Recommendations	   for	   a	   Resource	   Management	   Strategy	   for	   Sri	   Lanka's	   Coastal	   Region"	   published	   in	  
1992	   (CCD	   &	   MoFAR,1992).	   The	   current	   CZMP	   identifies	   57	   SAM	   sites	   and	   Areas	   of	   Species	   Concern	  
(APC)	   sites	   (ibid).	   This	   approach	   is,	   however,	   not	   adequately	   incorporated	   into	   coastal	   zone	  
management	  despite	  wide	  stakeholder	  consultation	  for	  preparation	  of	  policies,	  plans	  and	  actions.	  This	  is	  
attributed	  to	  problems	  of	  institutional	  coordination	  that	  preclude	  effective	  implementation	  of	  the	  CZMP	  
(MoENR,	  2007a)	  despite	  the	  support	  offered	  by	  laws,	  plans,	  programmes	  and	  projects	  (MoENR,	  2007a;	  
MoENR,	  2009).	  	  	  

The	  Coast	  Conservation	  Act	  (CCA)	  requires	  the	  CCD	  to	  prepare	  Coastal	  Zone	  Management	  Plans	  (CZMPs)	  
periodically	   and	   to	   request	   EIAs	   prior	   for	   development	   activities	   in	   the	   coastal	   zone	   (CCD	   &	   MoFAR,	  
1992).	  The	  current	  CZMP	  of	  2004	  (gazetted	  in	  2006)	  has	  incorporated	  relevant	  recommendations	  from	  
the	   BCAP,	   and	   identifies	   policies,	   strategies	   and	   actions	   for	   conserving	   coastal	   habitats,	   controlling	  
coastal	   water	   pollution,	   promoting	   Special	   Area	   Management,	   and	   integrating	   coastal	   fisheries	   and	  
aquaculture	  with	  coastal	  zone	  management	  (ibid).	  The	  UNDP/GEF	  project	  (2000-­‐2006)	  for	  Conservation	  
of	   Biodiversity	   through	   Integrated	   Collaborative	   Management	   in	   Rekawa,	   Ussangoda,	   and	   Kalametiya	  
Coastal	   Ecosystems	   (GEF	   ID	   802)	   carried	   out	   by	   IUCN	   sought	   to	   assist	   management	   of	   coastal	  
biodiversity	   with	   the	   participation	   of	   local	   people,	   with	   emphasis	   on	   conservation	   of	   wetlands	   and	  
turtles.	   Also	   post	   tsunami	   coastal	   rehabilitation	   is	   being	   targeted	   with	   the	   Participatory	   Coastal	   Zone	  
Restoration	   and	   Sustainable	   Management	   in	   the	   Eastern	   Province	   of	   Post-­‐Tsunami	   Sri	   Lanka	   (GEF	   ID	  
2753)	  that	  is	  ongoing.	  

Concerns	   for	   sustainable	   use	   of	   the	   fishery	   resource	   have	   been	   incorporated	   into	   laws,	   policies	   and	  
plans	  of	  the	  fishery	  sector.	  These	  include	  provisions	  in	  the	  Fisheries	  and	  Aquatic	  Resources	  Act	  No.	  2	  of	  
1996,	   and	   its	   amendments,	   to	   deal	   comprehensively	   with	   conservation	   of	   the	   fishery	   resource	   (both	  
marine	  and	  inland),	  declare	  fishery	  reserves	  where	  needed,	  and	  ensure	  sustainable	  development	  of	  the	  
industry.	  Accordingly,	  the	  National	  Fisheries	  and	  Aquaculture	  Policy	  of	  2006	  deals	  with	  environmentally	  
friendly	   management	   of	   the	   fishery	   (MoFAR,	   2006).	   The	   ADB	   and	   Government	   of	   Netherlands	   (GON)	  
funded	   Coastal	   Resources	   Management	   Project	   (CRMP)	   spanning	   2002-­‐2005	   played	   a	   major	   role	   in	  
institutional	  strengthening	  for	  managing	  coastal	  resources	  and	  for	  conduct	  of	  a	  sustainable	  marine	  and	  
coastal	  fishery.	  	  

Wetland	  biodiversity	  
Conservation	  of	  wetlands	  commenced	  with	  the	  Wetland	  Conservation	  Project(WCP	  of	   1991-­‐1997)	  carried	  
out	  by	  the	  CEA	  to	  prioritize	  wetlands	  for	  conservation	  and	  management	  (MoENR,	  2009),	  followed	  by	  the	  
Integrated	   Resource	   Management	   Project	   (IRMP)	   piloted	   at	   two	   selected	   wetlands	   during	   1998	   -­‐2002	  

                                                                                                                                                                              26
(Ibid).	   Positive	   actions	   for	   wetland	   management	   are	   the	   National	   Watershed	   Management	   Policy	   of	   2004,	  
setting	  up	  a	  Special	  Wetland	  Unit	  in	  2008	  within	  the	  CEA	  to	  oversee	  and	  coordinate	  wetland	  conservation,	  
the	   National	   Wetlands	   Policy	   and	   Strategy	   of	   2006	   (MoE	   &	   CEA,	   2006),	   and	   preparation	   of	   the	   National	  
Wetland	   Directory	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   (IUCN	   and	   CEA,	   2006).	   Development	   agencies	   responsible	   for	   land	  
reclamation	   have	   to	   consult	   The	   Wetland	   Unit	   prior	   to	   filling	   paddy	   land	   and	   obtain	   approval	   for	   any	  
development	   activity	   in	   such	   wetlands,	   and	   an	   EIA	   is	   required	   for	   clearing	  or	   filling	   of	   wetlands	   more	   than	  
4	   ha,	   and	   for	   clearing	   any	   wetland	   that	   occurs	   in	   a	   scheduled	   sensitive	   area.	   	   Six	   wetlands	   have	   been	  
declared	   Ramsar	   sites:	   namely,	   the	   Bundala	   National	   	   Park	   (1990),	   Anawilundawa	   Sanctuary	   (2001),	  
Maduganga	   Sanctuary	   (2003),	   Vankalai	   Sanctuary	   (2010),	   	   Kumana	   Wetland	   Cluster	   (2010)	   and	   the	  
Wilpattu	   Ramsar	   Wetland	   Cluster	   (2013).	   Despite	   these	   positives	   actions,	   wetland	   biodiversity	   has	  
received	  less	  attention	  than	  other	  terrestrial	  systems	  identified	  in	  the	  BCAP	  of	  1999.	  	  

Agricultural	  and	  livestock	  biodiversity	  
Agricultural	   policy	   has	   moved	   away	   from	   the	   sole	   aim	   of	   increasing	   productivity	   to	   reach	   self-­‐sufficiency	  
in	   essential	   food	   items,	   to	   the	   present	   2007	   National	   Agricultural	   Policy	   that	   takes	   into	   account	  
sustainable	  agriculture	  in	  conformity	  with	  environmental	  and	  biodiversity	  considerations,	  by	  promoting	  
integrated	   pest	   management,	   land	   management,	   adapting	   to	   climate	   change,	   and	   sustainable	   use	   of	  
genetic	   resources	   in	   compliance	   with	   Article	   15	   of	   the	   CBD	   	   (MoAAS,	   2007).This	   change	   was	   probably	  
influenced	  by	  the	  comprehensive	  National	  Agricultural	  Research	  Plan	  (NARP)	  developed	  in	  1999	  by	  CARP	  
which	   took	   into	   account	   some	   of	   the	   needs	   identified	   in	   the	   BCAP	   of	   1999	   for	   conservation	   of	   agro-­‐
biodiversity	   (MoENR,2007a;	   DoA/DEA/SLCARP,	   1999).	   The	   National	   Livestock	   Development	   Policy	  
Statement	  mentions	  conservation	  of	  native	  livestock	  genetic	  diversity	  (MoL&RCD,	  2010).	  	  

There	  have	  been	  several	  joint	  projects	  between	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (Biodiversity	  Division)	  and	  
the	  Department	  of	  Agriculture,	  which	  include	  the	  ‘in-­‐	  situ	  conservation	  of	  Crop	  Wild	  Relatives	  Project	  for	  
information	  management	  and	  enhanced	  field	  application	  in	  2004-­‐2009	  (GEF	  	  ID	  1259)18(MOENR,	  2009,	  
MoE,	  2010b),	  ‘Strengthening	  capacity	  to	  control	  the	  introduction	  and	  spread	  of	  invasive	  alien	  species	  in	  
Sri	  Lanka’(GEF	  ID	  2472),	  and	  Mainstreaming	  Agro-­‐biodiversity	  Conservation	  and	  Use	  in	  Sri	  Lankan	  Agro-­‐
ecosystems	   for	   Livelihoods	   and	   Adaptation	   to	   Climate	   Change(GEF	   ID	   4150).	   These	   are	   relatively	   new	  
projects	  and	  are	  yet	  to	  reveal	  results.	  The	  process	  used	  for	  development	  of	  the	  proposal	  for	  a	  Regional	  
UNEP/GEF	  PDF	  B	  Full	  Size	  Project	  for	  “Development	  &	  Application	  of	  Decision-­‐support	  Tools	  to	  Conserve	  
&	   Sustainably	   Use	   Genetic	   Diversity	   in	   Indigenous	   Livestock	   &	   Wild	   Relatives”	   helped	   identify	   country	  
status	  and	  needs	  in	  this	  sphere	  (GEF	  ID	  1902).	  	  

Climate	  change	  
Sri	   Lanka	   was	   a	   party	   to	   the	   Vienna	   Convention	   and	   the	   Montreal	   Amendment	   before	   ratifying	   the	  
UNFCCC	  in	  1993	  (Table	  2).	  Although	  being	  a	  developing	  non-­‐Annex	  1	  nation	  with	  no	  direct	  commitment	  
for	   reduction	   of	   emissions,	   Sri	   Lanka	   acceded	   to	   the	   Kyoto	   Protocol	   in	   September	   2002	   in	   view	   of	   the	  
potentially	   serious	   impacts	   of	   climate	   change	   on	   the	   island	   (MoENR,	   2006c).	   Sri	   Lanka	   has	   voluntarily	  
participated	  in	  CDM	  projects,	  so	  that	  the	  country	  can	  sell	  carbon	  credits	  to	  Annex	  1	  countries	  and	  is	  also	  

18
  The objectives of this project were to identify the status of wild crop relatives conservation in Sri Lanka in respect of in-situ and
ex-situ activities with the expected outputs of: Development of an information management and access system; capacity built to
undertake in-situ conservation with local communities; to review and share current experiences on conservation of crop wild
relatives at the global level; to develop a framework for an information management system with national and international features
that will support improved conservation and use of wild crop relatives.


                                                                                                                                                                         27
researching	   technologies	   for	   renewable	   energy	   through	   wind,	   solar	   and	   dendro-­‐thermal	   power.	   Sri	  
Lanka	  is	  not	  obligated	  to	  reduce	  emissions	  under	  the	  UNFCC.	  	  

A	   significant	   move	   to	   address	   climate	   change	   was	   the	   establishment	   of	   a	   Climate	   Change	   Secretariat	  
(CCS)	   in	   2010	   within	   the	   Ministry	   dealing	   with	   Environment	   to	   better	   facilitate,	   formulate	   and	  
implement	  projects	  and	  programmes	  at	  national	  level	  with	  regard	  to	  climate	  change.	  Ratification	  of	  the	  
UNFCCC	  also	  led	  to	  several	  enabling	  projects	  that	  were	  of	  significant	  value.	  

GEF	   made	   available	   to	   Sri	   Lanka	   a	   grant	   of	   US	   $110,000	   through	   UNDP	   to	   prepare	   its	   initial	   National	  
Communication	   on	   Climate	   Change	   in	   1997(GEF	   ID	   309).	   This	   Enabling	   Activity	   Project	   commenced	   its	  
activities	  in	  February	  1998	  and	  a	  national	  Steering	  Committee	  comprising	  of	  experts	  from	  different	  fields	  
was	   appointed	   to	   provide	   the	   necessary	   guidance	   and	   direction	   to	   the	   project.	   	   The	   National	  
Communication	   incorporates	   the	   updated	   (1994)	   inventory	   of	   greenhouse	   gases	   in	   Sri	   Lanka,	   the	  
potential	  measures	  to	  abate	  the	  increase	  of	  greenhouse	  gases,	  and	  the	  national	  action	  plan	  to	  address	  
Climate	  Change.	  As	  a	  prelude	  to	  the	  preparation	  of	  the	  National	  Action	  Plan	  on	  Climate	  Change	  (NAPCC),	  
the	   necessary	   background	   information	   was	   collected	   on	   the	   four	   major	   sectors:	   Energy,	   Industry,	  
Transport	  and	  Highways;	  Agriculture,	  Forestry,	  Land	  Use	  and	  Water	  Resources;	  Coastal	  Zone,	  Ports	  and	  
Fisheries;	  and	  Human	  Health,	  Human	  Settlements	  and	  Public	  Utilities	  (MoE,	  2000).	  	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  second	  
National	   Communication	   on	   Climate	   change	   was	   published	   in	   2011,	   with	   updates	   of	   greenhouse	   gas	  
emissions	   (MoE,	   2011).In	   parallel,	   the	   ADB	   assistance	   was	   provided	   to	   prepare	   a	   National	   Climate	  
Change	   Adaptation	   Strategy	   Sri	   Lanka:	   2011-­‐2016.	   By	   2012	   Sri	   Lanka	   had	   also	   developed	   a	   Climate	  
Change	   Policy	   and	   a	   process	   to	   operationalize	   the	   Clean	   Development	   Mechanism	   was	   established	   in	  
2010.	  

Many	   other	   policies	   impinge	   on	   reducing	   green-­‐house	   gasses	   and	   addressing	   climate	   change.	   Among	  
them	  are	  the	  National	  Policy	  on	  Air	  Quality	  Management	  of	  2000,	  Regulations	  on	  Mobile	  Emissions	  and	  
Fuel	  Quality	  &	  Vehicle	  Importation	  Regulations	  which	  came	  into	  effect	  in	  	  200319	  (Guneratne,	  2005),	  the	  
National	   Transport	   Policy	   of	   2008	   which	   incorporates	   statements	   to	   ensure	   environmentally	   sustainable	  
transport	  and	  the	  National	  Energy	  Policy	  and	  Strategies	  of	  Sri	  Lanka	  (2006).	  Measures	  such	  as	  phasing	  
out	  the	  use	  of	  leaded	  Petrol	  in	  2002	  and	  the	  ban	  on	  importation	  of	  two	  stroke	  three	  wheelers	  from	  1st	  
January	  2008	  have	  helped	  control	  GHGs.	  	  	  

At	   the	   institutional	   level,	   A	   Centre	   for	   Climate	   Change	   Studies	   (CCCS)	   was	   established	   in	   2000	   under	   the	  
Department	   of	   Meteorology	   to	   conduct	   research,	   monitor	   climate	   change,	   and	   provide	   the	   general	  
public	   with	   current	   information	   on	   climate	   change	   and	   allied	   issues.	   Several	   institutions	   including	   the	  
DoA,	  DEA	  TRI,	  RRI,	  CRI,	  SRI,	  NBRO,	  institutes	  dealing	  with	  water	  resources	  and	  the	  UDA	  have	  examined	  
vulnerability	   to	   climate	   change	   and	   initiated	   adaptation	   measures	   through	   institutional	   programmes	  
(MoENR,	   2010	   a,b,c,d);	   the	   CZMP	   of	   2004	   	   has	   taken	   into	   account	   sea	   level	   rise	   in	   their	   set	   back	  
standards	  (CCD,	  2006).	  	  

Leadership	   in	   Energy	   and	   Environmental	   Design	   (LEED),	   “Greening	   Sri	   Lankans	   Hotels	   Programme”,	   an	  
establishment	  of	  the	  Sri	  Lanka	  Sustainable	  Energy	  Authority	  in	  2007	  are	  some	  of	  the	  other	  initiatives	  and	  
they	  will	  reduce	  the	  Carbon	  foot	  print	  in	  the	  service	  sector.	  


19
  The National Environmental Regulations (Air, Emission, Fuel and Vehicle Importation standards) Regulation No 1 of 2000
gazetted (Gazette extraordinary No 1137/35 of June 2000)
                                                                                                                                                                      28
A	   project	   implemented	   by	   the	   Global	   Environment	   Facility/Small	   Grants	   Programme	   (GEF/SGP)	   of	   UNDP	  
Sri	  Lanka	  on	  introducing	  electric	  vehicles	  to	  the	  country	  received	  global	  recognition	  recently	  when	  it	  was	  
selected	   as	   a	   winner	   of	   the	   Lighthouse	   Projects	   Competition.	   An	   initiative	   of	   the	   United	   Nations	  
Framework	   Convention	   on	   Climate	   Change	   (UNFCCC),	   the	   competition	   awards	   projects	   that	   addresses	  
climate	  change	  and	  deliver	  social	  and	  environmental	  benefits	  to	  the	  urban	  poor	  in	  developing	  countries.	  
The	  project	  was	  also	  showcased	  at	  the	  Climate	  Change	  Conference,	  COP	  18,	  which	  took	  place	  in	  Doha,	  
Qatar	  on	  the	  4th	  of	  December	  201220.	  	  


International	  waters	  
The	   Marine	   Pollution	   Prevention	   Act	   No.	   59	   of	   1981	   (Table	   3)	   established	   the	   Marine	   Pollution	  
Prevention	  Authority	  (MPPA)	  to	  address	  the	  problem	  of	  marine	  pollution	  in	  Sri	  Lankan	  territorial	  waters.	  
The	   amended	   Act	   of	   2008	   (Effective	   from	   Jan	   2009)	   changed	   the	   name	   of	   the	   MPPA	   to	   Marine	  
Environment	  Protection	  Authority	  (MEPA)21	  and	  widened	  its	  regulation	  making	  capacity.22	  As	  the	  focal	  
point	   for	   UNCLOSS	   (ratified	   in	   1994),	   and	   MARPOL	   (ratified	   in	   1997)	   (Figure	   1),	   MEPA	   is	   working	   to	  
enforce	   the	   MPPA	   and	   enhance	   surveillance	   and	   response	   activities.	   Work	   done	   includes	   preparation	   of	  
a	  National	  Oil	  Contingency	  Plan	  (NASCOP)	  in	  1995	  for	  spills	  over	  100	  tonnes	  (MoENR,	  2007a),	  which	  was	  
revised,	  received	  Cabinet	  approval	  in	  2000,	  and	  has	  since	  undergone	  further	  change.	  Limited	  resources	  
are	   also	   available	   with	   the	   Colombo	   Port	   Authority23	   for	   responding	   to	   a	   spill	   within	   port	   or	   sheltered	  
waters.	  Further,	  A	  Regional	  Oil	  and	  Chemical	  Pollution	  Contingency	  Plan	  for	  South	  Asia	  is	  being	  prepared	  
by	   the	   South	   Asia	   Co-­‐operative	   Environmental	   Programme	   (SACEP),	   with	   the	   assistance	   of	   the	  
International	   Maritime	   Organization	   (IMO).24	   As	   a	   country	   party	   to	   the	   UNEP-­‐Global	   Programme	   of	  
Action	   for	   the	   Protection	   of	   the	   Marine	   Environment	   from	   Land	   based	   activities,	   Sri	   Lanka	   prepared	   a	  
National	   Programme	   of	   Action	   in	   2003.	   Other	   relevant	   actions	   are	   the	   India–Sri	   Lanka	   Joint	   Working	  
Group	   on	   Fisheries	   which	   is	   preparing	   a	   Memorandum	   of	   Understanding	   on	   Development	   and	  
Cooperation	  in	  the	  field	  of	  Fisheries	  	  through	  the	  Ministry	  of	  External	  Affairs.	  


Sri	  Lanka	  is	  not	  yet	  a	  signatory	  to	  the	  IMO	  Ballast	  Water	  Management	  Convention	  (which	  is	  not	  yet	  in	  
force).	   However,	   the	   potential	   problem	   of	   alien	   invasive	   species	   in	   ballast	   water	   from	   ships	   has	   been	  
recognized.	  MEPA	  is	  also	  carrying	  out	  a	  baseline	  biological	  study	  of	  ballast	  water	  at	  the	  Colombo	  port	  
and	   a	   National	   Ballast	   Water	   Strategy	   is	   under	   preparation.	   There	   is	   already	   a	   draft	   Ballast	   Water	  
Strategy	   for	   South	   Asia,	   and	   SACEP	   is	   engaged	   in	   organizing	   a	   regional	   Task	   Force	   on	   Ballast	   Water	  
Management	  (interview	  with	  MEPA).	  	  


However,	   a	   National	   Oil	   Contingency	   Plan	   was	   prepared	   by	   the	   Marine	   Pollution	   Prevention	   Authority	  
(MPPA)	  in	  1995	  and	  revised	  in	  1998	  and	  1999.	  It	  received	  Cabinet	  approval	  in	  2000	  and	  has	  undergone	  
subsequent	   amendments	   and	   limited	   resources,	   restricted	   to	   responding	   to	   a	   spill	   within	   port	   or	  
sheltered	  waters,	  are	  held	  at	  Colombo	  by	  the	  Port	  Authority25.	  
SACEP	  with	  the	  assistance	  of	  the	  IMO	  has	  also	  developed	  a	  regional	  oil	  spill	  contingency	  plan	  for	  South	  
Asia.	   	   The	   purpose	   of	   this	   Contingency	   Plan	   is	   to	   establish	   a	   mechanism	   for	   mutual	   assistance,	   under	  

20
  http://www.lk.undp.org/content/srilanka/en/home/presscenter/articles/2012/12/30/introducing-electric-vehicles-to-sri-
lanka-receives-global-recognition/

21
   The main partners of the MPPA are NARA, Sri Lanka Ports Authority, Ceylon Petroleum Corporation, Sri Lanka Navy, Air Force,
    Army and Police, Department of Meteorology, Coast Conservation Department, Local Authorities, experts in universities and
    the Dock Yard (MoENR, 2006a).
22
   http://www.mepa.gov.lk/web/
23
    Source: http://www.itopf.com/_assets/country/srilanka.pdf
24
    Source:http://www.sacep.org/pdf/Action%20Plan%20and%20Strategies%20-%20Oil%20spill%20contingency%20plan.pdf
25
   http://www.itopf.com/_assets/country/srilanka.pdf
                                                                                                                                                                     29
which	   the	   competent	   national	   Authorities	   of	   Bangladesh,	   India,	   Maldives,	   Pakistan	   and	   Sri	   Lanka	   will	   co-­‐
operate	   in	   order	   to	   co-­‐ordinate	   and	   integrate	   their	   response	   to	   marine	   pollution	   incidents	   either	  
affecting	   or	   likely	   to	   affect	   the	   territorial	   sea,	   coasts	   and	   related	   interests	   of	   one	   or	   more	   of	   these	  
countries,	  or	  to	  incidents	  surpassing	  the	  available	  response	  capacity	  of	  each	  of	  these	  countries	  alone26.	  	  
Thus,	  although	  the	  relevant	  plans	  and	  legislation	  are	  developed	  and	  adopted,	  it	  is	  believed	  that	  capacity	  
and	   resources	   may	   not	   be	   sufficient	   to	   successfully	   mitigate	   a	   major	   spill	   or	   serious	   marine	   pollution	  
incident	  that	  will	  drastically	  impact	  the	  marine	  waters	  surrounding	  the	  island	  state	  
Baseline	   information	   is	   also	   lacking	   for	   protecting	   	   shared	   waters	   in	   the	   Palk	   Strait	   and	   the	   Gulf	   of	  
Mannar,	  which	  are	  critical	  habitats	  shared	  by	  Sri	  Lanka	  and	  India	  	  Under	  the	  regional	  Bay	  of	  Bengal	  Large	  
Marine	   Ecosystem	   (BOBLME)	   Project	   GEF	   ID	   1252)	   bi-­‐national	   stakeholder	   consultations	   are	   undertaken	  
on	  sustaining	  the	  Gulf	  of	  Mannar	  Ecosystem	  and	  its	  Resources	  (BOBLME	  2011).	  	  


Persistent	  Organic	  Pollutants	  (POPs)	  
The	   Ministry	   dealing	   with	   Environment	   services	   the	   Basel	   Convention	   and	   the	   Stockholm	   (POPs)	  
Convention,	   ratified	   in	   1992	   and	   2005	   by	   Sri	   Lanka	   respectively	   (Table	   2).	   POPs	   pesticides	   have	   never	  
been	  manufactured	  in	  Sri	  Lanka,	  and	  those	  that	  were	  imported	  for	  use	  have	  either	  been	  banned	  or	  not	  
used	   for	   the	   last	   fifteen	   years	   (UNEP/GEF/MoE,	   n.d.).	   While	   there	   are	   no	   special	   laws	   for	   pollution	  
control,	   the	   NEA	   amendment	   of	   198827	   (Table	   3)	   	   addresses	   this	   by	   its	   provisions	   for	   EPL	   and	   EIA	  
procedures,	  and	  some	  aspects	  are	  covered	  under	  the	  Nuisances	  Ordinance,	  Police	  Ordinance	  and	  laws	  
applicable	  to	  LAs	  (Guneratne,	  2005).	  The	  Control	  of	  Pesticides	  Act	  No	  33	  of	  1980,	  and	  its	  Amendment	  
Act	   No.	   6	   of	   1994	   which	   deals	   with	   controlling	   the	   import,	   use,	   transport,	   storage	   and	   disposal	   of	  
pesticides	  in	  the	  country,	  has	  banned	  almost	  all	  of	  the	  POP	  pesticides	  in	  Sri	  Lanka,	  paving	  the	  way	  for	  
implementation	   of	   the	   Stockholm	   Convention	   (UNEP/GEF/MoE,	   n.d.).	   There	   are	   many	   other	   laws	   (Table	  
3),	  policies	  (Table	  4)	  plans	  and	  activities	  that	  address	  reduction	  of	  POPs	  in	  the	  country.	  Among	  these	  are	  
the	  Solid	  Waste	  Management	  Strategy	  of	  2000,	  and	  measures	  to	  manage	  hazardous	  wastes.	  	  

Key	   activities	   for	   control	   of	   POPs	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   were	   enabled	   by	   the	   UNDP/GEF	   funded	   Persistent	   Organic	  
Pollutants	  (POPs)	  Project	  spanning	  2002-­‐	  2006	  (GEF	  ID	  1777),	  leading	  to	  the	  establishment	  of	  the	  POPs	  
unit	  at	  the	  MOE	  in	  2002	  which	  carried	  out	  extensive	  awareness	  creation	  among	  the	  general	  public	  on	  
POPs	   and	   preparation	   of	   a	   National	   Implementation	   Plan	   (NIP),	   a	   preliminary	   inventory	   of	   all	   PCB	  
containing	   equipment	   in	   the	   country	   and	   three	   separate	   national	   inventories	   for	   POPs	   pesticides,	  
polychlorinated	   biphenyls	   (PCBs)	   and	   unintentionally	   produced	   Dioxins	   and	   Furans.	   The	   POPs	   project	  
prepared	   the	   groundwork	   required	   to	   implement	   the	   Stockholm	   Convention	   in	   Sri	   Lanka.	   Due	   to	  
institutional	   reorganizing	   POPs	   activities	   are	   now	   carried	   out	   by	   the	   Air	   Resources	   Management	   &	  
International	  Relations	  Division.	  

Land	  degradation	  
Land	  degradation	  has	  been	  a	  major	  environmental	  problem	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  since	  colonial	  times,	  and	  more	  
than	  39	  laws	  address	  various	  aspects	  of	  land	  degradation	  (MoENR,	  2006c).	  Of	  these	  several	  play	  a	  major	  


26
     http://www.sacep.org/pdf/Action%20Plan%20and%20Strategies%20-%20Oil%20spill%20contingency%20plan.pdf
27
     Under the NEA amendment Act No.53 of 2000, the total prohibition of discharging waste has been changed to prescribed
        activities, and the earlier license awarded for I year is extended to 3 years. However, this has also brought in a criminal
        liability for those who violate the license, and is the pollution is continued the penalty can be closing down of operations.


                                                                                                                                                                         30
role	  (Table	  3).	  Recognizing	  the	  seriousness	  of	  this	  problem	  and	  the	  threat	  of	  salinization	  in	  the	  Dry	  Zone,	  
Sri	   Lanka	   signed	   and	   ratified	   the	   UNCCD	   in	   1995	   and	   1998	   respectively.	   Since	   then,	   the	   Natural	  
Resources	   Division	   of	   the	   MoE&RE	   is	   responsible	   for	   supervising	   obligations	   under	   UNCCD.	   As	   a	   Party	   to	  
the	  UNCCD,	  Sri	  Lanka	  prepared	  the	  National	  Action	  Programme	  (NAP)	  of	  2002	  (GEF	  ID	  4829)	  to	  address	  
land	  degradation	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  This	  Plan	  identified	  the	  development	  programmes,	  activities	  and	  projects	  
required	  to	  meet	  the	  commitments	  under	  the	  UNCCD.	  This	  could	  not	  be	  implemented	  holistically	  due	  to	  
funding	   constraints	   -­‐	   as	   experienced	   by	   several	   other	   countries	   of	   South	   Asia.	   This	   is	   now	   being	  
addressed	   by	   aligning	   it	   with	   the	   10	   year	   strategy	   for	   the	   UNCCP	   to	   combat	   land	   degradation	   in	   the	  
country.	  A	  further	  impediment	  was	  that	  while	  a	  Land	  Use	  Policy	  was	  initiated	  in	  parallel	  in	  2002,	  this	  was	  
in	   draft	   form	   until	   it	   received	   cabinet	   approval	   in	   2007.	   This	   delay	   affected	   efficient	   use	   of	   the	   land	  
resource	  in	  the	  country	  during	  this	  time	  (MoENR,	  2007c).	  

Many	  other	  polices	  also	  impact	  on	  use	  of	  the	  land	  resource	  (Table	  4),	  chiefly,	  the	  National	  Agricultural	  
Policy	   of	   2007	   and	   the	   National	   Policy	   on	   Sand	   for	   the	   Construction	   Industry	   of	   2005.	   Several	   cross-­‐
sectoral	   plans	   and	   strategies	   such	   as	   the	   NEAP	   (Caring	   for	   the	   Environment	   2003-­‐2008),	   the	   Biodiversity	  
Action	  Plan	  of	  1999	  and	  the	  Haritha	  Lanka	  Action	  Plan	  also	  address	  various	  aspects	  of	  land	  degradation.	  	  

Some	   key	   projects	   for	   land	   degradation	   commenced	   in	   the	   1990s,	   such	   as	   the	   Upper	   Watershed	  
Management	   Project	   28effective	   from	   1998	   for	   7	   years	   and	   the	  Landslide	   Hazard	   Mapping	   Project	   which	  
commenced	   in	   1994	   to	   promote	   Optimal	   Land	   Use	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   with	   particular	   Application	   to	   Land	  
Degradation	  &	  Plantation	  Industries.	  More	  recently,	  there	  have	  been	  several	  soil	  rehabilitation	  and	  crop	  
diversification	   programmes	   in	   plantations	   to	   control	   and	   arrest	   soil	   erosion	   and	   improve	   soil	   water	  
storage	   and	   water	   resources,	   and	   land	   titling	   projects	   to	   meet	   the	   long-­‐term	   objective	   of	   increasing	  
economic	  productivity	  of	  the	  island’s	  land	  resource	  (MoENR,	  2006c).	  	  	  

Stemming	   from	   the	   NAP,	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Environment	   has	   prioritized	   several	   actions	   to	   combat	   land	  
degradation	   in	   the	   country	   with	   GEF/UNEP	   funds	   in	   2012.	   One	   was	   “The	   rehabilitation	   of	   degraded	  
agricultural	  lands	  in	  the	  Kandy,	  Badulla	  and	  Nuwara	  Eliya	  districts	  of	  the	  Central	  Highlands	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.	  
The	  MOE	  was	  also	  actively	  involved	  in	  the	  preparation	  of	  the	  South	  Asia	  Sub-­‐Region	  Action	  Programme	  
(SA-­‐SRAP)	   200429	   for	   the	   south	   Asian	   region	   with	   participation	   of	   international	   and	   national	   experts.	   But	  
implementation	  of	  this	  is	  also	  on	  hold	  for	  lack	  of	  financing.	  	  

The	   Land	   Use	   Policy	   Planning	   Department	   and	   the	   Land	   Commissioner	   General’s	   Department	   play	   a	   key	  
role	   in	   land	   management	   planning.	   Many	   other	   agencies	   such	   as	   the	   Natural	   Resources	   Management	  
Centre	   of	   the	   Department	   of	   Agriculture	   (DOA),the	   	   Department	   of	   Export	   Agriculture	   (DEA),	   The	  
Ministry	   of	   Plantation	   Industries,	   the	   Mahaweli	   Authority	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   (MASL)	   the	   Hadabima	   Authority	  
and	   the	   Provincial	   Departments	   of	   Agriculture	   are	   actively	   engaged	   in	   various	   soil	   and	   water	  
conservation	  measures	  (MoENR,	  2007c).	  	  The	  Department	  of	  Forests	  contributes	  to	  the	  control	  of	  soil	  
erosion	  and	  water	  conservation	  by	  implementing	  the	  Forestry	  Master	  Plan	  of	  1995	  (MALF,	  1995).	  


28
  Mainly funded by the Asian Development Bank (ADB)
29
  The five programmes proposed under the SA-SRAP programme were: Early warning system, integrated ecosystem management,
     Information network, Capacity building and resource mobilization and partnership building for the south Asia Sub- Region to
     achieve the requirement of UNCCD. However, this programme was not implemented due to funding constraints.




                                                                                                                                                                         31
The	   thematic	   assessment	   on	   land	   degradation	   of	   the	   NCSA	   Project	   (GEF	   ID	   2417)	   found	   that	   main	  
capacity	   constraints	   underlying	   land	   degradation	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   were	   weak	   coordination	   and	  
communication	   among	   institutions/agencies,	   the	   lack	   of	   a	   proper	   coordination	   mechanism/body	   and	  
poor	  private	  sector	  involvement.	  The	  lack	  of	  awareness	  about	  the	  NAP	  on	  the	  part	  of	  senior	  officers	  in	  
different	  government	  agencies	  and	  private	  institutions	  was	  found	  to	  impede	  implementing	  the	  activities	  
of	  NAP	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  (MoENR,	  2007c).




                                                                                                                                                        32
Annex	  1:	  References	  

     1. Bay	  of	  Bengal	  Large	  Marine	  Ecosystem	  Programme	  (BOBLME),	  2011.First	  Bi-­‐lateral	  consultation
         meeting	  on	  Gulf	  of	  Mannar	  Ecosystem,	  05	  -­‐06	  Sep	  2011,	  Rameshwaram,	  India.	  BOBLME-­‐2011-­‐
         Ecology-­‐21.
     2. Central	  Bank	  of	  Sri	  Lanka	  (CB),	  2011.	  Annual	  Report	  2011.	  Colombo,	  Central	  Bank	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.
     3. Coast	  Conservation	  Department	  (CCD),	  2006.	  Sri	  Lanka	  Coastal	  Zone	  Management	  Plan	  —	  2004,
         Amended	  under	  the	  Section	  12(5)	  of	  the	  Coast	  Conservation	  Act	  No.	  57	  of	  1981,	  Government
         Gazette	  Notification	  No.	  1,429/11,	  24th	  of	  January	  2006.	  Department	  of	  Government	  Printing,
         Sri	  Lanka.
     4. Coast	  Conservation	  Department	  and	  Ministry	  of	  Fisheries	  and	  Aquatic	  Resources	  (CCD	  and
         MoFAR),	  1992.	  Coastal	  2000:	  Recommendations	  for	  a	  Resource	  Management	  Strategy	  for	  Sri
         Lanka's	  Coastal	  Region.	  Eds;	  S.	  Olsen,	  D.	  Sadacharan,	  J.I.	  Samarakoon,	  A.T.	  White,	  H.J.M.
         Wickremeratne	  and	  M.S.	  Wijeratne.
     5. Department	  of	  Agriculture/	  Department	  of	  Export	  Agriculture/Sri	  Lanka	  Council	  for	  Agricultural
         Research	  Policy	  (DOA/DEA/SLCARP),	  1999.	  	  Agriculture	  Research	  Plan	  of	  the	  Ministry	  of
         Agriculture	  and	  Lands	  2000-­‐2008.	  Ministry	  of	  Agriculture	  and	  Lands,	  Sri	  Lanka.
     6. Department	  of	  National	  Planning	  and	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Finance	  and	  Planning	  (DoNP	  and	  MoFP),
         2010.	  Sri	  Lanka	  the	  emerging	  wonder	  of	  Asia.	  Mahinda	  chintanavision	  for	  the	  future,	  The
         Development	  Policy	  Framework,	  Government	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  Department	  of	  National	  Planning	  and
         the	  Ministry	  of	  Finance	  and	  Planning.
     7. Department	  of	  Wild	  Life	  Conservation	  (DWLC),	  2000.	  The	  National	  Wildlife	  Policy,	  Department
         of	  Wild	  Life	  Conservation,	  Sri	  Lanka.
     8. Environmental	  Foundation	  Limited	  (EFL),	  1993.	  National	  Environmental	  Act(No	  47	  of	  1980	  &	  56
         of	  1988)	  complete	  with	  all	  regulations	  (unofficial	  version)	  2nd	  edn,	  1993.	  Environmental
         Foundation	  Limited,	  Sri	  Lanka.
     9. Environmental	  Foundation	  Limited	  (EFL),	  2006.	  Your	  environmental	  rights	  and	  responsibilities,
         2006.	  A	  handbook	  for	  Sri	  Lanka,	  Environmental	  Foundation	  Limited.
     10. Forest	  Department	  (FD),	  2012.	  Sri	  Lanka	  REDD+	  Readiness	  Preparation	  Proposal	  for	  the	  UN-­‐
         REDD	  Programme,	  2012.	  Forest	  Department,	  Sri	  Lanka.	  (Final	  draft).
     11. Guneratne,	  C.,	  2005.	  International	  Encyclopaedia	  of	  Laws:	  Sri	  Lanka.	  Gen	  edn.	  Prof.	  R	  Blanpain,
         Kluwer	  Law	  International.
     12. International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Nature	  (IUCN),	  1994.	  Dellawa	  Conservation	  Forest,	  A
         Project	  of	  the	  Forest	  Department	  of	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Agriculture,	  Lands	  and	  Forestry,	  1994.
         International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Nature.	  (Unpublished).
     13. International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Nature(IUCN),	  2002.	  Part	  Four:	  Sri	  Lanka	  in	  Biodiversity
         Planning	  in	  Asia:	  A	  review	  of	  the	  National	  Biodiversity	  Strategies	  and	  Action	  Plans(NBSAPs),
         Prepared	  by	  J.	  Carew-­‐Reid.	  IUCN,	  Gland,	  Switzerland	  and	  Cambridge,	  UK.
     14. International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Natureand	  Central	  Environmental	  Authority	  (IUCN	  &
         CEA),	  2006.	  National	  Wetland	  Directory	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  2006.	  Central	  Environmental	  Authority,
         Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka.
     15. International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Natureand	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural
         Resources	  (IUCN	  &	  MoENR),	  2007.	  The	  2007	  Red	  List	  ofThreatenedFauna	  and	  Flora	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,


                                                                                                                                              33
    2007.	  The	  World	  Conservation	  Union	  and	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,	  
    Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka.	  
16. International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Natureand	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural
    Resources	  (IUCN	  &	  MoENR),	  2007.	  The	  2007	  Red	  List	  ofThreatenedFauna	  and	  Flora	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,
    2007.	  The	  World	  Conservation	  Union	  and	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,
    Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka.
17. International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Nature/	  Food	  and	  Agriculture	  Organization/	  Forest
    Department(IUCN/FAO/FD),	  1997.	  Designing	  an	  optimum	  protected	  areas	  system	  for	  Sri	  Lanka’s
    natural	  forests	  (I),	  1997.	  Sri	  Lanka	  Forest	  Department.	  (Unpublished).
18. Ministry	  of	  Agriculture	  and	  Agrarian	  Services	  (MoAAS),	  2007.	  National	  Agricultural	  Policy	  for
    Food	  and	  Export,	  Agricultural	  Crops	  and	  Floriculture,	  2007.	  Ministry	  of	  Agriculture	  and	  Agrarian
    Services.
19. Ministry	  of	  Agriculture,	  Lands	  and	  Forestry	  (MALF),	  1995.	  Sri	  Lanka	  Forestry	  Sector	  Master	  Plan:
    National	  Forest	  Policy,	  and	  executive	  summary,	  FSDD	  of	  MALF,	  Battaramulla,	  Sri	  Lanka.
20. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MoE),	  2010c.	  Sector	  Vulnerability	  Profile	  for	  Agriculture	  and	  fisheries:
    supplementary	  document	  to	  the	  National	  Climate	  Change	  Adaptation	  Strategy	  2011-­‐2016.
    Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
21. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MoE),	  2010d.	  Sector	  Vulnerability	  Profile	  for	  Water:	  supplementary
    document	  to	  the	  National	  Climate	  Change	  Adaptation	  Strategy	  2011-­‐2016.	  Ministry	  of
    Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
22. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MOE),	  2000.	  National	  Report	  on	  Desertification/Land	  Degradation	  in
    Sri	  Lanka.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
23. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MoE),	  2010a.	  Sector	  Vulnerability	  Profile	  for:	  Urban	  Development,
    Human	  Settlements	  and	  Economic	  Infrastructure:	  	  supplementary	  document	  to	  the	  National
    Climate	  Change	  Adaptation	  Strategy	  2011-­‐2016.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
24. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MoE),	  2010b.	  Sector	  Vulnerability	  Profile	  for:	  Biodiversity	  and
    Ecosystem	  Services:	  	  supplementary	  document	  to	  the	  National	  Climate	  Change	  Adaptation
    Strategy	  2011-­‐2016.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
25. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MoE),	  2011.	  Second	  National	  Communication	  on	  Climate	  Change
    submitted	  to	  the	  UNFCCC	  secretariat,	  2011.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
26. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MoE),	  2012.	  The	  National	  Red	  List	  2012	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  Conservation
    Status	  of	  the	  Fauna	  and	  Flora.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka,	  viii,	  pp.	  476.
27. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Department	  of	  National	  Botanic	  Gardens	  (MOE	  and	  DNBG),	  2012b.
    National	  Red	  List	  2012	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  Conservation	  status	  of	  the	  flora	  and	  fauna,	  	  	  Biodiversity
    Secretariat	  of	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  National	  Herbarium,	  Department	  of	  National
    Botanic	  Gardens.
28. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MOE),	  2003.	  National	  Action	  Programme	  for
    Combating	  Land	  Degradation	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources.
29. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2003.	  Caring	  for	  the	  Environment
    2003-­‐2007	  -­‐	  Path	  to	  sustainable	  development,	  with	  the	  2003	  National	  Environmental	  Policy	  and
    Strategies.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,	  Battaramulla,	  Sri	  Lanka.
30. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2002.	  State	  of	  the	  Environment	  in	  Sri
    Lanka:	  a	  National	  Report	  Prepared	  for	  the	  South	  Asian	  Association	  for	  Regional	  Cooperation,
    2002.	  	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,	  Sri	  Lanka.
                                                                                                                                                34
31. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2002.	  State	  of	  the	  Environment	  in	  Sri
    Lanka:	  a	  National	  Report	  Prepared	  for	  the	  South	  Asian	  Association	  for	  Regional	  Cooperation,
    2002.	  	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,	  Sri	  Lanka.
32. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2006a.	  Baseline	  Appraisal	  Report	  for
    the	  National	  Capacity	  Needs	  Self-­‐Assessment	  Project,	  2006.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and
    Natural	  Resources,	  Sri	  Lanka.
33. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2006b.	  Portfolio	  of	  Strategic
    Conservation	  Sites/Protected	  Area	  Gap	  Analysis	  in	  Sri	  Lanka,	  2006.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and
    Natural	  Resources,	  Sri	  Lanka.	  (Unpublished).
34. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2006c.	  The	  National	  Global
    Environmental	  Facility	  Strategy	  For	  Sri	  Lanka,	  2006.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural
    Resources,	  Sri	  Lanka.
35. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2006d.	  Workshop	  report	  on	  capacity
    building	  needs	  to	  ensure	  benefits	  from	  providing	  access	  to	  genetic	  resources,	  2006.	  Ministry	  of
    Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,	  Sri	  Lanka.	  (Unpublished).
36. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2007a.	  Thematic	  Assessment	  Report
    on	  biodiversity	  for	  the	  National	  Capacity	  Needs	  self	  Assessment	  for	  global	  environmental
    management,	  2007.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,	  	  Battaramulla,	  Sri	  Lanka.
37. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2007b.	  Thematic	  Assessment	  Report
    on	  climate	  change	  for	  the	  National	  Capacity	  Needs	  self	  Assessment	  for	  global	  environmental
    management,	  2007.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,	  	  Battaramulla,	  Sri	  Lanka.
38. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2007c.	  Thematic	  Assessment	  Report
    on	  Land	  Degradation	  for	  the	  National	  Capacity	  Needs	  self	  Assessment	  for	  Global	  Environmental
    Management,	  2007.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,	  Battaramulla,	  Sri	  Lanka.
39. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2007d.	  Capacity	  Assessment	  and
    Action	  Plan	  for	  Developing	  Capacity	  for	  Compliance	  with	  Global	  Conventions	  on	  Biodiversity,
    Climate	  Change	  and	  Land	  Degradation:	  Report	  of	  the	  NCSA	  Sri	  Lanka.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment
    and	  Natural	  Resources,	  Battaramulla,	  Sri	  Lanka.
40. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2008.	  Caring	  for	  the	  Environment:
    Path	  to	  Sustainable	  Development,	  Action	  Plan,	  2008-­‐2012.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural
    Resources,	  Battaramulla,	  Sri	  Lanka.
41. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2009.	  Fourth	  Country	  Report	  to	  the
    Convention	  on	  Biological	  Diversity.	  Prepared	  by	  J.	  D.	  S.	  Dela.	  (Unpublished)
42. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  and	  Bio	  Diversity	  Secretariat	  (MoENR	  and	  BDS),
    2007.	  Biodiversity	  Conservation	  in	  Sri	  Lanka:	  a	  framework	  for	  action:	  Addendum,	  2007.	  Ministry
    of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources/	  Bio	  Diversity	  Secretariat,	  Sri	  Lanka.
43. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  and	  the	  Central	  Environmental	  Authority	  (MoE
    &	  CEA),	  2006.	  National	  Wetland	  Policy	  and	  Strategy,	  2006.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural
    Resources	  and	  Central	  Environmental	  Authority,	  Sri	  Lanka.
44. Ministry	  of	  Finance	  and	  Planning	  (MoFP),	  n.d.,	  Randora	  National	  Infrastructure	  Development
    Programme.	  Ministry	  of	  Finance	  and	  Planning,	  Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka.
45. Ministry	  of	  Fisheries	  and	  Aquatic	  Resources	  (MoFAR),	  2006.	  The	  National	  Fisheries	  and
    Aquaculture	  Policy	  of	  2006.
                                                                                                                                       35
46. Ministry	  of	  Forestry	  and	  Environment	  (MOFE),	  1999a.	  Biodiversity	  conservation	  in	  Sri	  Lanka:	  a
    framework	  for	  action,	  1999.	  Ministry	  of	  Forestry	  and	  Environment,	  Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka.
47. Ministry	  of	  Forestry	  and	  Environment	  (MoFE),	  2000.	  The	  National	  Strategy	  for	  Solid	  Waste
    Management,	  2000.	  Ministry	  of	  Forestry	  and	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
48. Ministry	  of	  Forestry	  and	  Environment	  (MoFE),	  n.d.,	  National	  Environmental	  Action	  Plan	  (1998-­‐
    2001).	  Ministry	  of	  Forestry	  and	  Environment,	  Battaramulla,	  Sri	  Lanka.
49. Ministry	  of	  Highways	  and	  Road	  Development/Road	  Development	  Authority	  (MoH&RD/RDA),
    2007.	  The	  National	  Road	  Master	  Plan	  (2007-­‐2017)	  of	  2007.	  Road	  Development	  Authority,
    Battaramulla,	  Sri	  Lanka.

50. Ministry	  of	  Livestock	  and	  Rural	  Community	  Development	  (MoL	  &	  RCD),	  2010.	  National	  Livestock
    Development	  Policy	  Statement,	  2010.	  Accessed	  27	  October	  2010,
    <http://www.livestock.gov.lk/liveenglish/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=58&it
    emid=141>
51. National	  Council	  for	  Sustainable	  Development	  and	  the	  Presidential	  Secretariat	  (NCSD	  and	  PS),
    2009.	  National	  Action	  Plan	  for	  the	  Haritha	  Lanka	  Programme,	  National	  Council	  for	  Sustainable
    Development	  and	  the	  Presidential	  Secretariat,	  Colombo	  Sri	  Lanka.
52. National	  Physical	  Planning	  Department	  and	  Ministry	  of	  Urban	  Development	  and	  Sacred	  Area
    Development	  (NPPD	  and	  MUDSAD),	  2007.	  Sri	  Lanka	  in	  2030:	  	  Guide	  to	  urban	  physical
    infrastructure	  development	  and	  environmental	  conservation,	  2007.	  National	  Physical	  Planning
    Department,	  Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka.
53. Institute	  of	  Policy	  Studies/National	  Council	  for	  Economic	  Development/United	  Nations
    Development	  Programme	  (IPS/	  NCED/UNDP),	  2010.	  Millennium	  Development	  Goals	  Country
    Report	  2008/2009,	  2010.	  Institute	  of	  Policy	  Studies,	  Colombo.




                                                                                                                                    36
          TECHNICAL	  DOCUMENT	  B:	  

Global	  Environmental	  Benefits	  Assessment	  




                                                        37
1. Country	  Context

Democratic	  Socialist	  Republic	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	                    Table	  1:	  Sri	  Lanka	  -­‐	  Vital	  Statistics	  
a	   small	   island	   state	   in	   the	   Indian	   Ocean,	  
                                                                                Indian	  ocean	  (latitude/longitude)	                          5°55ʹ′-­‐	  9°50ʹ′	  N	  	  
by	   virtue	   of	   its	   geo-­‐positioning	   was	   a	   port	  
                                                                                                                                                   /79°42ʹ′	  -­‐	  81°53ʹ′E	  
of	   call	   on	   the	   ancient	   trade	   routes	                   Size	  	                                                         65,610	  Sq.km	  
between	  China	  and	  the	  Middle	  East.	  	  The	                  Maximum	  Length	  and	  width	                                435km	  /	  240km	  
existence	  of	  natural	  commodities	  such	  as	                       Elevation	  Zones	                                               3	  
spices	  and	  gems	  resulted	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  too	                (coast,	  lowlands,	  highlands)	  
becoming	   a	   valuable	   trade	   hub.	   These	                      Main	  Climatic	  Zones	                                        3	  
trade	   links	   coupled	   with	   its	   close	                        (wet,	  dry,	  intermediate)	  
proximity	   to	   the	   Indian	   subcontinent	   has	                  Agro-­‐Climatic	  Zones	                                         46	  
                                                                                                                                                                0
shaped	   its	   people,	   culture	   and	                                Average	  Annual	  mean	  surface	  Temperature	  	          28	  –	  32 	  C	  
                                                                                Annual	  Rainfall	  (range	  dry	  –	  wet)	                 1750-­‐	  5000mm	  
relationships.	   Sri	   Lanka	   is	   a	   multi-­‐
                                                                                Provinces	                                                        9	  
religious,	   multi	   ethnic	   country	   and	   this	  
                                                                                Population	                                                       20	  Million	  
diversity	   is	   emulated	   in	   the	   ecological	                   Races	   (Sinhalese,	   Tamil,	   Muslims,	   Burghers,	      5+	  
features	   and	   natural	   resources	   that	   can	                   Veddhas,	  other)	  
be	  found	  on	  the	  island.	  	                                       Religions	   (Buddhism,	   Hinduism,	   Islam,	                4+	  
                                                                                Christianity,	  other)	  	  
A	  30	  year	  armed	  conflict	  that	  divided	  the	                Source:	  MOE	  2011	  
country	   geographically,	   ethnically	   and	  
politically,	  was	  brought	  to	  an	  end	  in	  May	  2009.	  	  The	  end	  of	  war	  saw	  a	  new	  revival	  and	  vitality	  of	  the	  Sri	  
Lankan	  economy	  with	  greater	  opportunities	  for	  businesses	  such	  as	  tourism	  that	  remained	  constrained	  
and	   stunted	   over	   3.5	   decades.	   Even	   throughout	   the	   time	   of	   war,	   terrorist	   attacks,	   and	   unrest,	   the	  
consistent	  policy	  of	  an	  open	  economy,	  with	  the	  private	  sector	  at	  helm	  resulted	  in	  an	  average	  5%	  growth	  
rate	  per	  annum.	  The	  ambition	  is	  now	  is	  to	  move	  up	  to	  8.5%	  per	  year	  (CB	  2011).	  	  In	  order	  to	  achieve	  this,	  
the	   Government	   envisions	   a	   strategy	   of	   infrastructure	   development	   especially	   to	   combat	   the	   regional	  
disparities	  of	  growth	  and	  development	  and	  attracting	  investment	  in	  business	  ventures.	  In	  “Sri	  Lanka,	  the	  
Emerging	   Wonder	   of	   Asia”	   the	   government	   spells	   out	   the	   development	   policy	   framework30,	   of	   the	  
Government	  up	  to	  2016	  and	  it	  highlights	  the	  Presidents	  mission	  of	  transforming	  the	  island	  state	  into	  a	  
strategically	  important	  economic	  centre	  of	  the	  world	  (DoNP	  and	  MoFP,	  2010).	  

Sri	  Lanka	  has	  now	  also	  moved	  up	  in	  its	  economic	  ranks	  to	  become	  a	  low	  middle	  income	  country	  with	  a	  
per	   capita	   income	   of	   USD	   2836	   in	   2011(CB	   2011).	   The	   expansion	   of	   the	   economy	   has	   enabled	   the	  
progressive	  reduction	  of	  unemployment	  as	  well	  as	  the	  poverty.	  However	  the	  economic	  wealth	  has	  not	  
spread	   equitably	   –	   spatially	   or	   among	   its	   citizens.	   Much	   of	   the	   growth	   and	   wealth	   is	   accumulated	   in	   the	  
western	  province	  that	  generate	  45%	  of	  the	  Gross	  Domestic	  Product	  (GDP).The	  Northern	  Province	  due	  to	  
the	  armed	  conflict	  and	  restricted	  access	  in	  the	  area,	  has	  the	  lowest	  percentage	  (3.4%)	  of	  GDP	  while	  the	  
Uva	   Province	   where	   poverty	   has	   persisted	   and	   economic	   opportunities	   are	   restricted	   very	   much	   to	  
primary	  agriculture	  products	  also	  has	  a	  low	  contribution	  to	  GDP	  (4.5%)	  (Ibid).	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  main	  economic	  
drivers	  for	  2011	  have	  been	  the	  Service	  and	  industrial	  sectors,	  while	  highest	  foreign	  exchange	  earners	  are	  
tourism,	  remittances	  and	  tea.	  	  This	  shows	  a	  gradual	  change	  over	  time	  from	  an	  agriculture	  and	  plantation	  
industry	  based	  economy	  to	  a	  more	  diversified	  economy.	  

In	   terms	   of	   people,	  the	   poverty	   head	   count	   index	   has	   reduced	   from	   15.2%	   in	   2006/7	   to	   8.9%	   in	   2009/10	  
but	   the	   income	   inequality	   measured	   by	   the	   Gini	   Coefficient	   is	   0.49	   indicating	   a	   very	   high	   income	  
inequality	  between	  the	  poor	  and	  the	  rich	  (DCS	  2011).	  In	  fact	  in	  the	  period	  of	  2002	  –	  2009	  the	  lowest	  and	  

30
 The present government’s framework for development is popularly known as the Mahinda Chinthana and is
mentioned as such in this report in several instances.
                                                                                                                                                                             38
highest	  income	  deciles	  have	  shown	  negative	  growth	  rate	  that	  underscores	  the	  income	  inequality	  issue.	  
The	  poor	  tend	  to	  rely	  on	  agriculture	  and	  fisheries	  related	  income	  that	  is	  not	  a	  growing	  sector	  in	  terms	  of	  
its	  contribution	  to	  the	  GDP.	  	  	  

Sri	  Lanka	  is	  used	  as	  a	  beacon	  of	  how	  social	  and	  welfare	  policies,	  used	  consecutively	  over	  a	  long	  period	  of	  
time	   can	   bring	   about	   remarkable	   achievements	   in	   health	   and	   education,	   despite	   being	   a	   low	   income	  
country.	  The	  high	  levels	  of	  social	  development	  are	  reflected	  in	  the	  millennium	  development	  goal	  targets	  
that	   the	   country	   is	   on	   track	   to	   achieving.	   This	   is	   largely	   a	   result	   of	   past	   investments,	   particularly	   the	   free	  
education	   and	   health	   provision,	   which,	   despite	   its	   cost	   to	   the	   state	   provided	   equitable	   access	   and	  
opportunities	   for	   social	   mobility	   and	   moving	   out	   of	   poverty.	   Sri	   Lanka	   has	   achieved	   high	   levels	   of	  
reducing	  infant	  and	  maternal	  mortality	  and	  combating	  communicable	  diseases.	  However,	  these	  national	  
level	   indicators	   mask	   regional	   disparities	   and	   challenges	   in	   the	   delivery	   of	   services	   and	   quality	   of	  
services.	   At	   present	   the	   state	   investments	   into	   these	   sectors	   are	   well	   below	   the	   globally	   accepted	   levels	  
(1.4%	   as	   opposed	   to	   the	   global	   standard	   of	   4.5%	   of	   GDP	   on	   education	   and	   1.9%	   as	   opposed	   to	   5%	   of	  
GDP	  on	  health)	  (CB	  2011	  and	  WB	  data	  online).This	  raises	  issues	  of	  the	  ability	  to	  provide	  and	  maintain	  
quality	  health	  and	  education	  services	  across	  the	  country.	  

As	   a	   result	   of	   the	   better	   social	   conditions,	   Sri	   Lanka’s	   population	   is	   living	   longer.	   At	   the	   same	   time	   Sri	  
Lanka	  also	  has	  a	  low	  population	  growth	  rate.	  This	  is	  resulting	  in	  a	  population	  comprising	  of	  more	  people	  
over	  60	  years	  of	  age	  and	  less	  children	  under	  15.	  The	  number	  of	  people	  over	  60	  is	  predicted	  to	  double	  by	  
2031	   and	   to	   become	   1/4th	   of	   the	   population	   by	   2041.	   	   This	   demographic	   is	   on	   par	   with	   developed	  
countries,	  but	  has	  not	  followed	  up	  with	  stable	  economic	  growth	  and	  support	  structures	  to	  care	  for	  the	  
elderly.	   From	   an	   economic	   perspective,	   it	   will	   lead	   to	   greater	   dependency,	   with	   the	   current	   child	  
dependency	  being	  overtaken	  by	  old	  age	  dependency	  reaching	  over	  50%	  by	  2051	  (De	  Silva,	  2007).	  It	  can	  
also	  mean	  a	  labour	  shortage	  that	  can	  impact	  the	  economic	  growth	  potential.	  From	  a	  social	  perspective,	  
it	   puts	   pressure	   on	   the	   ability	   to	   care	   for	   the	   elderly	   –	   both	   in	   the	   homes	   and	   through	   the	   health	  
services.	   The	   health	   care	   system	   has	   to	   adjust	   to	   cater	   to	   the	   elderly	   while	   also	   having	   to	   deal	   with	  
changing	  disease	  profile,	  with	  Non	  Communicable	  Diseases	  (NCDs)	  emerging	  as	  the	  biggest	  health	  care	  
challenge.	  

The	   reconstruction	   and	   resettlement	   in	   the	   North	   and	   the	   East	   is	   one	   of	   the	   central	   focuses	   of	   the	  
government	  in	  the	  next	  few	  years.	  Revitalizing	  of	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  economy	  to	  attract	  investments	  increasing	  
businesses	  (such	  as	  tourism)	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  another.	  Both	  will	  be	  mobilized	  by	  large	  scale	  infrastructure	  
development	  and	  upgrading.	  The	  similarities	  they	  share	  are	  that	  both	  will	  result	  in	  land	  use	  changes	  and	  
resettlement	   of	   affected	   people.	   These	   are	   taking	   place	   in	   different	   ways	   across	   the	   country	   causing	  
disputes	   over	   resources	   and	   what	   they	   should	   be	   used	   for	   and	   disparities	   in	   how	   different	   affected	  
people’s	  entitlements	  are	  provided	  for.	  	  

Sri	   Lanka	   is	   a	   democratic,	   socialist,	   republic.	   It	   has	   an	   elected	   President	   with	   executive	   powers	   and	   a	  
parliament.	   The	   number	   of	   Ministries	   and	   Portfolios	   are	   re-­‐shuffled	   quite	   frequently	   and	   the	   most	  
recent	  change	  was	  in	  January	  2013.	  The	  cabinet	  now	  has	  10	  senior	  ministers,	  54	  cabinet	  ministers	  and	  
29	   deputy	   ministers	   and	   two	   project	   ministers.	   There	   is	   a	   central	   government	   with	   an	   administrative	  
structure	  that	  reaches	  all	  the	  way	  to	  village	  level	  (District	  to	  Divisional	  secretariats	  to	  Grama	  Niladhari	  at	  
village	   level).	   	   Parallel	   to	   this	   there	   are	   9	   Provincial	   Councils	   (PC),	   and	   a	   range	   Local	   Authorities	   (LAs)	  
(Municipal	   and	   Urban	   councils	   and	   Pradeshiya	   Sabha)	   that	   have	   elected	   bodies	   and	   some	   devolved	  
powers	   and	   responsibilities	   –	   such	   as	   health	   and	   education,	   social	   infrastructure	   for	   the	   PCs,	  
maintenance	   of	   public	   utilities	   for	   Las	   etc.	   The	   central	   government	   retains	   control	   of	   major	   portfolios	  
such	   as	   defence,	   finance,	   economic	   development,	   and	   security.	   In	   the	   last	   couple	   of	   years	   two	   powerful	  
ministries	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Economic	  Development	  and	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Defence	  and	  Urban	  Development	  
have	   been	   created	   to	   spear	   head	   development	   activities.	   In	   addition	   a	   new	   Act	   “Divi	   Neguma”	   was	  
                                                                                                                                                                                    39
passed	   in	   January	   2013,	   amalgamating	   national	   and	   regional	   poverty	   alleviation	   programmes	   and	  
centralizing	   the	   administration	   of	   these	   development	   activities.	   The	   bill	   raised	   concern	   among	   legal	  
professionals	  on	  its	  constitutionality,	  governance	  and	  transparency.	  	  	  

Capital	   expenditure	   of	   the	   government	   largely	   comes	   from	   loans	   and	   grants	   from	   donors.	   There	   has	  
been	   a	   shift	   in	   the	   funding	   partners	   to	   the	   government	   projects	   and	   programmes	   in	   the	   recent	   past.	  
Traditionally	   Japan,	   Asian	   Development	   Bank	   and	   the	   World	   Bank	   provided	   the	   largest	   share	   of	   loans	  
and	  grants	  to	  Sri	  Lanka.	  Since	  2009,	  China	  and	  India	  have	  started	  providing	  increasing	  amounts	  of	  loans	  
and	  grants	  to	  the	  government	  (Table	  4).	  
These	   new	   donors	   are	   supporting	   infrastructure	   projects	   and	   their	   commitment	   to	   community	   and	  
environmental	  safeguards	  are	  not	  clear.	  

While	   development	   speeds	   ahead	   in	   Sri	   Lanka,	   there	   is	   concern	   that	   this	   will	   come	   at	   the	   cost	   to	   its	  
environment.	   Currently	   Sri	   Lanka	   does	   have	   a	   depleting	   and	   degraded	   resource	   base	   and	   it	   cannot	   keep	  
pace	   with	   the	   demands	   of	   increasing	   populations	   and	   consumerists	   lifestyles.	   Table	   2	   summarises	   the	  
significant	   environmental	   issues	   for	   Sri	   Lanka.	   Climate	   change	   is	   an	   emerging	   threat	   with	   ecological,	  
economic	  and	  social	  consequences.	  	  

 Table	  2:	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  significant	  environmental	  issues	  
 Land	  Resources	                                         Water	  Resources	                                        Air	  
   •      Soil	  erosion                                     •      Depletion	   and	   pollution	   of               •        Pollution                due	                 to	  
   •      Biodiversity	  loss                                       fresh	  water	  sources                                     industrialization
   •      Pollution	   from	   agrochemicals                •      Depletion	   and	   degradation	   of             •        Emissions	   from	   transport	   and
          and	  solid	  waste                                      coastal	  and	  marine	  resources                         power	  generation
   •      Degradation                     and	               •      Pollution	  of	  coastal	  areas                  •        Indoor	   air	   pollution	   –	   due	   to
          fragmentation	  of	  forests                      •                                                                    open	  hearth	  cooking
   •      Urbanization	   coupled	   with
          unplanned	  development
   •      Sand	  mining
   •      Coastal	  erosion

Source:	  MoENR/UNEP	  2009;	  NCSD	  and	  PS,	  2009.	  

In	   the	   next	   5	   sections	   of	   this	   chapter,	   overviews	   of	   the	   current	   status	   in	   the	   5	   GEF	   focal	   areas	   –	  
biodiversity,	  climate	  change,	  international	  waters,	  Persistent	  organic	  pollutants	  and	  land	  degradation	  -­‐	  
are	  presented.	  These	  overviews	  provide	  relevant	  information	  of	  how	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  contributing	  to	  the	  GEF	  
global	  environmental	  benefits.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                                  40
2. Biodiversity

  The	  Biodiversity	  GEBs	  considered	  for	  Sri	  Lanka:	  
  •     Conservation	  of	  globally	  significant	  biodiversity
        Endemism,	  endangered/relict	  species/taxonomically	  unique	  species
        Globally	  threatened	  species	  (IUCN	  Red	  list)
        Important	  ecosystems	  (TNC	  –	  hotspots,	  WWF	  –	  threatened	  regions),	  unique/rare	  ecosystems,
        important	  life	  support	  systems,	  boosting	  global	  biodiversity,	  global	  climate	  and	  water
        balance,	  areas	  supporting	  threatened/significant	  migrant	  species.
  •     Sustainable	  use	  of	  the	  components	  of	  globally	  significant	  biodiversity
        Medicinal	  herbs,	  NTFP	  (fromsignificant	  species)
        Wild	  relatives	  of	  food	  crops	  and	  yams	  that	  are	  important	  to	  food	  security	  especially	  due	  to
        climate	  change
  •     Fair	  and	  equitable	  sharing	  of	  the	  benefits	  arising	  from	  the	  utilization	  of	  genetic	  resources,
        including	  by	  appropriate	  access	  to	  genetic	  resources.
        (currently	  not	  very	  applicable	  to	  Sri	  Lanka,	  but	  with	  future	  potential)

                                                                                                                                                   Source:	  GEF	  

Sri	  Lanka’s	  rich	  and	  unique	  biodiversity	  forms	  the	  basis	  for	  the	  country’s	  natural	  heritage	  that	  is	  linked	  to	  
its	   cultural	   legacy	   and	   economic	   advancement.	   Despite	   its	   relatively	   small	   size	   the	   island	   exhibits	   an	  
exceptional	  array	  of	  terrestrial,	  freshwater	  and	  marine	  ecosystems,	  with	  high	  diversity	  and	  endemism,	  
which	  can	  be	  attributed	  to	  the	  presence	  of	  wide	  range	  of	  topographic	  and	  climatic	  variations.	  Another	  
contributing	   factor	   is	   the	   countries	   isolation	   from	   the	   neighbouring	   Indian	   subcontinent	   since	   the	   late	  
Pleistocene,	  leading	  to	  a	  reduced	  influence	  of	  the	  subcontinent	  on	  the	  evolutionary	  history	  of	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  
biodiversity	  after	  that	  geological	  period	  (MTE	  &WA,	  1995).	  	  	  

Sri	  Lanka,	  together	  with	  the	  Western	  Ghats	  of	  India	  is	  recognized	  as	  one	  of	  the	  34	  biodiversity	  hotspot,	  
recognized	   for	   high	   endemism	   and	   70%	   loss	   of	   its	   original	   habitat	   (Conservation	   International,	   2012).	  
This	  indicates	  the	  globally	  significant	  nature	  of	  the	  biodiversity	  as	  well	  as	  the	  urgency	  to	  protect	  it.	  	  With	  
respect	  to	  comprehensive	  global	  analyses	  of	  specific	  taxonomic	  groups,	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  recognized	  as	  one	  of	  
234	  centres	  of	  plant	  diversity	  in	  the	  world	  (Davis,	  Heywood	  and	  Hamilton,	  1995)	  and	  as	  one	  of	  the	  218	  
endemic	   bird	   areas,	   defined	   by	   BirdLife	   International	   (Stattersfield	   et	   al.,	   1998).	   Further	   various	  
documents	   indicates	   that	   the	   marine	   waters	   around	   Sri	   Lanka	   contain	   high	   species	   richness	   and	   thus	  
priority	  should	  be	  given	  in	  conserving	  the	  marine	  biodiversity	  (Ausubel,	  2010;	  Cheung	  et	  al,	  2005;	  Robert	  
et	  al,	  2002).	  	  	  

Sri	   Lanka	   also	   has	   globally	   recognized	   biologically	   rich	   areas	   such	   as	   UNESCO	   World	   heritage	   sites	   (2:	  
Sinharaja	  and	  Central	  Highlands),	  UNESCO	  Man	  and	  biosphere	  reserves	  (4:Hurulu,	  Sinharaja,	  KDN	  Forest	  
Complex	  and	  Bundala),	  	  and	  Ramsar	  sites	  (6:	  Bundala,	  Madu	  Ganga,	  Anawilundawa,	  Vankalei,	  Kumana	  
wetland	  cluster,	  and	  Wilpattu	  wetland	  cluster).	  	  

The	  rich	  biological	  wealth	  of	  the	  country	  is	  a	  result	  of	  a	  combination	  of	  factors	  such	  as	  distinct	  climatic	  
zones	  and	  different	  soil	  conditions.	  Topographically,	  the	  island	  consists	  of	  a	  south-­‐central	  mountainous	  
region	  which	  rises	  to	  an	  elevation	  of	  2500m,	  surrounded	  by	  broad	  lowland	  plains	  at	  an	  elevation	  of	  0	  -­‐	  
75m	   above	   sea	   level.	   The	   climate	   is	   tropical	   overall,	   but	   it	   shows	   variations	   across	   the	   island	   mainly	   due	  
to	  differences	  in	  rainfall	  and	  elevation.	  Generally	  three	  broad	  climatic	  regions	  are	  recognized:	  the	  wet	  
zone,	   dry	   zone	   and	   intermediate	   zone.	   Whereas	   the	   dry	   zone	   is	   all	   lowland,	   the	   other	   two	   zones	   are	  
further	  subdivided	  on	  the	  basis	  of	  altitude.	  Sri	  Lanka,	  despite	  its	  small	  size,	  has	  a	  rich	  diversity	  of	  soils.	  
                                                                                                                                                                            41
Fourteen	  of	  the	  Great	  Soil	  Groups	  are	  recognized	  within	  the	  country.	  These	  variations	  have	  resulted	  in	  
several	  forest	  categories	  with	  their	  own	  characteristics	  (Table	  3.1).	  

Table	  3:	  	  Forest	  Cover	  of	  Sri	  Lanka	  
Type	  of	  forests	                                   2010	  (Ha)	                     Over	   28%	   of	   the	   total	   land	   area	   is	   under	   forest	  
Montane	  Forest	                                       44,758	                           cover	   and	   administered	   by	   either	   the	   Forest	  
Sub-­‐Montane	  Forest	                                 28,513	                           Department	   or	   the	   Department	   of	   Wildlife	  
Lowland	  Rain	  Forest	                               123,302	                          Conservation	   (Biodiversity	   Secretariat/MoE	   2011).	  
Moist	  Monsoon	  Forest	                              117,885	                          Deforestation	   has	   been	   the	   most	   serious	   threat	   to	  
Dry	  Monsoon	  Forests	  	                           1,121,392	                        terrestrial	  biodiversity	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  In	  the	  period	  of	  
Riverine	  Dry	  Forests	  	                          2,425	                            1884	   and	   1992	   the	   rate	   of	   deforestation	   was	  
Mangroves	                                               15,669	  
                                        ‡                                                    estimated	   at	   37,000ha	   per	   year.	   This	   rate	   has	  
Total	  “closed	  canopy”	  forest                     1,453,944	  
                                     †
Open	  Canopy	  Sparse	  Forest 	                     445,485	  
                                                                                             slowed	   down	   in	   the	   most	   recent	   past	   to	   7,000ha	  
Total	   natural	   forest	   cover	   in	   the	   1,899,429	                        per	  year	  (SD,	  2007;FD,	  2012).	  
country	  
Forest	  Plantations	                                   79,941	  
Source:	  Edirisinghe	  &	  Chandani	  (2011)	  
As	   seen	   in	   Table	   3,	   much	   of	   the	   closed	   canopy	   forest	   cover	   is	   in	   the	   dry	   zone	   (dry	   monsoon	   and	   riverine	  
forests).	  Dry	  zone	  forests	  are	  an	  important	  habitat	  for	  threatened	  and	  charismatic	  species	  such	  as	  the	  
elephant	  and	  leopard,	  however	  greater	  species	  diversity	  is	  found	  in	  the	  wet	  zone	  (low	  land	  rainforests,	  
moist	   monsoon	   forests).	   The	   wet	   zone	   is	   heavily	   populated	   and	   forest	   land	   here	   has	   been	   converted	   for	  
agriculture,	   homesteads,	   infrastructure	   etc.	   This	   has	   resulted	   in	   fragmented	   forest	   areas	   that	   put	  
pressure	  on	  the	  integrity	  of	  these	  ecosystems	  (FD,	  2012).	  	  The	  national	  budget	  and	  plans	  for	  2013	  had	  
stated	  that	  forest	  cover	  will	  be	  increased	  to	  35%	  with	  an	  allocation	  of	  Rs	  500	  million	  in	  2013	  and	  1,500	  
million	  over	  a	  3	  year	  period	  (MFP,	  2012).	  

Sri	   Lanka’s	   wetlands	   are	   diverse,	   comprising	   103	   major	   rivers	   and	   associated	   marshes	   and	   about	   12,000	  
man-­‐made	  irrigation	  tanks	  that	  harbour	  a	  multitude	  of	  wetland	  species.	  Being	  an	  island,	  the	  country	  has	  
a	   rich	   marine	   and	   coastal	   biodiversity	   along	   its	   1620	   km	   coastline	   and	   the	   Exclusive	   Economic	   Zone	   with	  
a	  sea	  bed	  and	  water	  column	  spanning	  over	  an	  area	  of	  517,000	  km	  (CCD,	  2006).	  	  	  

High	  ecosystem	  diversity	  in	  the	   island	  has	  given	  rise	  to	  
a	   large	   number	   of	   indigenous	   species,	   including	   a	                         Presently	   only	   a	   small	   fraction	   of	   the	   island	  
remarkably	  high	  percentage	  of	  endemics	  among	  both	                                   state’s	   biodiversity	   is	   known	   to	   science.	  
fauna	   and	   flora.	   Among	   the	   inland	   indigenous	                                  Invertebrates	   and	   lower	   plants	   are	   largely	  
vertebrate	   species	   (excluding	   marine	   forms	   and	                                    neglected	   except	   for	   few	   selected	   groups	  
migratory	   birds)	   described	   currently,	   43%	   are	   endemic	                         such	   as	   butterflies,	   dragonflies,	   land	   snails,	  
to	   Sri	   Lanka.	   A	   higher	   percentage	   of	   endemism	   is	                      pteridophytes	   and	   algae.	   Even	   the	  
evident	   among	   the	   freshwater	   crabs	   (almost	   100	   %),	                        vertebrates	   and	   higher	   plants	   may	   not	   be	  
amphibians	  (86%),	  and	  land	  snails	  (81%)	  (See	  table	  4).	                        completely	   listed	   as	   during	   the	   last	   two	  
Much	   of	   these	   endemic	   species	   are	   concentrated	   in	                         decade	   alone	   large	   number	   of	   new	   species	  
the	   rainforests	   and	   are	   heavily	   dependent	   on	   rainfall	                     has	   been	   discovered.	   The	   need	   for	   trained	  
and	   humidity	   to	   maintain	   their	   structure	   and	   function.	                    taxonomists	   and	   more	   initiative	   to	   explore	  
Many	  endemic	  rainforest	  species	  are	  ‘point	  endemics’	                                the	  biodiversity	  of	  the	  country	  is	  needed.	  
that	   are	   restricted	   to	   extremely	   small	   areas	   within	   a	  
single	  forest	  (MOE	  2012,	  MOE	  2010b).	  	                                                                                                       MoE,	  2012.	  




                                                                                                                                                                                        42
Table	  4:	  Species	  diversity	  among	  selected	  groups	  of	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  fauna	  and	  flora	  in	  terrestrial	  
and	  freshwater	  wetlands	  
  Taxonomic	  group	                                  Number	                of	   Number	   of	   endemic	   %	  endemism	  
                                                        species	                      species	  
  Land	  snails	                                       253	                          205	                               81%	  
  Dragonflies	                                          118	                          47	                                40%	  
  Bees	                                                 130	                          NA	  
  Butterflies	                                          245	                          26	                                17%	  
  Spiders	                                              501	                          257	                               51%	  
  Freshwater	  crabs	                                  51	                           50	                                98%	  
  Freshwater	  fish	                                   91	                           50	                                55%	  
  Amphibians	                                          111	                           95	                                86%	  
  Reptiles	  	                                        209	                           125	  	                           60%	  
  Birds	  (Resident)	                                 237	                           27	   definitive	   and	   6	  
                                                                                        proposed	  
  Mammals	                                             124	                          21	                                 17%	  
  Angiosperms	                                         3,154	                        894	                                28%	  
  Pteridophytes	                                       336	                          48	                                 14%	  
  Mosses	                                              566	                          63	  +	  
NA=	  data	  not	  available	  
Source:	  IUCN	  Red	  List	  version	  2013.1:	  Last	  Updated:	  02	  July	  2013)	  

The	   various	   geo-­‐evolutionary	   and	   geological	   processes	   in	   Sri	   Lanka,	   coupled	   with	   spatial	   variations	   in	  
climate	   and	   topography,	   have	   also	   promoted	   isolation	   of	   species	   resulting	   in	   a	   large	   number	   of	  
‘geographically	   relict	   species’.	   Several	   endemic	   relict	   genera	   are	   recorded	   among	   the	   land	   snails	   and	  
herpetofauna.	   The	   high	   elevation	   cloud	   forests	   contain	   a	   significant	   complement	   of	   geographically	   relict	  
endemic	   species.	   	   The	   high	   elevation	   features	   coupled	   with	   anthropogenic	   pressures	   has	   led	   to	   a	   higher	  
portion	  of	  endemic	  species	  becoming	  globally	  and	  nationally	  threatened	  (Bambaradeniya	  2006).	  

As	  per	  the	  IUCN	  Red	  list	  (table	  5)	  out	  of	  the	  571	  globally	  threatened	  species	  recorded	  from	  Sri	  Lanka	  286	  
are	   plants	   286.	   Out	   of	   the	   285	   threatened	   fauna	   there	   are	   130	   invertebrates,	   56	   amphibians	   and	   43	  
fishes,	  30	  mammals,	  15	  birds,	  and	  11	  reptiles	  (IUCN	  2013).	  	  	  

Table	  5:	  Red	  list	  Categories	  –	  Sri	  Lanka	  summary	  
                   E	          EW	        Sub	            CR	      EN	      VU	         Sub	           NT	        LR/	       DD	         LC	          Total	  
                                            total	                                           total	                     cd	  
Fauna	            20	         0	         20	             61	      96	      128	        285	           169	       129	       10	         1,146	       1,759	  
Flora	            1	          0	         1	              79	      74	      133	        286	           3	         4	         5	          382	         681	  
Total	                                     21	                                              571	                                                              2,220	  
E-­‐	   Extinct;	   EW-­‐Extinct	   in	   Wild;	   CR=	   Critically	   Endangered;	   EN-­‐	   Endangered;	   VU	   –	   Vulnerable;	  
NT	   –	   Near	   Threatened;	   LR/cd	   -­‐	   LR/cd	   -­‐	   Lower	   Risk/conservation	   dependent;	   DD	   –	   Data	   Deficient;	   	   LC	   –	   Least	  
Concern	  
Source:	  IUCN	  Red	  List	  version	  2013.1:	  Table	  5	  Last	  Updated:	  08	  July	  2013	  	  

With	  forty	  six	  agro-­‐climatic	  regions	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  based	  on	  soil	  variation,	  annual	  rainfall	  and	  altitude,the	  
country	   supports	   a	   wide	   range	   of	   traditional	   crop	   varieties.	   With	   a	   long	   history	   of	   agriculture	   and	   a	  
unique	  hydraulic	  civilization,	  agro-­‐biodiversity	  (crops	  and	  livestock)	  in	  the	  country	  has	  been	  enhanced.	  
Sri	   Lanka’s	   traditional	   farming	   systems	   developed	   over	   hundreds	   of	   years,	   have	   resulted	   in	   crops	   that	  
are	  resistant	  to	  diseases	  and	  insect	  pests,	  and	  are	  suited	  for	  varied	  soil	  conditions	  and	  climates	  in	  the	  
                                                                                                                                                                                   43
island.	   Despite	   a	   process	   of	   selection	   through	   the	   ages,	   introduction	   to	   new	   areas	   and	   climatic	  
conditions,	   some	   varieties	   still	   show	   close	   genetic	   links	   to	   their	   wild	   relatives	   (i.e.	   rice	   varieties)	   (MOE	  
2011).	  

Sri	  Lanka	  is	  also	  a	  valuable	  repository	  of	  crop	  germplasm,	  especially	  of	  rice.	  There	  are	  varieties	  of	  rice	  
which	  are	  resistant	  to	  pests	  and	  adverse	  climatic	  and	  soil	  conditions,	  exhibit	  variations	  in	  grain	  size	  and	  
quality,	   and	   show	   differences	   in	   rate	   of	   maturing	   (MoENR2009).	   With	   the	   threats	   of	   climate	   change	  
looming	  more	  effort	  has	  been	  put	  into	  identifying	  drought	  and	  flood	  resistant	  rice	  varieties.	  The	  uptake	  
remains	  limited	  due	  to	  preference	  given	  to	  conventional	  high	  yielding	  varieties	  and	  methods,	  as	  well	  as	  
the	   lack	   of	   knowledge,	   financial	   resources	   and	   external	   support	   (CEPA	   2011).	   There	   is	   also	   significant	  
crop	   genetic	   diversity	   among	   spices	   of	   commercial	   importance.	   Among	   these	   are	   500	   selections	   of	  
pepper	   and	   about	   seven	   wild	   species,	   10	   wild	   races	   of	   cardamom,	   and	   several	   indigenous	   varieties	   of	  
betel	  and	  chilli.	  Grain	  legumes	  and	  root	  and	  tuber	  crops	  also	  show	  a	  rich	  genetic	  variability,	  as	  do	  fruit	  
crops	   such	   as	   banana,	   mango	   and	   citrus.	   	   Among	   domesticated	   animals	   of	   economic	   value	   are	   wild	  
species	   of	   buffalo,	   cattle	   and	   fowl.	   The	   local	   cattle	   show	   high	   resistance	   to	   disease	   and	   tolerance	   of	  
internal	  parasites.	  Likewise,	  the	  local	  breeds	  of	  poultry	  are	  resistant	  to	  tropical	  diseases	  (MOE	  1999).	  	  

The	   most	   common	   use	   of	   forest	   products	   is	   for	   fuelwood	   that	   remains	   the	   most	   widely	   used	   cooking	  
fuel.	  Various	  projects	  have	  tried	  to	  control	  forms	  of	  destructive	  extraction	  of	  firewood	  from	  protected	  
areas	   through	   allocation	   of	   woodlots,	   community	   forests	   programmes,	   creating	   awareness,	   and	  
provision	   of	   alternative	   livelihoods.	   Another	   common	   use	   is	   of	   herbs	   for	   ritualistic	   and	   medicinal	  
purposes.	  At	  least	  189	  species	  of	  the	  1414	  medicinal	  plants	  used	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  are	  endemic	  to	  the	  island	  
or	   geographically	   restricted	   to	   the	   Indian	   sub-­‐continent.	   This	   number	   includes	   79	   species	   that	   are	  
threatened	   (from	   GEF	   project	   document	   –	   ID	   no	   95).	   Conservation	   of	   these	   plants	   will	   secure	   the	  
continued	   existence	   of	   these	   rare	   and	   endemic	   plants	   as	   well	   as	   the	   preservation	   of	   traditional	  
knowledge	   on	   medicinal	   plants.	   However	   with	   a	   greater	   reliance	   on	   western	   medicine,	   the	   use	   of	  
traditional	  healing	  methods	  has	  reduced	  (MoENR	  2009).	  

Sri	   Lanka	   ratified	   the	   Convention	   on	   Biological	   Diversity	   (CBD)	   in	   1994	   and	   the	   Cartagena	   Protocol	   on	  
Biosafety	  in	  2004.	  	  The	  country	  is	  yet	  to	  become	  a	  party	  to	  the	  Nagoya	  Protocol	  on	  Access	  and	  Benefit	  
Sharing	   and	   the	   Nagoya-­‐	   Kuala	   Lumpur	   Supplementary	   Protocol	   on	   Liability	   and	   Redress	   to	   the	  
Cartagena	   Protocol.	   Ratification	   of	   the	   CBD	   led	   to	   the	   publication	   of	   a	   comprehensive	   Biodiversity	  
Conservation	   Action	   Plan	   (BCAP)	   in	   1999	   through	   a	   widely	   participatory	   process,	   thus	   fulfilling	   the	  
country’s	   obligations	   under	   Article	   6a.	   This	   was	   updated	   with	   the	   publication	   of	   an	   Addendum	   to	   the	  
BCAP	  in	  2007	  (GEF	  Project	  –	  878)	  to	  reflect	  several	  issues	  that	  had	  a	  bearing	  on	  biodiversity	  conservation	  
in	   the	   country	   since	   publication	   of	   the	   BCAP.	   During	   2005	   and	   2006,	   Sri	   Lanka	   also	   carried	   out	   extensive	  
stakeholder	   consultations	   through	   the	   National	   Capacity	   Needs	   Self-­‐	   Assessment	   (NCSA)	   Project	   (GEF	   ID	  
2417)	   to	   identify	   national	   capacity	   needs	   to	   implement	   the	   Conventions	   on	   Biological	   Diversity	   (CBD),	  
Climate	   Change	   (UNFCCC)	   and	   Land	   Degradation	   (UNCCD).	   Among	   the	   main	   capacity	   building	  
requirements	   identified	   were	   for	   cross-­‐sectoral	   integration	   of	   biodiversity	   considerations,	   the	  
application	  of	  the	  “ecosystem	  approach”	  for	  establishing	  new	  protected	  areas	  (including	  forests,	  inland	  
wetlands,	  coastal	  and	  marine	  systems	  and	  agricultural	  systems),	  and	  establishing	  an	  Access	  and	  Benefit	  
Sharing	  regime	  (MoENR	  2009).	  	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                          44
Table	  6:	  GEF	  Projects	  and	  alignment	  to	  GEBs	  
                                                                          Biodiversity	  GEBs	  
                                                    Conservation	  of	   Sustainable	           Benefits	   and	  
GEF	  Project	                                    globally	             use	  	               Sharing	     of	   Other	  GEBs	  
                                                    significant	                                  genetic	  
                                                    Biodiversity	  	                             resources	  
95	   –	   Sustainable	   use	   of	   üü	                                üü	  
medicinal	  herbs	  

352	   –	   Development	                  of	   üü	                                                                     Forests/REDD	  
conservation	  areas	                                                                                                        Climate	  
                                                                                                                               change/LD/MF	  
802	   –	   coastal	   conservation	   üü	                                 ü	  
RUK	  area	  

818	  –	  Conservation	  of	  Globally	   üü	                             üü	                                       Climate	  change	  
Threatened	          Species	         in	                                                                                   Forests	  /REDD/MF	  
Rainforests	  

878	   -­‐	   Protected	   Areas	   and	   üü	                            ü	                                         Climate	  change	  
Wildlife	  Conservation	  Project	                                                                                          Forests	  
                                                                                                                               /REDD/LD/MF	  
2472	   -­‐	   Strengthening	   Capacity	   üü	                                                                         LD/IW	  
to	   Control	   the	   Alien	   Invasive	  
Species	  
4150	   –	   Agro	   biodiversity	   üü	                                   üü	                                       CC/POPs/LD	  
Conservation	   and	   Use	   Agro-­‐
ecosystems	  	  
4997	   -­‐	   Biodiversity	   Planning	   üü	                             üü	                      üü	           CC/IW	  
for	  the	  Implementation	  of	  the	  
CBD	  2011-­‐2020	  	  

2753	   -­‐	   Participatory	   Coastal	   üü	                                                                          CC/CCA/LD	  
Zone	                 Restoration	         and	  
Sustainable	   Management	   in	  
the	   Eastern	   Province	   of	   Post-­‐
Tsunami	  Sri	  Lanka	  
üü	  	  -­‐	  indicates	  main	  objectives	  covers	  this	  GEB	  and	  was/will	  be	  primary	  focus	  
ü	  -­‐	  indicates	  main	  objectives	  covers	  this	  GEB	  but	  with	  less	  focus	  	  	  




                                                                                                                                                         45
3. Climate	  Change

    The	  Climate	  change	  GEBs	  considered	  for	  Sri	  Lanka:	  
    •      Mitigated	  GHG	  emissions	  in	  metric	  tons	  of	  CO2	  equivalent;
    •      Increased	  use	  of	  renewable	  energy	  and	  decreased	  use	  of	  fossil	  energy	  resources;
    •      Improved	  efficiency	  in	  primary	  energy	  p roduction,	  energy	  p rocess	  and	  transmission,	  and	  final
           energy	  consumption	  at	  end-­‐use;
    •      Increased	  adoption	  of	  a	  low-­‐carbon	  development	  path	  through	  technology	  transfer,	  market
           transformation,	  and	  enabling	  activities;
    •      Reduced	  GHG	  emissions	  and	  enhanced	  carbon	  stocks	  under	  sustainable	  management	  of	  land
           use	  (including	  peatlands),	  land	  use	  change,	  and	  forestry.
                                                                                                                            Source:	  GEF	  

Sri	  Lanka	  is	  a	   negligible	   contributor	   to	   global	  warming.	  However,	  the	  island	  is	  highly	  vulnerable	  to	   the	  
impacts	  of	  climate	  change,	  which	  include:	  increases	  in	  the	  frequency	  and	  intensity	  of	  disasters	  such	  as	  
droughts,	   floods	   and	   landslides;	   variability	   and	   unpredictability	   of	   rainfall	   patterns;	   increase	   in	  
temperature;	  and	  inundation	  due	  to	  sea	  level	  rise	  (MOE,	  2010e)	  

The	   degree	   of	   severity	   and	   actual	   impacts	   are	  
being	   debated	   but	   there	   is	   overall	   agreement	                   The	  rains	  at	  the	  latter	  part	  of	  2012	  caused	  major	  
that	   climate	   change	   –	   if	   not	   acted	   upon,	   can	           flooding	  affecting	  17	  districts	  in	  the	  country.	  The	  
undermine	   the	   economic	   and	   social	                                      consequent	  loss	  of	  paddy	  production	  was	  290,000	  Mt	  
development	   potential.	   It	   is	   likely	   to	   affect	                  in	  2012/2013	  Maha	  season.	  The	  damage	  caused	  to	  
livelihoods	   such	   as	   tourism,	   agriculture	   and	                       the	  livestock	  sector	  was	  estimated	  at	  Rs	  160	  million.	  
fisheries,	   and	   especially	   those	   in	   the	   informal	                This	  also	  led	  to	  10	  elephants	  deaths.	  Consequent	  
sector,	                          small	                               scale	         damages	  required	  the	  Government	  to	  spend	  
businesses/farmers/fishermen,	   labourers,	   and	                                   additional	  funds	  to	  rehabilitate	  4,686	  km	  of	  roads	  
wageworkers	   who	   are	   less	   able	   to	   cope	   with	                 including	  national,	  provincial	  and	  rural	  roads	  and	  188	  
external	   shocks.	   It	   will	   also	   affect	   communities	               structures	  such	  as	  bridges,	  culverts,	  drains	  and	  
living	  in	  close	  proximity	  to	  the	  ocean,	  putting	  the	            retaining	  walls.	  The	  Government	  allocated	  Rs	  8,856	  
biggest	  risk	  on	  families	  in	  makeshift	  houses	  and	                  million	  for	  the	  implementation	  of	  a	  flood	  recovery	  
in	   environmentally	   sensitive	   areas	   (e.g.	   buffer	                    programme.	  
zones,	  flood	  plains).	  Climate	  change	  also	  affects	  
health,	   especially	   the	   health	   of	   young	   children	                May	  and	  September	  2012,	  recorded	  a	  significant	  
and	   older	   people	   who	   are	   less	   able	   to	   adapt	   or	     increases	  in	  temperature.	  This	  caused	  a	  severe	  
respond	   quickly	   to	   change	   (MOE,	   2012	   and	                       droughts	  coinciding	  with	  the	  2012	  Yala	  season	  in	  the	  
2010e).	                                                                                Dry	  and	  Intermediate	  zones.	  Further,	  many	  areas	  in	  
                                                                                         the	  Dry	  zone	  were	  affected	  in	  the	  2011/12	  Maha	  
Recognising	   the	   importance	   of	   Climate	   change	                       season	  as	  well	  disrupting	  livelihood	  of	  more	  than	  1.3	  
and	   its	   impacts	   on	   Sri	   Lanka,	   International	                    million	  people	  
conventions	   (UNFCCC	   and	   Kyoto	   Protocol)	   have	  
been	   ratified	   and	   measured	   have	   been	   taking	                                                                       Source:	  MFP	  (2013)	  
place	   to	   fulfil	   the	   requirements.	   Sri	   Lanka	   has	  
developed	   a	   Climate	   change	   policy	   (in	   2013),	   a	   CDM	   policy	   Adaptation	   strategy	   (in	   2012).	   A	   separate	  
unit-­‐	   a	   climate	   change	   Secretariat	   -­‐	   within	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Environment	   was	   set	   up	   in	   2010	   to	   handle	  
climate	  change	  issues.	  This	  unit	  deals	  with	  both	  mitigation	  and	  adaptation.	  	  In	  addition	  Sri	  Lanka	  has	  also	  
set	   up	   a	   sustainable	   energy	   authority	   (in	   2007),	   that	   was	   under	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Power	   and	   Energy	   and	   in	  

                                                                                                                                                                             46
the	  most	  recent	  portfolio	  reshuffle	  in	  January	  2013,	  it	  has	  been	  placed	  under	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  
and	  Renewable	  Energy	  to	  promote	  the	  use	  of	  renewable	  energy	  in	  the	  country.	  	  

Sri	   Lanka’s	   Green	   House	   Gas	   (GHG)	   emissions	   are	   low,	   with	   the	   per	   capita	   GHG	   emissions	   being	  
0.6tonnes/y	   while	   the	   global	   standard	   is	   4.29tonnes/y.	   It	   is	   also	   the	   lowest	   for	   South	   Asia	   (WB	   data	  
online).	  This	  is	  mainly	  due	  to	  the	  lower	  levels	  of	  industrialization	  (table	  6).	  Highest	  source	  of	  GHG	  comes	  
from	  Carbon	  Dioxide	  (CO2)	  as	  a	  result	  of	  the	  use	  of	  biomass	  mainly	  as	  the	  source	  of	  household	  cooking	  
fuel	   as	   well	   as	   for	   industrial	   thermal	   energy.	   Fossil	   fuel	   combustion	   for	   energy	   mainly	   from	   transport	  
(49%)	   and	   power	   generation	   (29%)	   are	   the	   other	   large	   contributors	   to	   CO2	   emissions.	   The	   largest	  
methane	   (CH4)	   emissions	   are	   from	   agriculture	   (mainly	   rice	   cultivation)	   and	   waste	   (agriculture	   and	  
municipal).	  Largest	  source	  of	  Nitrous	  Oxide	  (N2O)	  is	  also	  from	  Agriculture.	  	  

Table	  7:	  Sources	  of	  GHG	  Emissions	  and	  Removals	  
Sector	                                                          CO2	  	  (Gg)	                CH4	  (Gg)	                  N2O	  (Gg)	  
                                  1
Fuel	  Combustion	  (FF) 	                                               10430.01	                                41.87	                   0.81	  
    Energy	  Industry	  	                                                 3065.84	                                 0.12	                   0.02	  
    Industry	                                                                842.03	                                 2.29	                   0.21	  
    Transport	                                                              5059.19	                                 0.48	                   0.05	  
    Household	  and	  Commercial	                                         1195.70	                                38.97	                   0.53	  
    Refinery	                                                                268.25	                                 0.01	                   0.00	  
Biomass2	                                                                  19720.30	  
Industrial	  Processes3	                                                     492.4	  
    Cement	                                                                  347.95	  
Agriculture4	                                                                                                       185.14	                   2.65	  
   Enteric	  Fermentation	                                                                                          59.68	  
   Rice	  Cultivation	                                                                                             117.43	  
LUCF	                                                                                  10.3	                         1.67	  
Waste	                                                                                                               96.82	  
Source:	  Derived	  from	  MOE	  2011.	  2nd	  National	  Communication	  to	  UNFCCC.	  Values	  generated	  in	  2000.	  	  
1
  	  Refers	  to	  emissions	  due	  to	  the	  use	  of	  fossil	  fuels	  for	  producing	  energy	  (electrical	  and	  thermal).	  
2
  	  Biomass	  has	  been	  listed	  separately	  and	  combines	  emissions	  from	  industrial	  and	  household	  use	  
3	  
      Industrial	  processes	  include	  cement,	  mineral,	  chemical,	  metal,	  other.	  The	  figures	  here	  represent	  emissions	  due	  to	  
industrial/manufacturing	   processes	   and	   do	   not	   include	   electricity	   that	   is	   covered	   under	   fuel	   combustion.	   Only	  
cement	  is	  highlighted	  separately	  as	  the	  main	  source	  of	  emissions	  in	  this	  category.	  
4
  	  Agriculture	  includes	  livestock,	  and	  processes	  such	  as	  burning	  residues.	  Only	  main	  sources	  of	  GHG	  emissions	  are	  
mentioned	  in	  this	  category	  

Table	  7	  presents	  the	  aggregate	  emissions,	  calculated	  using	  global	  warming	  potential	  values	  applicable	  in	  
a	  100	  year	  time	  horizon	  as	  used	  in	  the	  IPCC	  calculations.	  In	  this	  format	  all	  emission	  values	  are	  converted	  
to	  CO2	  equivalents.	  This	  shows	  that	  the	  inclusion	  of	  land	  use	  change	  and	  forestry	  (LUCF)	  has	  contributed	  
to	  the	  removal	  of	  around	  30%	  of	  the	  total	  emissions	  (MOE	  2011).	  Biomass	  has	  not	  been	  included	  into	  
this	  calculation.	  




                                                                                                                                                                  47
Table	  8:	  Sources	  of	  GHG	  Emissions	  and	  Removals	  
            Sector	                          CO2	                CO2	  Removals	                     CH4	                     N2O	                    Total	  (net)	  
                                              Gg	                        (Gg)	                       GgCO2eq	                  GgCO2eq	                  GgCO2eq	  
Energy	                                     10,430.0	                                                    881.4	                    251.1	                  11,562.5	  
Ind.	  Processes	                             492.4	  
Agriculture	                                                                                                3,887.9	                     821.5	                   4,709.4	  
LUCF	  -­‐	  emissions	                          10.3	                                                      35.1	                                                  45.4	  
Waste	                                                                                                      2,033.2	                                               2,033.2	  
Total	  -­‐	  Emissions	                  10,932.8	                                                      6,837.6	                  1,072.6	                 18,849.9	  
Total	  -­‐	  Removals	                                                      -­‐6,254.0	                                                                      -­‐6,254.0	  
Total	  -­‐	  Net	                        10,932.8	                         -­‐6,254.0	                 6,837.6	                  1,072.6	                 12,588.9	  
Source:	  MOE	  2011.	  2nd	  National	  Communication	  to	  UNFCCC.	  Values	  generated	  in	  2000.	  



In	   the	   post	   conflict	   era	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   with	   increased	       Table	  9:	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  Energy	  Mix	  
economic	   growth,	   greater	   mobility,	   greater	   reliance	                        Primary	  Energy	  Sources	  	                                     2011	  
on	  coal	  and	  thermal	  energy,	  it	  can	  be	  assumed	  that	                  Biomass	                                                             43.7%	  
the	   emissions	   have	   increased,	   however	   a	   more	                           Petroleum	                                                           43.4%	  
recent	   emission’s	   inventory	   has	   not	   been	   carried	                       Coal	                                                                 2.9%	  
                                                                                                 Hydro	                                                                8.5%	  
out.	  The	  electricity	  demand	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  growing	  at	  
                                                                                                 Renewables	                                                           1.6%	  
a	  rate	  of	  about	  7-­‐8%	  per	  annum	  and	  number	  of	  new	  
vehicles	  added	  is	  300,000	  per	  annum.	  Industries	  and	                       Electricity	  Sources	  (2011)	  
the	   commercial	   sectors	   are	   also	   expanding	   and	   this	                 Thermal	  (oil	  and	  coal)	                                     59.1%	  
indicates	   a	   greater	   level	   of	   emissions	   can	   be	                      Hydro	  (Large	  scale)	                                           34.5%	  
expected	  (MOE	  2011).	  	  	                                                             Renewables	  (grid	  and	  off-­‐grid)	                            6.2%	  
                                                                                                            Source:	  SLSEA,	  2011.	  Sri	  Lanka	  Energy	  Balance	  
Sri	   Lanka’s	   energy	   mix	   shows	   the	   dependency	   on	  
thermal	  –	  biomass	  and	  fossil	  fuel,	  while	  hydro	  power	  makes	  up	  the	  next	  largest	  power	  source	  (table	  8).	  
Biomass	   remains	   the	   most	   widely	   used	   cooking	   fuel,	   while	   thermal	   power	   generated	   through	   oil	   and	  
coal	   is	   the	   largest	   source	   of	   electricity.	   This	   is	   a	   change	   from	   the	   1990s	   when	   large	   hydro,	   that	   is	  
considered	   a	   conventional	   renewable	   energy,	   made	   up	   over	   90%	   of	   the	   electricity	   supply.	   The	   large	  
hydro	   potential	   has	   been	   fully	   tapped,	   and	   the	   future	   plan	   is	   to	   increase	   coal	   fired	   power	   plants	   to	  
1000MWs.	  In	  2011,	  Sri	  Lanka	  commissioned	  its	  first	  coal	  power	  plant	  (300MW).	  

Non-­‐conventional	  renewable	  energy	  (such	  as	  mini	  hydro,	  solar,	  wind)	  use	  is	  increasing,	  but	  at	  present	  
levels	   it	   makes	   up	   a	   very	   small	   portion	   of	   the	   energy	   balance.	   Sri	   Lanka	   has	   also	   put	   in	   place	   tariff	  
structures	  and	  power	  purchasing	  policies	  that	  allow	  private	  households	  and	  businesses	  to	  sell	  renewable	  
energy	   to	   the	   grid.	   GEF	   funding	   has	   directly	   contributed	   to	   increasing	   the	   use	   of	   non	   conventional	  
renewables	  and	  to	  reduce	  the	  market	  barriers	  for	  the	  greater	  uptake	  of	  renewable	  energy	  (GEF	  IDs	  104,	  
1545).	  Private	  mini	  hydro	  schemes	  are	  well	  established	  with	  over	  180Mw	  of	  installed	  capacity	  connected	  
to	  the	  grid	  (DFCC	  online).	  Some	  of	  the	  mini	  hydro	  projects	  are	  also	  registered	  for	  carbon	  credits	  under	  
the	   CDM	   mechanism.	   	   Since	   2010,	   private	   sector	   has	   been	   involved	   in	   wind	   power	   generation	   and	   more	  
recently	   with	   biomass	   (dendro)	   power	   projects.	   As	   per	   the	   SLSEA	   website	   there	   are	   11	   private	   wind	  
generation	  units	  listed	  with	  111.5	  MW	  of	  power	  and	  6	  biomass	  projects	  are	  listed	  with	  23.5MW.	  Wind	  
and	  Biomass	  are	  identified	  as	  two	  main	  sources	  that	  can	  increase	  the	  non-­‐conventional	  power	  supply.	  In	  
2011	  the	  first	  grid	  connected	  commercial	  solar	  plant	  (1.2MW)	  was	  also	  commissioned.	  	  

Overall	   Sri	   Lanka	   has	   provided	   100%	   fuel	   accessibility	   to	   all	   communities	   and	   will	   shortly	   reach	   100%	  
electrification,	   thereby	   fulfilling	   the	   goal	   of	   providing	   access	   to	   modern	   energy	   services	   to	   all	   the	  

                                                                                                                                                                               48
citizens.	   Interestingly	   the	   largest	   users	   of	   energy	   are	   households	   with	   transport	   and	   industries	   following	  
behind	  with	  a	  wide	  gap	  (table	  9).	  This	  indicates	  that	  a	  bulk	  of	  the	  energy	  generated	  is	  not	  being	  used	  for	  
productivity	  and	  growth.	  	  

Table	  10:	  Sri	  Lanka	  Energy	  Use	  in	  2010	  (thousand	  toe)	  




                                                                                                                                                              fired	  
                                                                                 FuelWood	  




                                                                                                                                                                                       Kerosene	  
                                                                                                                               Gasoline	  
                                                                                 Baggase	  
Sector	  




                                                                                                                                                    power	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          power	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Hydro	  
                                                                                                     Diesel	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Avtur	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Total	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                      F.Oil	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Coal	  
                                                                                                                                                                          LPG	  
                                                                                                                                                    Oil	  
Household,	   Commercial	   3,435	                                                                12	                      -­‐	                243	                 169	        152	          23	         -­‐	       -­‐	      278	                 4,313	  
and	  Other	  
Transport	                                                                      -­‐	               1,518	                   672	                -­‐	                 -­‐	        -­‐	          -­‐	        117	       -­‐	      -­‐	                 2,336	  

Industrial	                                                                     1,619	             62	                      -­‐	                126	                 26	         21	           134	        -­‐	       67	       144	                 2,200	  

Agricultural	                                                                   -­‐	               3	                       -­‐	                -­‐	                 -­‐	        -­‐	          7	          -­‐	       -­‐	      -­‐	                 10	  

Total	  Energy	  Use	                                                         5.054	             1,596	                   672	                370	                 196	        173	          164	        117	       67	       422	                 8,860	  
Source:	  Derived	  using	  SLSEA	  web	  portal	  data	  

As	   a	   low	   middle	   income	   country,	   with	   high	   social	   development	   indicators,	   Sri	   Lanka	   has	   a	   per	   capita	  
energy	   consumption	   (0.4	   toe)	   that	   is	   far	   below	   the	   lower	   middle	   income	   country	   average	   of	   1.02	   toe.	  
This	  indicates	  a	  more	  positive	  picture	  in	  terms	  of	  low	  carbon	  development	  while	  also	  having	  the	  space	  
to	  increase	  its	  energy	  consumption	  levels	  (Chart	  1).	  	  
                                                                             Human Development Index and Per Capita Energy Use
   0.800	  1:	  Human	  development	  Index	  and	  energy	  use	  in	  relation	  to	  other	  countries	  
Chart	  
                                 0.750	  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Malaysia	  

                                                                                                                                Turkey	  
                                 0.700	  
                                                                    Sri	  Lanka	                                                                               China
                                                                                                                                              Thailand
                                 0.650	  
 Human	  Development	  Index




                                                                                                 Indonesia	  
                                 0.600	  
                                                                                           Vietnam
                                 0.550	                                    India	  
                                                   Bangladesh
                                 0.500	                                    Pakistan

                                 0.450	                        Nepal

                                 0.400	  


                                 0.350	  


                                 0.300	  
                                             -­‐                  500	                          1,000	                                       1,500	                              2,000	                       2,500	                           3,000	  
                                                                                                                  Per	  capita	  energy	  use	  (kgoe	  per	  capita)
Source:	  WB	  data	  (online)	  



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            49
Chart	  2	  shows	  the	  possible	  increase	  in	  energy	  consumption	  if	  a	  business	  as	  usual	  development	  trajectory	  
is	  followed.	  

Chart	  2:	  Projected	  energy	  Consumption	  pattern	  under	  a	  business	  as	  usual	  scenario	  




Source:	  WB	  data	  (online)	  
While	   recognising	   the	   need	   to	   increase	   the	   use	   of	   energy,	   there	   are	   policy	   targets	   include	   generating	  
10%	  of	  the	  power	  from	  non-­‐conventional	  renewable	  energy	  by	  2015,	  while	  also	  looking	  to	  reduce	  the	  
business	  as-­‐usual-­‐energy	  demand	  by	  2020	  by	  20%.	  	  

Much	  of	  the	  progress	  in	  terms	  of	  climate	  change	  has	  been	  in	  energy	  sector	  through	  the	  promotion	  of	  
renewables.	   The	   GEF	   supported	   projects	   –national,	   regional	   and	   global	   have	   tended	   to	   focus	   on	   this	  
aspect	  as	  well.	  




                                                                                                                                                               50
                                   Climate	  change	  and	  the	  GEBs	  
                                   GHG	                   Increase	  in	          Improved	               Low	  carbon	     Carbon	  
GEF	  Project	                   Mitigation	            REs	  and	              efficiency,	  	        development	       stocks	     Other	  GEBs	  
                                                           reduction	  in	         transmission,	  and	  
                                                           FFs	                     end	  use	  
104	   –	   Energy	   üü	                            üü	                    ü	                                                      BD/LD	  
Service	  delivery	  	  

425	   –	   RE	   and	                                 ü	  
Capacity	  Building	  

1545	   –	   RE	   and	   üü	                       üü	                                                   ü	  
Rural	            Economic	  
Development	  
2996	   –	   Portfolio	                                                           üü	  
Approach	                to	  
Distributed	  
Generation	  
Opportunity	  	  
4096	   -­‐	   Sustainable	   üü	                    üü	                                                   ü	          ü	  
Biomass	            Energy	  
Production	            and	  
Bio-­‐Energy	  
Technologies	  
4114	   –	   bamboo	   üü	                           üü	                                                                 üü	       LD	  
processing	  
4609	   –	   Resilience	                                                                                                                    LD/BD/	  
to	  climate	  change	  –	                                                                                                                 CCA	  
post	                   conflict	  
recovery	  
2753	                             -­‐	                                                                                          üü	       LD/BD/	  
Participatory	                                                                                                                                CCA	  
Coastal	                  Zone	  
Restoration	                   and	  
Sustainable	  
Management	                      in	  
the	                    Eastern	  
Province	   of	   Post-­‐
Tsunami	  Sri	  Lanka	  
üü	  	  -­‐	  indicates	  main	  objectives	  covers	  this	  GEB	  and	  was/will	  be	  primary	  focus	  
ü	  -­‐	  indicates	  main	  objectives	  covers	  this	  GEB	  but	  with	  less	  focus	  	  	  




                                                                                                                                                            51
4. International	  waters

   The	  International	  waters	  GEBs	  considered	  for	  Sri	  Lanka:	  

         •      Multi-­‐state	  cooperation	  to	  reduce	  threats	  to	  international	  waters;
         •      Reduced	  p ollution	  load	  in	  international	  waters	  from	  nutrient	  enrichment	  and	  other	  land
                based	  stresses;
         •      Restored	  and	  sustained	  coastal	  and	  marine	  ecosystems	  goods	  and	  services,	  including	  globally
                relevant	  biodiversity	  and	  ecosystems
                                                                                                                              Source:	  GEF	  

As	  an	  island	  state	  situated	  in	  the	  Northern	  Indian	  Ocean,	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  marine	  environment	  comes	  under	  
the	   International	   Waters	   Category	   as	   it	   lays	   in	   the	   Bay	   of	   Bengal	   Large	   Marine	   Ecosystem	   (BOBLME).	  
Other	   than	   Sri	   Lanka,	   BOBLME	   is	   bordered	   by	   Bangladesh,	   India,	   Indonesia,	   Malaysia,	   Maldives,	  
Myanmar,	   and	   Thailand.	   The	   LME	   covers	   an	   area	   of	   about	   3,660,130	   km 2	   and	   contains	   3.63%	   and	   0.12%	  
of	   the	   world’s	   coral	   reefs	   and	   sea	   mounts,	   respectively.	   It	   is	   influenced	   by	   the	   second	   largest	   hydrologic	  
region	   in	   the	   world,	   the	   Ganges-­‐Brahmaputra-­‐Meghna	   Basin,	   which	   	   spread	   over	   five	   countries.	   	   The	  
BOBLME	   and	   its	   natural	   resources	   are	   of	   considerable	   social	   and	   economic	   importance	   to	   the	   bordering	  
countries.	   Activities	   such	   as	   fishing,	   marine	   farming,	   tourism	   and	   shipping	   contribute	   to	   foodsecurity,	  
employment	   and	   national	   economies.	   Marine	   living	   resources	   are	   extremely	   important	   to	   the	   coastal	  
poor,	  particularly	  as	  a	  source	  of	  food	  (BOBLME	  Project,	  2012).	  

The	   maritime	   boundaries	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   are	   established	   under	   the	   Maritime	   Zones	   Law,	   No.	   22	   of	   1976	  
(MZL)	   that	   follows	   the	   framework	   provided	   by	   the	   United	   Nation	   Convention	   on	   the	   Law	   of	   the	   Sea	  
(UNCLOS),	   to	   which	   Sri	   Lanka	   became	   signatory	   in	   December	   1982	   and	   ratified	   in	   1994.	   	   Under	   the	   MZL,	  
different	  maritime	  zones	  have	  been	  declared	  by	  a	  Presidential	  Proclamation	  gazetted	  in	  January	  1977.	  
The	  Sovereignty	  of	  the	  Republic	  extends	  to	  the	  territorial	  sea	  and	  to	  the	  airspace	  over	  the	  territorial	  sea.	  
The	  Exclusive	  Economic	  Zone	  (EEZ)	  of	  the	  country	  extends	  to	  a	  distance	  of	  200	  nautical	  miles	  from	  the	  
baseline.	  	  The	  area	  enclosed	  by	  the	  EEZ	  is	  reported	  as	  517,000	  sq.	  km,	  which	  is	  7.8	  times	  the	  total	  land	  
area	  of	  the	  country.	  Within	  this	  zone	  the	  country	  has	  sovereign	  rights	  to	  explore,	  exploit,	  conserve	  and	  
manage	   natural	   resources,	   both	   living	   and	   non-­‐living	   and	   exclusive	   rights	   to	   authorize	   regulate	   and	  
control	  scientific	  research.	  	  	  (UN,	  1993,	  Joseph,	  2003).	  Sri	  Lanka	  and	  India	  agreed	  on	  June	  1974	  to	  the	  
delimitation	   of	   a	   boundary	   through	   the	   "historic	   waters"	   of	   Palk	   Bay.	   This	   agreement	   came	   into	   force	   in	  
July	  1974.	  Another	  agreement	  between	  the	  two	  countries	  in	  1976	  determines	   the	  maritime	  boundary	  in	  
the	  areas	  of	  Gulf	  of	  Mannar,	  Palk	  Straight	  and	  Bay	  of	  Bengal	  (DoD/USA,	  2005).	  

Under	  the	  provisions	  of	  UNCLOS,	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  entitled	  to	  lodge	  a	  claim	  for	  an	  extended	  area	  of	  seabed	  
where	  the	  thickness	  of	  the	  sediment	  layer	  is	  over	  1km	  and	  once	  this	  claim	  is	  accepted,	  the	  country	  could	  
gain	  an	  additional	  seabed	  area	  which	  would	  be	  23	  times	  the	  island's	  land	  area.	  In	  addition	  to	  the	  living	  
resources,	  the	  EEZ	  and	  the	  extended	  area,	  which	  will	  come	  under	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  jurisdiction,	  also	  contain	  
valuable	   non-­‐living	   resources	   such	   as	   hydrocarbon	   sources	   and	   a	   variety	   of	   economically	   important	  
minerals	  including	  manganese	  nodules	  (MF&AR,	  2007).	  	  

Sri	  Lanka	  has	  a	  coastline	  of	  approximately	  1,620	  km,	  which	  includes	  the	  shoreline	  of	  bays	  and	  inlets,	  but	  
excludes	   the	   lagoons	   (CCD,	   2006).The	   main	   economic	   activities	   associated	   with	   marine	   waters	   are	  
fishery,	  maritime	  transport	  and	  tourism.	  	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  exploiting	  the	  coastal	  fisheries	  resources	  close	  to	  
its	   Maximum	   Sustainable	   Yield	   (MSY),	   while	   the	   deep	   sea	   resources	   which	   were	   largely	   untapped	   or	  
being	   exploited	   by	   foreign	   vessels	   illegally,	   which	   is	   now	   become	   a	   huge	   political	   issue	   (CB,	   2008).	   More	  
recently	  there	  have	  been	  several	  incidences	  of	  illegal	  fishing	  of	  foreign	  boats	  in	  Sri	  Lankan	  waters	  that	  

                                                                                                                                                                        52
have	   been	   reported	   in	   the	   media.	   In	   the	   post	   war	   era	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Fisheries	   aims	   to	   expand	   and	  
promote	   off-­‐shore	   fishing.	   While	   dolphin	   and	   whale	   watching	   has	   become	   new	   attractions	   for	   the	  
tourism	  sector.	  	  

Strategic	  location	  of	  Sri	  Lanka	  in	  the	  Indian	  Ocean	  close	  to	  east	  west	  shipping	  route	  and	  the	  increased	  
shipping	   activity	   projected	   within	   next	   decade	   has	   given	   vision	   to	   enhance	   capacity	   in	   Sri	   Lankan	  
commercial	   ports	   at	   Colombo,	   Hambantota,	   Trincomalee.	   According	   to	   the	   “Mahinda	   Chinthana”	  
development	   policy	   framework,	   rapid	   development	   in	   tourism	   and	   marine	   related	   industries	   is	  
expected.	   In	   the	   light	   of	   these	   developments	   Sri	   Lanka	   face	   a	   greater	   risk	   of	   marine	   pollution	   due	   to	  
oil/chemical	   spill	   or	   due	   to	   dumping	   of	   ship	   generated	   waste	   and	   need	   to	   enhance	   and	   strengthen	  
awareness,	   preparedness	   and	   capacity	   to	   counter	   possible	   threat	   caused	   to	   marine	   environment.	  
Marine	   Pollution	   Prevention	   Authority	   was	   established	   under	   the	   Marine	   Pollution	   Prevention	   Act	   No.	  
59	   of	   1981.	   With	   a	   view	   to	   strengthen	   the	   legal	   authority	   vested	   with	   this	   authority	   to	   deal	   with	   marine	  
pollution	  incidents	  and	  to	  implement	  international	  conventions	  relating	  to	  marine	  pollution	  prevention	  
as	  applicable	  to	  GOSL,	  the	  existing	  act	  was	  repealed	  and	  Marine	  Pollution	  Prevention	  act	  No.	  35	  of	  2008	  
was	   enacted	   and	   was	   operationilsed	   in	   January	   2009.In	   line	   with	   the	   Act	   this	   authority	   was	   re-­‐named	   as	  
Marine	  Environment	  Protection	  Authority	  (MOE,	  2012).	  

Presently	   a	   GEF	   funded	   regional	   International	   Waters	   project	   entitled	   Bay	   of	   Bengal	   Large	   Marine	  
Ecosystem	   Project	   (BOBLME)	   is	   being	   executed	   by	   FAO	   to	   improve	   the	   lives	   of	   coastal	   populations	  
through	  improved	  regional	  management	  of	  the	  Bay	  of	  Bengal	  environment	  and	  its	  fisheries.	  Key	  issues	  
to	   be	   addressed	   by	   this	   project	   include:	   (i)	   overexploitation	   of	   living	   resources,	   (ii)	   critical	   habitat	  
degradation,	   (iii)	   land-­‐based	   sources	   of	   pollution,	   and	   (iv)	   the	   status	   of	   these	   critical	   habitats,	   post-­‐
tsunami,	   and	   their	   ability	   to	   support	   livelihoods	   in	   the	   future.	   The	   project	   will	   address	   one	   of	   the	   key	  
barriers	   to	   resolving	   these	   issues;	   the	   lack	   of	   regional	   institutional	   arrangements	   to	   facilitate	   a	  
coordinated	   approach	   among	   the	   BOBLME	   countries.	   Addoitonally	   illegal	   fishing	   and	   poaching;	  
sustainable	   utilization	   of	   migratory	   species;	   protection	   of	   shared	   non-­‐targeted	   species	   such	   as	   turtles,	  
dugongs	   and	   sea	   birds;	   and	   safety	   at	   sea	   issues	   are	   also	   pirotity	   issues	   with	   in	   the	   BOBLME	   (BOBLME	  
Project,	  2012).	  	  

Sri	   Lanka	   is	   presently	   party	   to	   several	   bi-­‐lateral	   and	   multi-­‐lateral	   agreements	   developed	   with	   the	  
objective	  of	  collaborative	  management	  of	  marine	  resources	  with	  neighboring	  countries.	  	  Few	  examples	  
are:	  
 • South	   Asian	   Seas	   Action	   Plan	   Developed	   in	   1995	   under	   the	   umbrella	   of	   UNEP	   Regional	   Seas
         Programme.	   The	   objective	   is	   to	   protect	   and	   manage	   the	   marine	   environment	   and	   related	   coastal
         ecosystems	   of	   the	   region	   through	   the	   promotion	   of	   sustainable	   development	   of	   the	   resources
         (SACEP/UNEP,	  1995)
 • The	   Bay	   of	   Bengal	   Programme	   (BOBP-­‐IGO)	   is	   an	   Inter-­‐Governmental	   Organization	   mandated	   to
         enhance	   cooperation	   among	   member	   countries,	   other	   countries	   and	   organizations	   in	   the	   region
         and	   to	   provide	   technical	   and	   management	   advisory	   services	   for	   sustainable	   coastal	   fisheries
         development	  and	  management	  in	  the	  Bay	  of	  Bengal	  region.	  	  The	  BOBP-­‐IGO	  presently	  covers	  four
         countries:Bangladesh,	  India,	  Maldives,	  Sri	  Lanka	  (Anonymous,	  2011).




                                                                                                                                                                              53
5. POPs

   The	  POPs	  GEBs	  considered	  for	  Sri	  Lanka	  

         •      Reduced	  POP	  risks	  on	  human	  health	  and	  the	  environment	  through	  reducing	  and	  eliminating
                production,	  use	  and	  releases	  of	  POPs;	  and
         •      Protected	  ecosystems	  and	  their	  goods	  and	  services,	  including	  biodiversity,	  from	  POP	  impacts.
                                                                                                                                Source:	  GEF	  



Persistent	   Organic	   Pollutants	   (POPs)	   can	   be	   categorized	   into	   three	   groups:	   pesticides,	   industrial	  
chemicals	   and	   unintentional	   by-­‐products.	   The	   Pesticides	   are	   Aldrin,	   Chlordane,	   Dieldrin,	   Endrin,	  
Heptachlor,	  Hexachlorobenzene	  (HCB),	  Mirex	  and	  Toxaphene	  that	  are	  no	  longer	  used	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  The	  
industrial	  chemical	  Polychlorinated	  Biphenyls	  (PCBs)	  is	  widely	  used	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  The	  two	  unintentional	  
by	   products	   are	   Dioxins	   (Polychlorinated	   Dibenzo	   Dioxin	   -­‐	   PCDD)	   and	   Furans	   (Polychlorinated	   Dibenzo	  
Furan	   (PCDF)	   that	   are	   also	   present	   due	   to	   incomplete	   combustion	   in	   various	   anthropogenic	   activities	  
(MOE	  2005).	  As	  a	  country	  where	  agriculture	  is	  a	  main	  livelihood,	  the	  major	  use	  of	  POPs	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  as	  
agricultural	   pesticides.	   However	   POPs	   pesticides	   are	   not	   manufactured	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   but	   imported	   as	  
ready-­‐to-­‐use	  products	  or	  technical	  materials	  for	  local	  formulation.	  	  	  

Sri	   Lanka	   has	   been	   fortunate	   that	   the	   detrimental	   effects	   of	           The	   first	   synthetic	  pesticide	   to	  be	   used	  
POPs	   have	   been	   noted	   and	   substantial	   measures	   have	   taken	                   in	  the	  country	   on	   a	   large	   scale	  was	   DDT	  
place	   even	   decades	   before	   the	   Stockholm	   Convention	   came	                        in	   the	  late	   1940s	  and	   it	   was	  followed	   by	  
into	   force.	   With	   the	   implementation	   of	   the	   Control	   of	                      benzene-­‐hexa-­‐chloride	                         (BHC	         or	  
Pesticides	   Act	   No	   33	   of	   1980,	   all	   POPs	   pesticides	   were	   banned.	     Lindane)	   to	   control	   the	   malaria	   vector.	  
The	   prohibition	   of	   use	   of	   POPs	   pesticides	   was	   initiated	   in	   the	     Subsequently	   these	   pesticides	   were	  
early	   1970s	   and	   was	   completed	   in	   1996	   with	   the	   ban	   of	              used	   in	   agriculture	   for	   control	   of	   pests	  
chlordane,	  which	  was	  the	  last	  POPs	  pesticide	  used	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	               to	  meet	  the	  increasing	  demand	  for	  food	  
(Table	  10).	  Prior	  to	  completing	  the	  ban,	  the	  last	  remaining	  use	              after	   the	   2nd	   World	   War.	   By	   the	   next	  
                                                                                                             decade	   more	   toxic	   chemicals	   such	   as	  
of	   chlordane	   was	   termite	   control	   in	   a	   building	   construction	  
                                                                                                             aldrin,	  dieldrin,	  endrin	  and	  others	  were	  
sites	  (CEJ,	  2006;	  MOE	  2005).	  	                                                               introduced	   and	   used	   indiscriminately	  
                                                                                                             for	   control	   of	   pests	   in	   the	   fields	   of	  
The	   problems	   related	   to	   POPs	   pesticides	   are	   due	   to	   the	                 agriculture,	   veterinary,	   public	   health,	  
possibility	  of	  illegal	  imports	  through	  false	  declarations,	  lack	  of	                 and	  the	  industry	  	  
resources	   for	   systematic	   screening	   of	   imports	   as	   well	   as	   for	                                                                  (CEJ,	  2006)	  
identification	   and	   analysis,	   and	   inadequate	   data	   on	  
environmental	  impact	  baselines	  and	  health	  issues.	  	  One	  of	  the	  main	  concerns	  associated	  presently	  with	  
POPs	  pesticides	  is	  the	  possibility	  of	  exposure	  through	  contaminated	  sites/environmental	  compartment	  
resulted	  from	  historical	  uses.	  However,	  there	  is	  very	  little	  information	  available	  on	  safe	  environmental	  
levels,	   which	   seriously	   incapacitates	   arriving	   at	   reasonable	   predictions	   on	   potential	   human	   and	  
environmental	   adverse	   effects	   arising	   from	   POPs	   pesticide	   use	   in	   Sri	   Lanka.	   	   Some	   data	   is	   available	  
concerning	   the	   concentration	   of	   limited	   number	   of	   pesticides	   in	   surface	   waters,	   river	   waters,	   while	  
isolated	   incidences	   of	   pesticide	   related	   deaths	   of	   fish	   populations,	   snakes,	   etc.	   have	   been	   reported	   in	  
surface	  waters	  following	  heavy	  application	  of	  mostly	  organophosphate	  and	  carbamate	  type	  of	  pesticides	  
in	  agricultural	  fields	  without	  possible	  long-­‐term	  environmental	  damages	  (CEJ,	  2006;	  MoE,	  2005).	  




                                                                                                                                                                                  54
Table	  11:	  Historical	  Use	  of	  POPs	  as	  Pesticides	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  
     Name	  of	  the	  Chemical	           Year	  of	  administrative	  declaration	  of	                           Last	  Imports	  
                                                prohibition	  /restriction	  of	  imports	                   Amount	  (kg/yr)	             Year	  
   Toxaphene	                                                    1970+	                                                NA	  
   Endrin	                                                        1970	                                                NA	                       -­‐	  
   DDT	                                                           1976	                                              316,522	                  1976	  
   Aldrin	                                                        1986	                                               7,040	                   1986	  
   Heptachlor	                                                   1986*	                                                NA	                       -­‐	  
   Dieldrin	                                                      1992	                                               1,100	                   1991	  
   Chlordane	                                                     1996	                                               4,600	                   1994	  
   Hexachlorobenzene	                                        Never	  been	  used	                                   None	  
   Mirex	                                                    Never	  been	  used	                                   None	  
NA-­‐	  Not	  Available	  *	  Year	  of	  restriction	  for	  termite	  control	  +	  Year	  maximum	  expected	  in	  use	  
Source:	  Jayakody.	  S.	  2005,	  Office	  of	  the	  Pesticide	  Registrar:	  as	  used	  in	  CEJ	  2006.	  	  

As	   reported	   in	   the	   National	   Implementation	   Plan:	   “PCB	   was	   used	   extensively	   as	   a	   dielectric	   in	  
transformers	  until	  international	  production	  ceased	  in	  1986.	  Of	  the	  estimated	  18,500	  transformers	  in	  the	  
electricity	   and	   industrial	   sector,	   a	   very	   few	   pure	   PCB	   transformers	   have	   been	   identified.	   Initially	   it	   was	  
assumed	   that	   only	   transformers	   manufactured	   before	   1986	   had	   high	   probability	   of	   containing	   PCB.	  
However,	   sampling	   across	   different	   era	   of	   manufacture	   using	   field	   test	   kits	   and	   laboratory	   analysis	  
indicates	   that	   there	   is	   a	   very	   high	   degree	   of	   cross	   contamination	   of	   even	   non-­‐PCB	   transformers	   during	  
routine	  maintenance	  even	  among	  relatively	  new	  transformers.	  	  

The	  danger	  with	  PCBs	  is	  that	  PCB	  oils	  can	  cause	  contamination	  of	  ground	  and	  surface	  waters,	  soil	  and	  
air.	  Contamination	  can	  take	  place	  during	  maintenance	  and	  through	  recyclers,	  scrapping	  yards	  or	  repair	  
yards.	  The	  recyclers	  use	  a	  considerable	  quantity	  of	  used	  transformer	  oil	  in	  their	  daily	  operations.	  They	  
use	  sawdust	  to	  absorb	  the	  oil	  during	  draining	  of	  transformers.	  The	  sawdust	  soaked	  with	  transformer	  oil	  
is	  then	  handed	  over	  to	  the	  local	  authorities	  for	  disposal.	  Therefore,	  there	  is	  a	  possibility	  of	  dumping	  and	  
burning	   of	   sawdust	   used	   for	   cleaning	   spilled	   oil,	   which	   might	   contain	   PCBs.	   Three	   experiments	   of	  
burning	   PCB	   oil	   have	   been	   tried	   in	   a	   cement	   kiln	   and	   could	   be	   an	   alternative	   to	   manage	   PCBs	   (MOE	  
2005,	  CEJ	  2006).	  

Some	  of	  the	  issues	  related	  to	  the	  control	  and	  elimination	  of	  PCBs	  as	  identified	  in	  the	  NIP:	  
• Long	  life	  span	  of	  PCBs	  containing	  equipment	  –	  30	  –	  35	  years
• High	  cost	  of	  replacement	  of	  PCBs	  containing	  equipment
• Lack	   of	   legislation	   to	   prevent	   import	   of	   PCB	   containing	   equipment	   –	   no	   legislation	   dedicated	   to
   prevent	  imports	  and	  use
• Lack	  of	  facilities	  in	  testing	  for	  PCBs;
• Recycling	  of	  transformers	  without	  testing	  for	  presence	  of	  PCBs	  that	  can	  lead	  to	  more	  contamination;
• Closed	  systems	  using	  dielectric	  oils	  can	  be	  a	  future	  source	  of	  PCB	  contamination;

In	  terms	  of	  unintended	  POPs	  produced	  in	  Sri	  Lanka,	  estimations	  were	  made	  using	  a	  toolkit	  developed	  by	  
UNEP.	  The	  main	  sources	  of	  releases	  of	  PCDD	  and	  PCDF	  (Dioxins	  and	  Furans)	  were	  identified	  as:	  
• The	  uncontrolled	  combustion	  of	  wastes,	  primarily	  in	  dumps	  and	  in	  the	  open;
• The	  processing	  of	  metals,	  in	  particular	  scrap	  copper	  where	  a	  significant	  amount	  of	  PCDD/F	  is	  likely	  to
        be	  associated	  with	  the	  residues	  from	  gas	  cleaning	  systems;
• The	  incineration	  of	  medical	  wastes	  carried	  out	  under	  very	  poorly	  controlled	  conditions;
• Burning	  of	  biomass	  in	  homes	  for	  cooking,	  industry	  and	  for	  disposal	  of	  agricultural	  residues.
                                                                                                                                       (MOE	  2005)	  



                                                                                                                                                                      55
There	   are	   implications	   for	   health	   from	   short	   term	   issues	   like	   irritation	   to	   more	   long	   term	   effects	   such	   as	  
cancer,	  immunological	  and	  neurological	  issues.	  There	  are	  also	  effects	  on	  the	  health	  of	  ecosystems	  and	  
wildlife.	  	  

Sri	  Lanka	  became	  a	  signatory	  to	  the	  Stockholm	  Convention	  on	  POPs	  on	  5th	  September	  2001	  and	  ratified	  
the	   Convention	   in	   December	   2005.	   	   To	   meet	   the	   obligations	   towards	   the	   convention,	   a	   National	  
Implementation	  Plan	  was	  prepared	  in	  2006	  with	  GEF	  support	  (GEF	  ID	  1777	  -­‐	  Enabling	  activities	  for	  the	  
Stockholm	   Convention	   on	   Persistent	   Organic	   Pollutants	   (POPs):	   National	   Implementation	   Plan	   for	   Sri	  
Lanka).	  	  

A	   national	   coordinating	   committee	   has	   been	   formed	   under	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Environment	   and	  
Harmonized	  System	  (HS)	  codes	  for	  prioritised	  POPs	  chemicals	  has	  been	  established	  in	  collaboration	  with	  
Department	  of	  Customs.	  	  Further	  National	  Inventories	  for	  PCBs,	  Dioxins	  and	  Furans	  and	  Pesticides	  have	  
been	   undertaken	   (MoE,	   2008).	   Additionally	   there	   are	   several	   NGOs	   actively	   participating	   in	   events	  
organized	  by	  the	  International	  POPs	  Elimination	  Network	  (IPEN).	  


6. Land	  degradation
Land	  Degradation	  GEBs	  considered	  for	  Sri	  Lanka	  
       •      Improved	  provision	  of	  agro-­‐ecosystem	  and	  forest	  ecosystem	  goods	  and	  services;
       •      Reduced	  vulnerability	  of	  agro-­‐ecosystems	  and	  forest	  ecosystems	  to	  climate	  change	  and
              other	  human-­‐induced	  impacts;
       •      Conservation	  and	  sustainable	  use	  of	  biodiversity	  in	  productive	  landscapes;
                                                                                                                         Source:	  GEF	  
Sri	   Lanka	   consists	   of	   6.5	   million	   ha	   of	   land,	   where	   only	   about	   50%	   is	   arable	   due	   to	   unsuitable	   terrain,	  
inland	   water	   bodies	   and	   forest	   reservations.	   At	   present	   with	   an	   estimated	   population	   of	   about	   20.2	  
million,	  the	  per	  capita	  arable	  land	  area	  is	  less	  than	  1.5ha	  indicating	  heavy	  pressure	  on	  land	  resources.	  
The	   present	   land	   use	   pattern	   of	   the	   country	   stems	   from	   the	   legacy	   of	   a	   land	   policy	   from	   the	   colonial	  
times	   where	   export	   based	   commercial	   agriculture	   was	   superimposed	   on	   a	   traditional	   farming	   systems	  
(DLUPP,	  2011).	  As	  table	  10	  indicates	  agricultural	  activities	  –	  including	  the	  plantation	  crops	  and	  land	  set	  
aside	  for	  conservation	  are	  the	  highest	  percentages.	  	  

Table	  12:	  Land	  Use	  categories	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  
                                      Land	  Use	  Category	                                                  Extent	  (ha)	                   %	  
Agriculture	  (Tea,	  Rubber,	  Coconut,	  Paddy,	  &	  other	  crops)	                                       2,605,647	                            40	  
Urban	  Areas	                                                                                                           29,353	                          >1	  
Forests,	  Wildlife,	  Reserves	  &	  Catchments	  areas	                                                       2,000,000	                            31	  
Underutilized	  Lands	                                                                                                728,800	                            11	  
Reservations	  (Reservoirs,	  Streams	  &	  Irrigation	  Channels)	                                               585,300	                             9	  
Steeply	  sloping	  lands,	  unsuitable	  for	  Agriculture	                                                      380,000	                             6	  
Barren	  Lands	                                                                                                        77,000	                             1	  
Highlands	  over	  5000	  feet	  (1600m)	  above	  mean	  sea	  level	                                          76,400	                             1	  
Mangroves	  &	  Marsh	  Lands	                                                                                       70,000	                             1	  
Total	                                                                                                               6,552,500	  
Source:	  DLUPP,	  2011.	  

Land	   is	   considered	   as	   the	   most	   important	   and	   heavily	   threatened	   natural	   resource	   in	   the	   country.	   Sri	  
Lanka	   is	   a	   predominantly	   agricultural	   nation,	   while	   land	   ownership	   is	   considered	   as	   a	   social	   and	  
                                                                                                                                                                             56
economic	   status.	   The	   agriculture	   sector	   is	   important	   in	   the	   local	   economy	   of	   the	   country,	   and	   is	   directly	  
linked	  to	  the	  systematic	  management	  of	  the	  land	  under	  cultivation.	  At	  present	  about	  37	  percent	  of	  the	  
people	  in	  the	  country	  are	  dependent	  on	  land	  centred	  activities,	  for	  their	  sustenance	  (MoE,	  2002).	   New	  
trends	   to	   develop	   infrastructure,	   urban	   centres	   coupled	   migration	   into	   city	   areas	   will	   impact	   this	   land	  
use	  pattern.	  

The	   island	   is	   not	   a	   desertification	   prone	   country,	   yet	   falls	   within	   the	   context	   of	   land	   degradation	   and	  
drought	   mitigation	   aspects	   of	   the	   UN	   Convention	   to	   Combat	   Desertification,	   (UNCCD).	   It	   is	   widely	  
accepted	   that	   land	   degradation	   is	   one	   of	   the	   most	   critical	   problems	   affecting	   the	   future	   economic	  
development	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  According	  to	  the	  Global	  Assessment	  of	  Soil	  Degradation	  (GLASOD),	  about	  50%	  
of	  land	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  degraded.	  The	  area	  affected	  by	  soil	  fertility	  decline	  is	  61%	  of	  the	  total	  agricultural	  
land.	   The	   major	   contributors	   to	   land	   degradation	   are	   soil	   erosion	   and	   soil	   fertility	   degradation.	   This	   in	  
turn	   affects	   productivity.	   Over	   exploitation	   of	   ground	   water,	   salinization,	   water	   logging	   and	   water	  
pollution	   are	   also	   becoming	   important	   contributors	   to	   land	   degradation.	   The	   demands	   of	   a	   rapidly	  
expanding	   population	   has	   set	   up	   pressures	   on	   the	   island’s	   natural	   resources	   and	   these	   in	   turn	   have	  
resulted	  in	  a	  high	  level	  of	  environmental	  degradation.	  The	  more	  important	  manifestations	  are	  heavy	  soil	  
losses;	   high	   sediment	   yields;	   soil	   fertility	   decline	   and	   reduction	   in	   crop	   yields;	   marginalization	   of	  
agricultural	   land;	   salinization;	   landslides	   and	   deforestation	   and	   forest	   degradation	   (MoE,	   2000;	   MoE,	  
2003:	  MoE,	  2006	  and	  2007).	  

Soil	  erosion	  is	  a	  common	  problem	  in	  the	  entire	  country	  and	  it	  has	  been	  estimated	  that	  nearly	  one	  third	  
of	  the	  land	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  is	  subjected	  to	  soil	  erosion,	  the	  erodible	  proportion	  ranging	  from	  less	  than	  10.0%	  
in	  some	  districts	  to	  over	  50.0%	  in	  others.	  Severe	  erosion	  takes	  place	  in	  the	  hill	  country	  on	  sloping	  lands	  
under	   market	   gardens	   (vegetables	   and	   potatoes)	   tobacco,	   poorly	   managed	   seedling	   tea	   and	   chena	  
cultivation.	  Soil	  erosion	  is	  also	  considered	  a	  threat	  to	  agricultural	  production	  in	  the	  rainfed	  farming	  areas	  
in	  the	  Dry	  Zone	  (MOE,	  2000;	  2006).	  

According	  to	  the	  National	  Building	  Research	  Organization	  (NBRO),	  about	  125,000	  ha	  of	  land	  in	  the	  hill	  
country	   are	   vulnerable	   to	   landslides.	   Although	   landslides	   occur	   due	   to	   various	   reasons,	   soil	   erosion	   is	  
one	  of	  the	  main	  reasons	  for	  the	  occurrence	  of	  landslides	  in	  the	  hill	  country.	  Landslides	  frequently	  occur	  
during	   the	   rainy	   season	   in	   areas	   with	   steep	   slopes	   and	   high	   rainfall.	   Human	   activities	   such	   as	  
deforestation	  and	  poor	  land	  uses	  have	  contributed	  to	  the	  increased	  incidence	  of	  landslides	  (MoE,	  2002).	  

There	  are	  a	  few	  important	  ground	  water	  sources	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  The	  Karstic	  ground	  water	  resource	  found	  
in	  the	  lime	  stone	  belt	  in	  the	  Jaffna	  Peninsula	  has	  been	  exploited	  for	  agriculture	  for	  over	  100	  years.	  	  In	  
this	  aquifer,	  a	  shallow	  lens	  of	  fresh	  water	  is	  found	  to	  float	  over	  the	  saline	  water.	  Over	  exploitation	  has	  
led	  to	  increased	  salinity.	  	  Further	  in	  the	  North	  western	  Province	  the	  intensive	  agriculture	  developed	  in	  
the	   area	   over	   the	   last	   few	   decades	   has	   caused	   several	   problems	   due	   to	   over-­‐exploitation	   of	   ground	  
water	  and	  over	  use	  of	  agro	  chemicals	  (MoE,	  2003;	  MoE,	  2006).	  	  

Existence	   of	   large	   number	   of	   decision	   making	   institutions	   with	   complicated	   legal	   systems	   and	  
overlapping	   policies	   had	   lead	   limited	   government	   interventions	   to	   conserve	   and	   improve	   the	  
productivity	   of	   land.	   Insecure	   tenure	   systems,	   extreme	   weather	   conditions	   including	   droughts	   and	  
floods	   and	   haphazard	   development	   initiatives	   are	   further	   contributing	   to	   land	   degradation.	  
Implementation	   of	   land	   conservation	   activities	   is	   generally	   confined	   to	   a	   few	   small	   donor	   funded	  
projects.	   Often,	   the	   process	   initiated	   by	   the	   projects	   could	   not	   be	   extended	   to	   other	   areas	   after	   the	  
project	  period	  due	  to	  the	  non-­‐availability	  of	  funds	  and	  the	  discontinuation	  of	  incentives	  offered	  to	  the	  
extension	  staff	  and	  the	  farmers	  (MoE,	  2000;	  MoE,	  2006)	  



                                                                                                                                                                       57
Sri	   Lanka	   signed	   and	   ratified	   the	   UN	   Convention	   to	   combat	   desertification	   and	   land	   degradation	  
(UNCCD)	   in	   1995	   and	   1998	   respectively.	   The	   Ministry	   of	   Environment	   is	   the	   focal	   point	   for	   the	  
implementation	  of	  activities	  of	  UNCCD	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  	  A	  	  National	  Action	  Programme	  (NAP)	  was	  prepared	  
in	   2002	   to	   identify	   the	   factors	   contributing	   to	   land	   degradation	   and	   practical	   measures	   necessary	   to	  
combat	   land	   degradation.	   A	   National	   Expert	   Committee	   in	   Land	   Degradation	   was	   formed	   in	   2004.	   In	  
2010	  the	  Land	  use	  Policy	  Planning	  Division	  was	  upgraded	  into	  a	  Department	  under	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Lands	  
(Gazette	  Extraordinary	  No.	  1654/21).	  




                                                                                                                                                           58
Annex	  1:	  References	  

     1. Anonymous,	  2011.	  Report	  of	  the	  Seventh	  Meeting	  of	  the	  Governing	  Council	  of	  the	  Bay	  of
         Bengal.
     2. Ausubel,	  J.,	  Christ,	  D.,	  Waggoner,	  P	  (Eds),	  2010.	  First	  Census	  of	  Marine	  Life	  2010.	  	  Highlights	  of	  a
         Decade	  of	  Discovery.	  	  Census	  of	  Marine	  Life.
     3. Bambaradeniya,	  C.	  N	  .B.	  	  (ed.),	  2006.	  Fauna	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  Status	  of	  Taxonomy,	  Research	  and
         Conservation.	  The	  World	  Conservation	  Union,	  Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka	  and	  Government	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,
         Vol.	  viii,	  pp.	  308.
     4. Bay	  of	  Bengal	  Large	  Marine	  Ecosystem	  Programme	  (BOBLME	  Project),	  2012.	  Transboundary
         Diagnostic	  Analysis.	  	  Vol.	  1:	  	  Issues,	  Proximate	  and	  Root	  causes.
     5. Central	  Bank	  of	  Sri	  Lanka	  (CB),	  2008.	  Annual	  Report	  2007.	  Colombo,	  Central	  Bank	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.
     6. Central	  Bank	  of	  Sri	  Lanka	  (CB),	  2011.	  Annual	  Report	  2011.	  Colombo,	  Central	  Bank	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.
     7. Centre	  for	  Environmental	  Justice	  (CEJ),	  2006,	  Country	  Situation	  Report	  on	  Persistent	  Organic
         Pollutants	  (POPs)	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  Centre	  for	  Environmental	  Justice.
     8. Centre	  for	  Poverty	  Analysis	  (CEPA),	  2011.	  	  Athulathmudali,	  S.,	  Balasuriya,	  A.,	  and	  Fernando,	  K.
         An	  exploratory	  study	  on	  adapting	  to	  climate	  change	  in	  coastal	  areas	  of	  Sri	  Lanka–	  Colombo:
         Centre	  for	  Poverty	  Analysis,	  2011.-­‐62p.;	  29cm.	  Working	  paper	  series	  No.	  18.
     9. Cheung,	  W.,	  Alder,	  J.,	  Karpouzi,	  V.,	  Watson,	  R.,	  Lam,	  V.,	  Day,	  C.,	  Kaschner,	  K.,	  and	  Pauley,
         D.	  ,2005:	  Patterns	  of	  Species	  Richness	  in	  the	  High	  Seas.	  	  Secretariat	  of	  the	  Convention	  on
         Biological	  Diversity,	  Montreal,	  Canada.	  	  Technical	  Series	  No.20.	  pp31
     10. Coast	  Conservation	  Department	  (CCD),	  2006.	  Sri	  Lanka	  Coastal	  Zone	  Management	  Plan	  —	  2004,
         Amended	  under	  the	  Section	  12(5)	  of	  the	  Coast	  Conservation	  Act	  No.	  57	  of	  1981,	  Government
         Gazette	  Notification	  No.	  1,429/11,	  24th	  of	  January	  2006.	  Department	  of	  Government	  Printing,
         Sri	  Lanka.
     11. Conservation	  international,	  2012.	  Western	  Ghats	  and	  Sri	  Lanka,	  accessed	  on	  5th	  December
         2012.	  <http://www.conservation.org/where/priority_areas/hotspots/asia-­‐pacific/Western-­‐
         Ghats-­‐and-­‐Sri-­‐Lanka/Pages/default.aspx>
     12. Davis,	  S.	  D.,	  Heywood,	  V.	  H.,	  &	  Hamilton	  A.	  C.,	  	  (eds.),	  1995.	  Centers	  of	  Plant	  Diversity,	  A	  guide
         and	  strategy	  for	  their	  conservation,	  Asia,	  Australasia	  and	  the	  Pacific,	  vol.	  2.	  	  IUCN	  Publication,
         Cambridge.
     13. De	  Silva,	  W.I.,	  2007.	  Population	  Projection	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  For	  the	  New	  Millennium,	  2001-­‐	  2101:
         Trends	  and	  Implications.	  Institute	  for	  Health	  Policy,	  Sri	  Lanka.
     14. Department	  of	  Census	  and	  Statistics	  (DCS),	  accessed	  on	  14th	  July
         2011.<http://www.statistics.gov.lk>.
     15. Department	  of	  Defence/	  United	  States	  of	  America	  (DoD/USA),	  Maritime	  Claims	  Reference
         Manual,	  Under	  Secretary	  Of	  Defence	  for	  Policy	  accessed	  22	  June	  2005,
         <http://www.dtic.mil/whs/directives/corres/html/20051m.htm>.
     16. Department	  of	  Land	  Use	  Policy	  Planning	  (DLUPP),	  2011.	  National	  Land	  Use	  Policy	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.
         Department	  of	  Land	  Use	  Policy	  Planning,	  Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka.
     17. Department	  of	  National	  Planning	  and	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Finance	  and	  Planning	  (DoNP	  and	  MoFP),
         2010.	  Sri	  Lanka	  the	  emerging	  wonder	  of	  Asia.	  Mahinda	  chintanavision	  for	  the	  future,	  The
         Development	  Policy	  Framework,	  Government	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  Department	  of	  National	  Planning	  and
         the	  Ministry	  of	  Finance	  and	  Planning.
                                                                                                                                                             59
18. DFCC:	  Changing	  the	  Sustainable	  Energy	  Landscape	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  accessed	  on	  20th	  July	  2013.
    <http://www.dfcc.lk/news/dfcc-­‐changing-­‐the-­‐sustainable-­‐energy-­‐landscape-­‐in-­‐sri-­‐lanka>
19. Edirisinghe,	  E.	  A.	  P.	  &	  Chandani,	  R.P.B.S.,	  2011,	  Updated	  Forest	  Cover	  Map,	  Ruk	  (August	  -­‐
    December),	  vol.	  26.	  	  A	  Publication	  by	  the	  Forest	  Conservation	  Department	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.
20. Forest	  Department	  (FD),	  2012,	  Sri	  Lanka	  REDD+	  Readiness	  Preparation	  Proposal	  for	  the	  UN-­‐
    REDD	  Programme,	  2012.	  Forest	  Department,	  Sri	  Lanka.	  (Final	  draft).
21. International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Nature(IUCN)	  Red	  List,	  accessed	  on	  02	  July	  2013.
    <http://www.iucnredlist.org/>.
22. International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Nature(IUCN)	  Red	  List,	  accessed;	  08	  July	  2013.
    <http://www.iucnredlist.org/>.
23. Joseph	  L.,	  2003.	  National	  Report	  Of	  Sri	  Lanka	  on	  the	  Formulation	  of	  a	  Transboundary	  Diagnostic
    Analysis	  and	  Strategic	  Action	  Plan	  for	  the	  Bay	  of	  Bengal	  Large	  Marine	  Ecosystem	  Programme.
24. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MoE)	  2010e.	  National	  Climate	  Change	  Adaptation	  Strategy	  for	  Sri
    Lanka	  2011-­‐2016.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
25. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MOE),	  2000.	  National	  Report	  on	  Desertification/Land	  Degradation	  in
    Sri	  Lanka.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
26. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MOE),	  2002.	  Second	  National	  Status	  Report	  on	  Land	  Degradation,
    Implementation	  of	  the	  UN	  convention	  to	  Combat	  desertification	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  Submitted	  to
    UNCCD	  Secretariat,	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
27. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MOE),	  2005.	  National	  Implementation	  Plan	  under	  the	  Stockholm
    Convention	  on	  POPs	  for	  Sri	  Lanka.	  Persistent	  Organic	  Pollutants	  (POPs)	  Project,	  Ministry	  of
    Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
28. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MOE),	  2008.	  Hand	  book	  on	  Multilateral	  Environment	  Agreements	  in
    Sri	  Lanka.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
29. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MoE),	  2010b.	  Sector	  Vulnerability	  Profile	  for:	  Biodiversity	  and
    Ecosystem	  Services:	  	  supplementary	  document	  to	  the	  National	  Climate	  Change	  Adaptation
    Strategy	  2011-­‐2016.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
30. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MoE),	  2011.	  Second	  National	  Communication	  on	  Climate	  Change
    submitted	  to	  the	  UNFCCC	  secretariat,	  2011.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Sri	  Lanka.
31. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  (MOE),	  2012.	  The	  National	  Red	  List	  2012	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  Conservation
    Status	  of	  the	  Fauna	  and	  Flora.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment,	  Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka,	  viii,	  pp.	  476.
32. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MOE),	  2003.	  National	  Action	  Programme	  for
    Combating	  Land	  Degradation	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources.
33. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  resources	  (MoE),	  2006.	  Third	  National	  Status	  Report	  on
    Land	  Degradation	  Implementation	  of	  the	  UN	  Convention	  to	  Combat	  Desertification	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.
    Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  resources.
34. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MOE),	  2007.	  Thematic	  Assessment	  Report	  on
    Land	  Degradation.	  National	  Capacity	  Needs	  Self	  Assessment	  for	  Global	  Environmental
    Management,	  NCSA	  Project,	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,	  Battaramulla,	  Sri
    Lanka.
35. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources	  (MoENR),	  2009.	  Fourth	  Country	  Report	  to	  the
    Convention	  on	  Biological	  Diversity.	  Prepared	  by	  J.	  D.	  S.	  Dela.	  (Unpublished)


                                                                                                                                         60
36. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources/	  United	  Nations	  Environment	  Programme
    (MoENR/UNEP),	  2009.	  Sri	  Lanka	  Environment	  Outlook.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural
    Resources/	  United	  Nations	  Environment	  Programme.
37. Ministry	  of	  Finance	  &	  Planning	  (MFP),	  2013:	  Annual	  Report,	  2012.	  	  Ministry	  of	  Finance	  &
    Planning-­‐	  The	  Treasury	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.
38. Ministry	  of	  Fisheries	  and	  Aquatic	  Resources	  (MF&AR),	  2007.	  Ten	  Year	  Development	  Policy
    Framework	  of	  the	  Fisheries	  and	  Aquatic	  Resources	  Sector:	  2007-­‐	  2016.	  	  Ministry	  of	  Fisheries	  and
    Aquatic	  Resources,	  Sri	  Lanka.
39. Ministry	  of	  Forestry	  and	  Environment	  (MOE),	  1999.	  Biodiversity	  Conservation	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  -­‐	  A
    Framework	  for	  Action.	  Ministry	  of	  Forestry	  and	  Environment,	  Battaramulla,	  Sri	  Lanka.
40. Ministry	  of	  Transport,	  Environment	  and	  Women	  Affairs	  (MTE	  &	  WA),	  1995.	  Strategy	  for	  the
    Preparation	  of	  a	  Biodiversity	  Action	  Plan	  for	  Sri	  Lanka.	  Ministry	  of	  Transport,	  Environment	  and
    Women	  Affairs.
41. National	  Council	  for	  Sustainable	  Development	  and	  the	  Presidential	  Secretariat	  (NCSD	  and	  PS),
    2009.	  National	  Action	  Plan	  for	  the	  Haritha	  Lanka	  Programme,	  National	  Council	  for	  Sustainable
    Development	  and	  the	  Presidential	  Secretariat,	  Colombo	  Sri	  Lanka.
42. Roberts,	  C.M.,	  C.J.	  McClean,	  J.E.N.	  Veron,	  J.P.	  Hawkins,	  G.R.	  Allen,	  D.E.	  McAllister,	  C.G.
    Mittermeier,	  F.W.	  Schueler,	  Spalding,	  M.,	  Wells,	  F.,	  Vynne	  C.,	  Werner,	  T.	  B.,	  2002:	  	  Marine
    biodiversity	  hotspots	  and	  conservation	  priorities	  for	  tropical	  reefs.	  Science	  295:1,280–1,284.
43. South	  Asia	  Co-­‐operative	  Environment	  Programme/	  United	  Nations	  Environment	  Programme
    (SACEP/	  UNEP),	  1995.	  Action	  Plan	  for	  the	  Protection	  and	  Management	  of	  the	  Marine	  and
    Coastal	  Environment	  of	  the	  South	  Asian	  Seas	  Region.	  SAS	  Action	  Plan.
44. Sri	  Lanka	  Sustainable	  Energy	  Authority	  (SLSEA),	  2011.	  Sri	  Lanka	  Energy	  Balance.	  An	  Analysis	  of
    Energy	  Sector	  Performance.	  Sri	  Lanka	  Sustainable	  Energy	  Authority,	  Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka.
45. Sri	  Lanka	  Sustainable	  Energy	  Authority	  (SLSEA),	  accessed	  on	  19th	  June	  2011.
    <http://www.energy.gov.lk/>
46. Stattersfield,	  A.,	  Crosby	  M.,	  Long,	  A.	  &	  Wege,	  D.,	  1998.	  Endemic	  Bird	  Areas	  in	  the	  World:
    Priorities	  for	  Biodiversity	  Conservation.	  	  Birdlife	  International,	  Cambridge.
47. Survey	  Department	  (SD),	  2007.	  National	  Atlas	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  Survey	  Department	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.
48. United	  Nations	  Economic	  and	  Social	  Commission	  for	  Asia	  and	  the	  Pacific	  (UN),	  1993.	  Study	  on
    the	  Implications	  of	  the	  New	  Ocean	  Regime	  Deriving	  from	  the	  1982	  UN	  convention	  on	  the	  Law	  of
    the	  Sea:	  	  Sri	  Lanka	  and	  the	  Law	  of	  the	  Sea,	  Vol.	  3	  ESCAP.
49. World	  Bank	  (WB),	  n.	  d.,	  accessed	  on	  24th	  February	  2013.	  <data.worldbank.org>.




                                                                                                                                           61
                         TECHNICAL	  DOCUMENT	  C:	  

                     Review	  of	  Outcomes	  to	  Impact:	  

	  Conservation	  of	  the	  Biodiversity	  in	  the	  Rain	  Forests	  Project	  

                                    (GEF	  ID	  818)	  




                                                                                               63
Acronyms	  
A	            Assumptions	  
BCAP	         Biodiversity	  Conservation	  Action	  Plan	  	  
CBD	          Convention	  on	  Biological	  Diversity	  	  
CBO	          Community	  Based	  Organization	  
FGD	          Focus	  Group	  Discussion	  
GEB	          Global	  Environmental	  Benefit	  
GEG	          Global	  Environmental	  Facility	  
ID	           Impact	  Drivers	  
IS	           Intermediate	  States	  	  
KDN	          Kanneliya-­‐Dediyagala-­‐Nakiyadeniya	  
KPI	          Key	  Person	  Interview	  
MSP	          Medium	  Sized	  Project	  	  
NCR	          National	  Conservation	  Review	  	  
NTFP	         Non-­‐timberForest	  Product	  
ROtI	         Review	  of	  Outcomes	  to	  Impact	  	  
TOC	          Theory	  of	  Change	  
UNDP	         United	  Nations	  Development	  Programme	  




                                                                        64
1. Introduction

As	   a	   part	   of	   the	   GEF	   Sri	   Lanka	   Country	   Portfolio	   Evaluation	   (CPE),	   a	   review	   of	   the	   project	   entitled	  
“Contributing	   to	   the	   Conservation	   of	   the	   Unique	   Biodiversity	   in	   the	   Threatened	   Rain	   Forests	   of	  
Southwest	   Sri	   Lanka”	   (GEF	   ID	   818)	   was	   carried	   out	   using	   the	   Review	   of	   Outcomes	   to	   Impact	   (ROtI)	  
methodology,	  which	  was	  developed	  by	  the	  GEF	  Evaluation	  Office.	  

This	  Medium	  Sized	  Project	  (MSP)	  was	  implemented	  between	  July	  2000	  and	  December	  2005.	  The	  total	  
budget	  for	  the	  project	  was	  US$	  975,713	  including	  GEF	  financing	  of	  US$	  749,713	  and	  US$	  226,000	  in	  co-­‐
financing	   from	   the	   Sri	   Lankan	   government.	   It	   was	   implemented	   by	   the	   United	   Nations	   Development	  
Programme	   (UNDP)	   and	   executed	   by	   the	   Forest	   Department,	   of	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Forestry	   and	  
Environment	  of	  the	  Government	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.	  	  

The	  project	  expected	  to	  pilot	  a	  forest	  management	  model	  to	  improve	  the	  protection	  of	  floral	  and	  faunal	  
species	  and	  to	  promote	  conservation	  of	  endemic	  species	  in	  the	  area	  with	  community	  participation.	  The	  
project	  aimed	  to	  create	  a	  positive	  change	  in	  forest	  management	  that	  would	  improve	  forest	  protection	  
from	  encroachment,	  illicit	  logging	  and	  unsustainable	  resource	  extraction	  while	  also	  enhancing	  the	  socio-­‐
economic	  status	  of	  buffer	  zone	  communities	  that	  were	  engaged	  in	  adverse	  forest	  use	  activities.	  	  	  

The	  following	  were	  the	  expected	  outcomes	  of	  the	  project;	  

      •      Buffer	  zone	  community	  (and	  society	  at	  large)	  cooperating	  in	  the	  conservation	  of	  the	  selected
             rainforest	  ecosystems	  harbouring	  globally	  threatened	  species
      •      A	  suitable	  model	  developed	  for	  securing	  collaboration	  between	  the	  local	  community,	  state
             agencies	  and	  other	  stakeholders	  in	  managing	  the	  rainforest	  ecosystems
      •      Sustainable	  use	  of	  non-­‐timber	  forest	  products	  (NTFP)	  secured
      •      Forests	  adequately	  protected	  against	  encroachment	  and	  illicit	  logging

The	  relevance	  and	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  project	  outcomes	  have	  been	  rated	  as	  satisfactory	  in	  the	  Terminal	  
Evaluation	  Report.	  	  This	  current	  review	  expects	  to	  assess	  whether	  the	  successful	  outcomes	  have	  actually	  
contributed	  to	  achieving	  a	  long-­‐lasting	  and	  favourable	  environmental	  impact.	  	  	  	  

This	   ROtI	   assessment	   followed	   the	   following	   steps.	   First,	   the	   project	   documents	   were	   reviewed	   and	   a	  
TOC	  was	  developed	  with	  the	  project	  stakeholders.	  In	  order	  to	  validate	  it	  and	  discover	  the	  sustainability	  
of	  the	  project	  benefits,	  key	  informant	  interviews	  (KIIs)	  were	  carried	  out	  with	  Forest	  Department	  officials,	  
ex-­‐officials	   and	   consultants	   and	   focus	   group	   discussions	   (FGDs)	   were	   held	   with	   the	   buffer	   zone	  
communities	  of	  the	  KanneliyaForest	  area	  and	  in	  the	  southern	  side	  of	  the	  Sinharaja	  World	  Heritage	  Site.	  
Information	  and	  data	  was	  also	  drawn	  from	  the	  Periodic	  Review	  of	  Man	  and	  Biosphere	  (MAB)	  Reserves	  in	  
Sri	   Lanka	   for	   the	   SinharajaWorld	   Heritage	   Site.	   Comparative	   data	   were	   also	   drawn	   from	   the	   Periodic	  
Review	   of	   Man	   and	   Biosphere	   (MAB)	   Reserves	   in	   Sri	   Lanka,which	   replicated	   the	   ROtI	   data	   collection	  
format	   for	   focus	   group	   discussions	   with	   the	   Sinharaja	   Forest	   buffer	   communities	   and	   also	   gathered	  
information	  from	  interviews	  with	  the	  Forest	  Reserve	  Officials.	  	  

The	   report	   is	   structured	   according	   to	   the	   ROtI	   methodology,	   starting	   with	   the	   characterisation	   of	   the	  
intended	   project	   environmental	   impacts,	   or	   Global	   Environmental	   Benefits	   (GEB)	   (section	   2).	   The	   logical	  

                                                                                                                                                                     65
sequence	  of	  conditions	  (i.e.	  the	  project	  theory	  of	  change	  -­‐	  TOC)	  deemed	  necessary	  to	  convert	  outcomes	  
to	  impacts	  was	  then	  modelled	  (sections	  3),	  and	  was	  followed	  by	  an	  assessment	  of	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  
the	   outcomes-­‐impacts	   pathways	   have	   been	   realised,	   which	   in	   turn	   provides	   an	   indirect	   measure	   of	  
impact	  that	  is	  likely	  to	  be	  achieved	  over	  time	  (section	  4).	  Section	  5	  provides	  a	  summary	  of	  the	  overall	  
conclusions	  of	  the	  ROtI	  assessment.	  


2. The	  project’s	  global	  environmental	  benefits

Sri	  Lanka	  ratified	  the	  Convention	  on	  Biological	  Diversity	  (CBD)	  in	  1994.	  This	  ratification	  of	  the	  CBD	  was	  
followed	   by	   the	   preparation	   of	   the	   national	   Biodiversity	   Conservation	   Action	   Plan	   (BCAP)	   in	   1999,	   which	  
has	  given	  high	  priority	  to	  the	  conservation	  of	  forest	  biodiversity.	  The	  Forestry	  Master	  Plan	  of	  1995,	  the	  
Forest	  Policy	   of	   1995	   and	   the	   Five-­‐year	  implementation	  programme	  of	  the	  Forest	  Department	  have	   also	  
given	  high	  priority	  to	  the	  conservation	  management	  of	  the	  biodiversity-­‐rich	  forests	  in	  the	  wet	  zone	  with	  
the	  participation	  of	  local	  people.	  The	  Forest	  Ordinance	  has	  been	  amended	  to	  include	  a	  new	  category	  of	  
forests	  –	  Conservation	  Forests.	  

The	   aim	   of	   the	   project	   was	   to	   protect	   the	   ecosystems	   in	   the	   rainforests	   of	   Sinharaja	   and	   Kanneliya,	  
which	   are	   exceptionally	   rich	   value	   in	   biodiversity,	   through	   community	   involved	   participatory	   forest	  
management.	   The	   Sinharaja	   forest	   is	   a	   World	   Heritage	   Site,	   an	   International	   Biosphere	   Reserve	   and	   a	  
National	   Heritage	   Wilderness	   Area.	   According	   to	   the	   National	   Conservation	   Review	   (NCR)	   carried	   out	  
from	  1991	  to	  1996,	  the	  inventoried	  sample	  plots	  contained	  337	  species	  of	  woody	  plants	  in	  the	  Sinharaja	  
forest.	   57%	   of	   these	   species	   were	   endemic	   and	   34%	   were	   globally	   threatened.	   Kanneliya	   forest	   is	   a	  
biodiversity-­‐rich	   lowland	   rainforest,	   which	   is	   a	   part	   of	   the	   Kanneliya-­‐Dediyagala-­‐Nakiyadeniya	   (KDN)	  
complex.	  According	  to	  the	  NCR,	  there	  were	  234	  woody	  species,	  of	  which	  66%	  were	  endemic	  and	  45%	  
were	  globally	  threatened.	  	  Both	  forests	  are	  also	  high	  in	  endemic	  fauna.	  	  

Since	  the	  economy	  of	  the	  buffer	  zone	  communities	  of	  these	  two	  forests	  was	  based	  on	  tea	  cultivation,	  
encroachment	  to	  expand	  tea	  lands	  was	  the	  main	  threat	  to	  these	  two	  forests.	  Illicit	  felling	  of	  timber	  by	  
timber	  dealers	  was	  also	  a	  threat	  to	  these	  two	  forests,	  but	  it	  was	  not	  prevalent.	  There	  was	  	  threat	  from	  
buffer	   zone	   villagers	   through	   the	   removal	   of	   poles	   and	   felling	   of	   small	   timber	   for	   household	   and	  
community	   requirements.	   The	   collection	   of	   non-­‐timber	   forest	   products	   (NTFPs)	   was	   also	   considered	   a	  
threat	  to	  biodiversity	  in	  these	  two	  forests.	  Buffer	  zone	  villagers	  were	  also	  prone	  to	  collect	  several	  types	  
of	  products	  for	  their	  household	  or	  community	  use.	  

It	   was	   expected	   that	   through	   the	   successful	   implementation	   of	   the	   project,	   protection	   and	   conservation	  
of	   endemic	   and	   globally	   threatened	   species	   in	   the	   two	   forests	   would	   have	   been	   ensured	   with	  
community	  participation.	  




                                                                                                                                                                 66
3. Conservation	  of	  the	  Biodiversity	  in	  the	  Rain	  Forests	  Outcome	  to	  Impact	  Theory	  of
   Change

The	   theory	   of	   change	   of	   a	   project	   is	   the	   logical	   sequence	   of	   conditions	   and	   factors	   that	   are	   necessary	   to	  
deliver	   the	   ultimate	   project	   impact.	   The	   basic	   project	   theory	   of	   change	   starts	   with	   activities	   and	  
develops	   through	   delivery	   of	   outputs	   and	   achievement	   of	   expected	   outcomes	   at	   the	   end	   of	  
implementation,	   i.e.	   through	   a	   means-­‐ends	   hierarchy	   that	   ultimately	   puts	   in	   place	   the	   conditions	   to	  
reach	  impact	  sometime	  after	  project	  completion.	  The	  GEF	  project	  terminal	  evaluations	  assess	  the	  basic	  
theory	  of	  change	  as	  far	  as	  outcomes,	  but	  do	  not	  usually	  go	  far	  in	  assessing	  the	  crucial	  last	  step	  to	  impact.	  
The	   ROtI	   assessment	   focuses	   on	   this	   last	   step	   and	   develops	   and	   assesses	   a	   detailed	   theory	   of	   change	  
between	   outcomes	   and	   impacts,	   referred	   to	   as	   outcomes-­‐impacts	   pathways,	   measured	   at	   least	   two	  
years	   after	   project	   completion.	   Each	   outcomes-­‐impacts	   pathway	   represents	   a	   specific	   strategy.	   Figure	  
1below	   illustrates	   the	   key	   elements	   and	   relationships	   of	   the	   detailed	   theory	   of	   change	   between	  
outcomes	  and	  impacts.	  

Figure1:	  Generic	  theory	  of	  change	  for	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways	  

                                                       ASSUMPTIONS	  




        	                                                                 INTERMEDIATE	  
  Strategy	                       OUTCOMES	  
                                                                              STATES	  
                                                                                                                    IMPACTS/	  GEBs	  




                                                         IMPACT	  
                                                         DRIVERS	  




The	   key	   ingredients	   in	   the	   outcomes-­‐impacts	   pathways	   (or	   strategies)	   that	   are	   examined	   according	   to	  
the	   ROtI	   methodology	   are	   intermediate	   states,	   impact	   drivers	   and	   assumptions,	   which	   are	   defined	   in	  
Table	   1	   below.	   Impact	   in	   terms	   of	   global	   environmental	   benefits	   can	   be	   achieved	   either	   through	  
environmental	  threat/stress	  reduction	  or	  improvement	  in	  the	  environmental	  conservation	  status	  of	  the	  
resource.	   If	   the	   project	   outcomes	   are	   assessed	   to	   be	   successfully	   delivered	  and	   the	   key	   ingredients	   of	  
the	  theory	  of	  change	  between	  outcomes	  and	  impacts	  are	  in	  place,	  then	  it	  is	  reasonable	  to	  conclude	  that	  
that	   the	   barriers	   and	   threats	   to	   impact	   have	   been	   overcome,	   the	   environmental	   status	   has	   improved,	  
and	   that	   consequently	   impact	   has	   or	   will	   be	   achieved,	   with	   time.	   In	   the	   evaluation	   the	   focus	   is	   on	  
performance	  beyond	  the	  life	  of	  the	  project	  –	  therefore	  beyond	  outcomes	  to	  assess	  the	  progress	  made	  
towards	  achieving	  the	  intermediate	  states	  and	  the	  contribution	  towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  
at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  




                                                                                                                                                                               67
Table	  1:	  Definitions	  of	  theory	  of	  change	  elements	  in	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways	  
TOC	  terms	              Definition	  

Intermediate	              These	  are	  the	  transitional	  conditions	  between	  the	  project’s	  outcomes	  and	  impacts	  
States	  (IS)	            that	  must	  be	  achieved	  in	  order	  to	  deliver	  the	  intended	  impacts	  
Impact	  Drivers	         These	  are	  the	  significant	  factors	  that,	  if	  present,	  are	  expected	  to	  contribute	  to	  the	  
(ID)	                      ultimate	  realisation	  of	  project	  impacts	  and	  that	  are	  within	  the	  ability	  of	  the	  project	  to	  
                            influence	  
Assumptions	               These	  are	  the	  significant	  factors	  that,	  if	  present,	  are	  expected	  to	  contribute	  to	  the	  
(A)	                       ultimate	  realisation	  of	  project	  impacts,	  but	  that	  are	  largely	  beyond	  the	  power	  of	  the	  
                            project	  to	  influence	  or	  address	  


The	   development	   of	   the	   Conservation	   of	   Biodiversity	   in	   the	   Rainforests	   outcomes-­‐impacts	   theory	   of	  
change	   was	   based	   on	   document	   review	   followed	   by	   validation	   by	   key	   informants	   and	   the	   buffer	   zone	  
communities	  of	  the	  Kanneliya	  and	  South	  of	  Sinharaja	  forests.	  




                                                                                                                                                              68
Table	  2:	  The	  Conservation	  of	  Biodiversity	  in	  the	  Rain	  Forests	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  theory	  of	  
change	  

 Project	                                                     Impact	  Drivers	  &	  
                                    Outcomes	                                                       Intermediate	  States	                     Impact	  
Strategies	                                                     Assumptions	  
                                                                                                 IS1:	  Strengthening	  of	  
                                                                                                 institutional	  mechanisms	  
                                                            ID1:	  The	  ownership	  of	     for	  community	  
                                                            the	  project	  by	  the	        participation	  in	  forest	  
                             Outcome	  1:	  
Model	  Development	  




                                                            Forest	  Department	               conservation	  
                             Functioning	  model	  
  STRATEGY	  #1	  




                             for	  	  forest	  
                                                                                                 IS2:	  Attitudinal	  change	  in	  
                             conservation	  with	      A1:	  FD	  adopts	                   Forest	  Department	  
                             cooperation	  
                                                         community	  based	                    officials	  for	  improved	  
                             between	  local	  
                                                                                                 community	  
                             community,	  FD	  and	   forest	  management	                                                               PROTECTED	  
                                                                                                 collaboration.	  	  
                             other	  stakeholders	                                                                                         ECOSYSTEMS	  
                                                                                                 IS3:	  Improvement	  in	  	                    IN	  THE	  
                                                                                                 livelihood	  benefits	  to	              RAINFORESTS	  
                                                                                                 local	  people	                           OF	  SINHARAJA	  
                                                            ID2:	  Effective	  training	                                                          AND	  
                             Outcome	  2:	                                                                                                  KANNELIYA	  
                             Buffer	  zone	               programmes	  
                             community	                    -­‐ For	  communities	  
                             cooperate	  in	              -­‐ For	  FD	  officers/	  
                             conservation	                     mobilisers	  
                                                                                                 IS4:	  Better	  community	  
                                                            ID3:	  Effective	                  awareness	  and	  active	  
Conservation	  Action	  




                             Outcome	  3:	                livelihood	                         involvement	  in	  forest	               CONSERVED	  
   STRATEGY	  #2	  




                             Improved	  forest	           development	                        conservation	                               GLOBALLY	  
                             protection	  from	           activities	  leading	  to	                                                    THREATENED	  
                             encroachment	  and	          community	                          IS5:	  Reduction	  in	  forest	  	       SPECIES	  
                             illicit	  logging	           participation	                      offences	  by	  local	  people	  

                                                            ID4:	  Effective	                  IS6:	  Reduced	  dependency	  
                             Outcome	  4:	                awareness	                          on	  over	  extracted	  NTFPs	  	  
                             Sustainable	  use	  of	     programmes	  
                             non-­‐timber	  forest	       delivered	  via	  
                             products	  secured.	         mobilisers	  




                                                                                                                                                               69
4. Assessment	  of	  achievement	  of	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways

The	  assessment	  of	  achievement	  of	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways	  was	  carried	  out	  through	  a	  review	  of	  
documents,	  interviews	  with	  key	  persons	  and	  focus	  group	  discussions	  with	  the	  buffer	  zone	  communities	  
of	  the	  Kanneliya	  and	  South	  of	  Sinharaja	  forests.	  The	  rating	  system	  used	  for	  the	  assessment	  is	  given	  in	  
Table	  4	  below	  as	  per	  the	  ROtI	  Handbook,	  and	  is	  applied	  at	  the	  different	  levels	  of	  the	  Theory	  of	  Change;	  
i.e.	  at	  the	  individual	  TOC	  element	  level	  (outcomes,	  impact	  drivers,	  assumptions	  and	  intermediate	  states)	  
and	  at	  the	  overall	  project	  level.	  

Table	  3:	  Field	  ROtI	  Rating	  System	  

                                                 Rating	          Description	  
                                                 0	               Not	  achieved	  
                                                 1	               Poorly	  achieved	  
                                                 2	               Partially	  achieved	  
                                                 3	               Well	  achieved	  

The	   reporting	   starts	   off	   by	   providing	   justification	   for	   why	   the	   identified	   intermediate	   state	   for	   the	  
strategy	  is	  considered	  important	  in	  delivering	  the	  ultimate	  impact.	  The	  theory	  of	  change	  for	  the	  strategy	  
is	   then	   examined	   through	   its	   logical	   steps,	   firstly	   validating	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   the	   outcomes	   were	  
achieved	   at	   project	   closure,	   secondly	   by	   an	   assessment	   of	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   the	   impact	   drivers	   and	  
assumptions	   were	   realized.	   The	   section	   concludes	   with	   an	   assessment	   of	   achievement	   of	   the	  
intermediate	  state	  itself.	  



4.1	  	     Strategy	  1:	  Model	  Development	  
4.1.1 Theory	  of	  Change	  Overview	  

The	   model	   development	   strategy	   focuses	   on	   delivering	   three	   intermediate	   states.	   The	   first	   intermediate	  
state	   “Strengthening	   of	   institutional	   mechanisms	   to	   involve	   the	   community	   in	   conservation”	   was	   a	  
necessary	  change	  to	  improve	  the	  protection	  of	  the	  forest.	  The	  second	  intermediate	  state:	   “Attitudinal	  
change	   in	   Forest	   Department	   officials	   and	   improved	   community	   collaboration”	   was	   used	   to	   build	   the	  
relationship	   between	   the	   two	   parties	   and	   the	   third	   intermediate	   state	   “Improvement	   in	   livelihood	  
benefits”	   was	  a	  specific	  feature	  of	  the	  model	  that	  has	  contributed	  to	  ensuring	  community	  participation	  
in	  conservation.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                  70
Figure	  2:	  Theory	  of	  Change	  for	  Strategy	  #1	  

                                                                                                                                       IS1:	  Strengthened	  
                                                                                                                                 institutional	  mechanisms	  for	  
                                             ID1:	  The	  ownership	  of	                                                     community	  participation	  in	  
      Outcome	  1:	                                                                                                                 forest	  conservation	  
      Functioning	                             the	  project	  by	  the	  
   model	  for	  forest	                    Forest	  Department	  
     conservation	  
                                                                                                                                   IS2:	  Attitudinal	  change	  in	  
   with	  cooperation	  
                                                                                                                                  Forest	  Department	  officials	  
     between	  local	  
                                                                                                                                   for	  improved	  community	  
    community,	  FD	  
                                                                                                                                            collaboration	  
       and	  other	  
                                                   A1:	  FD	  adopts	  
     stakeholders	  
                                                 community	  based	  
                                                forest	  management	  
                                                                                                                                       IS3:	  Improvement	  in	  
                                                                                                                                   livelihood	  benefits	  to	  local	  
                                                                                                                                                 people	  

The	  project	  outcome	  that	  was	  identified	  as	  important	  for	  delivering	  these	  three	  intermediate	  states	  is	  
shown	  in	  Figure	  1	  above.	  



Outcome	  1:	  functioning	  model	  for	  forest	  conservation	  with	  cooperation	  between	  local	  
community,	  FD	  and	  other	  stakeholders	  

Intermediate	  States	  

IS1:	  Strengthened	  institutional	  mechanisms	  for	  community	  participation	  in	  forest	  conservation	  
  There	   was	   realisation	   at	   the	   time	   of	   the	   project	   design	   that	   that	   the	   policing	   approach	   for	   forest	  
  management	  was	  not	  effective	   for	  conservation	  of	  Sri	  Lanka’s	  valuable	  wet	  zone	  forests.	   It	  could	  not	  
  stop	  surreptitious	  forest	  clearing	  for	  tea	  cultivation	  and	  other	  unsustainable	  forest	  practices	  by	  local	  
  people.	   This	   project	   pilot	   tested	   a	   participatory	   model	   to	   see	   its	   effectiveness	   for	   adoption	   by	   the	  
  Forest	   Department.	   The	   project	   expected	   to	   improve	   the	   dialogue	   between	   the	   forest	  
  managerscommunities	   and	   other	   stakeholders	   for	  forest	   conservation.	   To	   achieve	   this	   purpose	   it	   was	  
  intended	  to	  set	  up	  CBOs,	  and	  include	  forest	  conservation	  in	  their	  mandate	  without	  creating	  conflicts	  
  with	  their	  own	  objectives.	  Loan	  schemes	  and	  training	  for	  livelihoods	  and	  community	  activities	  was	  a	  
  part	  of	  the	  model,	  to	  provide	  benefits	  for	  the	  community.	  	  

  As	   this	   was	   a	   new	   concept	   for	   the	   FD,	   strengthening	   the	   department’s	   capacity	   for	   engaging	   with	  
  communities	   and	  implementing	   the	   model	  was	   a	  strong	  requirement.	   	  To	   ensure	   that	   adequate	   staffs	  
  with	  the	  required	  skills	  were	  deployed	  in	  the	  project	   without	  compromising	  the	   department’s	  other	  
  functions,	  special	  staffs	  were	  recruited	  to	  the	  project.	  	  


Twenty	  seven	  community	  based	  organizations	  (CBOs)	  had	  been	  established	  in	  peripheral	  villages	  around	  
the	   Kanneliya	   forest	   and	   south	   of	   Sinharaja	   forest	   with	   the	   aim	   of	   developing	   a	   viable	   system	   for	  
community	  involvement	  for	  conservation	  of	  the	  rich	  biodiversity	  in	  the	  two	  forests.	  Some	  of	  these	  CBOs	  
had	  been	  newly	  established	  and	  the	  others,	  which	  were	  already	  there,	  have	  been	  strengthened	  through	  
                                                                                                                                                                    71
the	   project	   through	   the	   social	   mobilisers	   who	   provided	   training	   and	   guidance.	   The	   established	   or	  
strengthened	   CBOs	   were	   provided	   with	   sufficient	   financial	   capital	   to	   initiate	   community	   development	  
activities	  and	  environment-­‐friendly	  enterprises	  in	  the	  buffer	  zone.	  Substantial	  time	  and	  effort	  had	  been	  
spent	  to	  develop	  the	  capacity	  of	  communities	  to	  carry	  out	  above	  tasks	  so	  that	  the	  groups	  can	  function	  
independently	   and	   beyond	   the	   life	   of	   the	   project.	   With	   the	   establishment	   of	   this	   mechanism,	  
communities	  have	  actively	  participated	  in	  forest	  conservation.	  	  

The	  groups	  were	  functioning	  quite	  well	  during	  and	  immediately	  after	  the	  project.	  However,	  at	  present,	  
due	   to	   non-­‐payment	   of	   loans	   borrowed	   from	   the	   CBOs	   by	   some	   members	   and	   a	   lack	   of	   active	  
involvement	  on	  the	  part	  of	  members,	  around	  one	  third	  of	  the	  CBOs	  are	  not	  functioning	  at	  Kanneliya.	  In	  
these,	  active	  involvement	  in	  the	  CBO	  by	  members	  has	  diminished	  due	  to	  the	  lack	  of	  new	  opportunities	  
offered	  to	  the	  CBOs	  by	  the	  FD,	  lack	  of	  time	  due	  to	  tea	  cultivation	  work,	  non-­‐payment	  of	  loans,	  perceived	  
low	   benefitof	   attending	   meetings	   to	   receive	   small	   loans	   of	   Rs.	   5,000/=	   to	   Rs.	   10,000/=,	   and	   in	   a	   few	  
cases	  tensions	  among	  members	  and	  administrative	  issues	  involved	  with	  maintaining	  the	  revolving	  fund.	  
The	   remaining	   CBOs	   are	   performing	   well	   with	   strong	   leadership	   from	   the	   community	   and	   active	  
involvement	  of	  their	  members.	  The	  focus	  of	  their	  activities	  is	  mainly	  on	  livelihood	  and	  community	  based	  
activities,	  but	  members	  (and	  former	  members)	  continue	  to	  collaborate	  in	  supporting	  law	  enforcement	  
activities	  of	  the	  FD.	  The	  extension	  officers	  and	  other	  officials	  of	  the	  Forest	  Department	  are	  now	  working	  
to	  revive	  the	  non-­‐active	  CBO	  members	  and	  mobilize	  these	  CBOs	  back	  to	  a	  functioning	  level.	  

         “Some	  CBOs	  have	  become	  inactive	  due	  to	  the	  non-­‐payment	  of	  the	  loans.	  We	  are	  currently	  trying	  
         re-­‐establishing	  the	  CBOs.	  We	  re-­‐started	  two	  CBOs	  which	  were	  inactive	  for	  some	  time.”	  
                                                                                                                           - Forest	  Officers	  

The	  replication	  of	  CBO	  activities	  in	  other	  adjoining	  villages	  and	  other	  forest	  areas	  (i.eIllukkumbura	  –	  in	  
the	   Knuckles	   range)	   is	   taking	   place	   gradually	   either	   through	   funded	   projects	   (i.e.	   AusAid	   )	   or	   through	  
regular	  work	  (i.e.	  in	  selected	  forests	  in	  Hambantota).	  	  The	  scaleof	  activities	  to	  replicate	  the	  whole	  model	  
is	   at	   times	   constrained	   due	   to	   lack	   of	   regular	   funds	   especially	   to	   establish	   newCBO	   and	   credit	   lines.	  
However,	   overall	   there	   is	   acceptance	   that	   community-­‐level	   activities	   should	   be	   part	   of	   forest	  
management	  and	  these	  types	  of	  activities	  should	  continue	  and	  efforts	  are	  taking	  place	  in	  selected	  areas.	  


IS2:	  Attitudinal	  change	  in	  Forest	  Department	  officials	  for	  improved	  community	  collaboration	  
   Forest	  management	  was	  considered	  the	  domain	  of	  the	  Forest	  Department,	  which	  enforced	  the	  laws	  
   and	   rules	  of	  forest	   use	  within	   the	   forest	  boundaries.	  Their	  relationship	   with	  the	   community	   was	  more	  
   one	   of	   policing,	   with	   interaction	   occurring	   only	   when	   illegal	   activities	   such	   as	   encroachment	   and	  
   logging	   took	   place	   and	   hence,	   was	   a	   hostile	   one.	   As	   part	   of	   the	   institutional	   changes	   piloted	   in	   this	  
   project,	   the	   officials	   were	   provided	   training	   in	   community	   mobilization	   and	   participatory	   forest	  
   management.	   The	   aim	   of	   this	   process	   was	   to	   change	   their	   attitudes	   towards	   collaboration	   with	  
   communities,	  which	  was	  deficient	  in	  the	  p re-­‐project	  period.	  


Through	  this	  project,	  in	  addition	  to	  providing	  skills	  in	  terms	  of	  biodiversity	  and	  biodiversity	  conservation,	  
all	   levels	   of	   staff	   -­‐	   field	   level	   staff	   to	   high	   ranking	   district	   officialsof	   the	  FD-­‐	   were	   trained	   in	   participatory	  

                                                                                                                                                                                           72
forest	  management	  and	  working	  with	  communities.	  The	  training	  as	  well	  as	  the	  hands-­‐on	  application	  of	  
the	  concepts,	  the	  various	  collaborative	  activities	  carried	  out,	  helped	  to	  change	  their	  mind	  set	  and	  they	  
interacted	  and	  worked	  collaboratively	  with	  buffer	  zone	  communities	  for	  forest	  conservation	  as	  well	  as	  
community	  development.	  	  

        “Previously,	  even	  the	  forest	  officers	  used	  to	  work	  for	  their	  personal	  gains,	  but	  now	  it	  is	  difficult	  
        for	  them,	  since	  the	  village	  is	  connected	  with	  the	  forest.	  In	  the	  past,	  they	  only	  came	  to	  the	  village	  
        if	  there	  was	  a	  need	  to	  arrest	  somebody.	  There	  was	  no	  such	  a	  relationship	  with	  us	  like	  now.	  We	  
        go	   in	   to	   the	   forest	   with	   forest	   officers	   and	   we	   meet	   them	   in	   the	   program.	   That’s	   how	   the	  
        relationship	  was	  built	  up.”	  
                                                                                                                                      - Community	  FGD	  

        “Without	  the	  participation	  of	  the	  people,	  a	  large	  area	  like	  the	  Sinharaja	  forest	  cannot	  be	  
        managed	  and	  conserved	  by	  a	  handful	  of	  forest	  officers”	  
                                                                                                                                     Field	  Officer	  

A	   large	   number	   of	   mobilizers	   were	   necessary	   at	   the	   start	   of	   the	   project,	   and	   it	   was	   a	   staff	   intensive	  
process	  with	  one	  mobiliser	  for	  every	  GramaNiladhari	  division.	  This	  was	  necessary	  to	  overcome	  suspicion	  
of	  the	  FD,	  and	  gain	  acceptance	  from	  the	  community	  to	  start	  CBOs.	  The	  logic	  of	  the	  model	  is	  that	  once	  
the	   CBOs	   are	   established	   they	   should	   be	   able	   to	   function	   independently.	   However	   communities	   express	  
a	  need	  to	  maintain	  the	  interaction	  as	  an	  incentive	  to	  continue	  to	  stay	  active.	  This	  is	  taking	  place	  but	  less	  
frequently	  resulting	  in	  less	  dynamism	  of	  some	  groups.	  From	  the	  perspective	  of	  the	  Forest	  Department,	  
the	   mobilisers	   recruited	   for	   the	   project	   and	   specially	   trained	   were	   absorbed	   into	   the	   Forest	   Department	  
as	  Forest	  Extension	  officers	  (EO).	  They	  are	  now	  spread	  more	  widely	  to	  cover	  a	  larger	  area,	  hence	  their	  
ability	   to	   maintain	   the	   same	   level	   of	   interaction	   is	   no	   longer	   feasible.	   	   This	   can	   be	   seen	   as	   an	   acceptable	  
change.	  	  

The	   attitudinal	   change	   of	   Forest	   Department	   officials	   and	   their	   collaboration	   with	   communities	   for	  
forest	   conservation,	   during	   as	   well	   as	   after	   the	   project,	   is	   a	   highly	   satisfactory	   achievement	   of	   the	  
project.	  The	  need	  to	  maintain	  relationships	  and	  involve	  the	  communities	  in	  the	  conservation	  effort	  has	  
been	   absorbed	   into	   the	   operational	   style	   of	   the	   Forest	   Department.	   An	   EO	   is	   assigned	   to	   every	   Range	  
office	   to	   continue	   with	   extension	   and	   education,	   which	   highlights	   their	   acceptance	   of	   the	   need	   for	  
community	  development	  and	  interaction	  as	  a	  part	  of	  their	  regular	  activities.	  	  


IS3:	  Improvement	  in	  livelihood	  benefits	  to	  local	  people	  
The	   villagers	   who	   were	   cultivating	   tea	   on	   the	   boundaries	   of	   the	   forest	   were	   given	   training	   to	   improve	  
their	  productivity	  within	  the	  available	  land	  without	  expanding	  their	  cultivation	  extent.	  In	  addition,	  they	  
were	   given	   advice	   on	   use	   of	   fertilizers	   and	   newly	   improved	   tea	   varieties	   to	   improve	   productivity.	  
Financial	   support	   was	   given	   through	   the	   revolving	   funds	   offered	   to	   CBOs	   as	   credits	   to	   enhance	   their	   tea	  
cultivations	  or	  establish	  tea	  nurseries.	  

        “If	  I	  got	  5kg	  of	  tea	  leaves	  in	  those	  days,	  now	  I	  take	  10	  kg	  of	  tea	  leaves.	  Now	  I	  know	  how	  to	  get	  
        the	   maximum	   productivity	   out	   of	   the	   limited	   land	   I	   have.	   When	   I	   get	   a	   support,	   when	   I	   get	   new	  


                                                                                                                                                                                     73
        cloned	   tea,	   also	   supplying	   proper	   guidance	   to	   increase	   productivity	   leads	   to	   increase	   of	   my	  
        income.”	  
                                                                                                                      - Community	  FGD	  

Many	  livelihood	  activities	  were	  also	  supported	  by	  this	  project	  –	  through	  training	  and	  loans	  given	  to	  the	  
CBO	   membership.	   This	   activity	   was	   considerably	   successful	   and	   is	   a	   strong	   driver	   for	   community	  
participation	  in	  conservation	  activities.	  	  	  

        “Training	   was	   provided	   to	   get	   driving	   licenses.	   Many	   of	   those	   who	   took	   their	   drivers	   licenses	  
        received	  jobs	  at	  the	  Ceylon	  Transport	  Board	  and	  Ceylon	  Electricity	  Board	  as	  drivers.	  There	  were	  
        other	  trainings	  such	  as	  in	  bee	  keeping,	  beauty	  culture,	  bridal	  dressing,	  etc.	  	  Those	  who	  received	  
        sewing	  training	  now	  do	  sewing	  as	  self-­‐employment.”	  

                                                                                                                                    -     Community	  FGD	  

With	  improvements	  in	  facilities	  such	  as	  tourist	  centres	  and	  the	  creation	  of	  walking	  trails,	  etc.	  for	  nature-­‐
based	   tourism,	   the	   arrival	   of	   foreign	   and	   local	   tourists	   as	   well	   as	   school	   children	   has	   increased.	   Some	  
CBO	   members	   were	   trained	   as	   Forest	   Tourist	   Guides	   to	   guide	   these	   tourists	   on	   such	   forest	   walks.	   	   In	  
addition,	   a	   few	   people	   from	   communities	   adjacent	   to	   the	   tourist	   centres	   where	   the	   entrances	   to	   the	  
forest	  are	  located,	  could	  earn	  an	  additional	  income	  through	  the	  provision	  of	  food	  and	  accommodation	  
and	  by	  selling	  their	  local	  products	  to	  tourists.	  	  

        “Tourist	  guides	  were	  trained	  through	  the	  project.	  Many	  people	  in	  Koralegama	  requested	  tourist	  
        guide	   training.	   After	   this	   project	   only	   tourists	   started	   coming	   to	   Kanneliya.	   No	   one	   knew	   this	  
        place	   earlier.	   Some	   villagers	   started	   places	   to	   supply	   food	   and	   accommodation	   such	   as	   small	  
        hotels.”	  
                                                                                                                           - Community	  FGD	  

The	   tourist-­‐related	   facilities	   (i.e.	   visitor	   centres,	   guides,	   accommodation)	   have	   improved	   in	   both	   the	  
project	  locations	  and	  are	  continuing	  to	  operate.	  In	  terms	  of	  the	  livelihood	  benefits	  of	  such	  activities,	  it	  is	  
benefitting	  only	  a	  few	  members	  living	  closest	  to	  the	  entrances,	  due	  to	  access.	  	  The	  most	  widely	  spread	  
benefits	   of	   the	   programmes	   relate	   to	   enhanced	   incomes	   from	   tea	   cultivation,	   the	   main	   economic	  
activity	  in	  the	  buffer	  zone,	  with	  an	  acknowledged	  impact	  on	  preventing	  encroachment.	  The	  community	  
members	   also	   state	   that	   similar	   training	   on	   livelihoods	   should	   continue	   periodically	   so	   that	   the	   next	  
generation	   will	   also	   benefit	   and	   help	   to	   attract	   new	   members	   to	   the	   CBOs.	   With	   the	   limited	   funds	  
available	   some	   activities	   such	   as	   English	   classes,	   linking	   to	   the	   tea	   extension	   services,	   assistance	   for	  
home	  gardening	  is	  carried	  out.	  	  	  



Impact	  Drivers	  

ID1:	  The	  ownership	  of	  the	  project	  by	  the	  Forest	  Department	  
The	  project	  objectives	  were	  very	  much	  in	  line	  with	  the	  objectives	  of	  the	  Forest	  Department,	  their	  work	  
plans	  and	  policies.	  They	  were	  also	  very	  much	  at	  the	  forefront	  in	  developing	  this	  project.	  The	  process	  of	  
development	  also	  included	   feedback	  from	   the	  regional	  staff.	   	   Hence	  although	  there	   was	  a	  project	   office	  
and	  an	  project	  manager	  (an	  ex-­‐forester)	  the	  project	  was	  absorbed	  into	  the	  regular	  work	  at	  the	  project	  
                                                                                                                                                                     74
sites.	   Additional	   support	   for	   the	   community	   mobilisation	   was	   also	   provided	   and	   the	   staff	   has	   been	  
retained	  as	  extension	  officers.	  	  

It	   was	   administered	   and	   managed	   closely	   by	   the	   Forest	   Department	   staff	   and	   this	   helped	   to	   create	  
ownership	  of	  the	  project.	  This	  also	  helped	  to	  bring	  about	  a	  change	  in	  their	  attitudes	  and	  collaboration	  
with	   local	   communities	   for	   participatory	   forest	   management.	   In	   addition,	   the	   Forest	   Department	   has	  
taken	   measures	   to	   integrate	   the	   project	   experience	   back	   into	   the	   Forest	   Department	   that	   takes	   place	  
gradually	  overtime.	  	  

This	  experience	  has	  also	  been	  replicated	  in	  a	  few	  other	  projects	  in	  Sri	  Lanka,	  for	  instance	  through	  the	  
AUSAID	   project	   and	   at	   Hambantota.	   The	   same	   model,	   more	   or	   less,	   has	   been	   used	   for	   the	   Protected	  
Area	   Community	   Partnership	   Building	   component	   of	   the	   Protected	   Area	   Management	   and	   Wildlife	  
Conservation	  project	  implemented	  by	  the	  Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation,	  Sri	  Lanka.	  




Assumptions	  

A1:	  FD	  adopts	  community	  based	  forest	  management	  
The	   period	   during	   which	   the	   project	   was	   designed	   and	   implemented	   was	   when	   community	   based	  
management	  was	  considered	  as	  extremely	  important	  for	  sustainable	  use	  of	  environmental	  resources	  in	  
developing	   countries.	   These	   were	   concepts	   being	   promoted	   internationally	   in	   the	   forestry	   sector.	   The	  
Forest	  Department	  had	  been	  experimenting	  with	  this	  concept	  in	  other	  community	  forestry	  projects	  to	  
manage	   woodlots,	   set	   up	   home	   gardens	   or	   for	   sustainable	   use	   of	   medicinal	   herbs	   (GED	   ID	   95).	   Hence	  
they	   did	   have	   previous	   experience	   in	   social	   forestry,	   but	   in	   this	   case	   the	   model	   was	   developed	   for	  
conservation	  of	  protected	  forest	  areas.	  	  The	  model	  had	  been	  proposed	  in	  several	  management	  plans	  as	  
a	  response	  to	  the	  1995	  forest	  policy	  and	  FSMP.	  Hence	  the	  FD	  was	  interested	  in	  piloting	  the	  proposed	  
model.	  	  The	  drive	  for	  this	  project	  thus	  came	  from	  within	  the	  Forest	  Department	  there	  was	  good	  support	  
and	  buy-­‐in.	  	  It	  must	  be	  noted	  that	  some	  aspects	  of	  a	  co-­‐management	  model	  where	  communities	  directly	  
manage	  forest	  plots,	  or	  have	  legal	  rights	  to	  it	  (as	  is	  done	  in	  Nepal)	  	  was	  not	  envisioned	  in	  this	  project.	  
Hence	   as	   stated	   in	   the	   terminal	   evaluation,	   the	   objectives	   of	   the	   project	   was	   thus	   reformulated	   mid-­‐
way,	  to	  forest	  management	  with	  community	  participation	  rather	  than	  co-­‐management,	  on	  the	  basis	  that	  
dependence	   on	   forests	   by	   Sri	   Lankan	   communities	   is	   different	   from	   countries	   likes	   Nepal	   and	   that	  
previous	  efforts	  by	  the	  FD	  to	  give	  direct	  management	  to	  the	  communities	  did	  not	  generate	  community	  
buy	  in.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                    75
Table	  4:	  Outcomes-­‐impacts	  assessment	  findings	  for	  Strategy	  #1:	  Model	  Development	  

     Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                                                        Qualitative	  Assessment	                                                 Rating	  
       Component	  

                                        u   Identification	  of	  a	  functional	  participatory	  forest	  management	  
                                             model	  which	  has	  resulted	  in	  obtaining	  the	  collaboration	  for	  
                                             conservation	  by	  the	  community	  and	  has	  increased	  protection	  
                                             of	  the	  Forest,	  its	  resources	  and	  ecosystem	  services.	  	  
Outcome	  1:	  Functioning	  
                                        u   The	  Forest	  Department	  has	  accepted	  the	  model	  as	  a	  viable	  
model	  for	  	  forest	  
                                             forest	  management	  approach.	  However,	  replication	  of	  the	  
conservation	  with	  
                                             entire	  model	  in	  all	  wet	  zone	  conservation	  forests	  has	  been	    3	  
cooperation	  between	  
                                             constrained	  due	  to	  lack	  of	  funds	  to	  establish	  micro-­‐credit	  
local	  community,	  FD	  and	  
                                             facilities	  and	  intense	  skills	  development	  training	  for	  livelihood	  
other	  stakeholders	  	  
                                             benefits.	  	  
                                        u   In	  some	  locations	  and	  projects	  (Ausaid)	  the	  entire	  model	  is	  
                                             being	  applied.	  	  
                                        u   Regular	  interaction	  with	  communities	  is	  continuing	  	  

                                        u   A	  lasting	  change	  in	  the	  attitudes	  of	  the	  FD	  from	  one	  of	  
                                             policing	  and	  applying	  the	  law	  to	  one	  where	  community	  
                                             participation	  in	  forest	  conservation	  is	  respected	  and	  valued.	  
                                        u   Trained	  Extension	  officers	  to	  maintain	  relationships,	  carry	  out	  
Assumption	  1:FD	  adopts	               education	  and	  community	  based	  activities	  is	  mainstreamed	  
community	  based	  forest	               into	  the	  structure.	                                                                           3	  
management	                            u   A	  model	  that	  is	  seen	  more	  aligned	  to	  Sri	  Lanka,	  especially	  for	  
                                             management	  of	  protected	  areas,	  and	  in	  this	  case	  the	  
                                             management	  of	  wet	  zone	  forests	  with	  high	  biodiversity,	  	  has	  
                                             been	  accepted.	  (this	  is	  different	  from	  the	  definition	  of	  co-­‐
                                             management	  and	  hence	  the	  wording	  was	  changed)	  	  

                                        u   Full	  engagement	  of	  the	  Forest	  Department	  within	  the	  design,	  
Impact	  Driver	  1:The	  
                                             administration	  and	  management	  of	  the	  project	  has	  led	  to	  the	  
ownership	  of	  the	  project	                                                                                                                3	  
                                             integration	  of	  the	  project	  experience	  back	  into	  the	  Forest	  
by	  the	  Forest	  Department	  
                                             Department	  and	  hence	  into	  its	  future	  work.	  	  

Intermediate	  State	  1:	  
                                        u   Though	  currently	  the	  impact	  of	  strengthening	  CBOs	  for	  forest	  
Strengthening	  of	  
                                             conservation	  has	  deteriorated	  in	  a	  few	  places,	  its	  
institutional	  mechanisms	  
                                             sustainability	  is	  satisfactory	  in	  most	  places.	  	  Forest	                         2	  
for	  community	  
                                             Department	  officials	  have	  taken	  some	  steps	  to	  revive	  those	  
participation	  in	  forest	  
                                             non-­‐active	  CBOs	  back	  to	  functioning	  level.	  	  
conservation	  

Intermediate	  State	  2:	           u   The	  project	  community	  mobilizers	  were	  absorbed	  into	  the	  
Attitudinal	  change	  in	                Forest	  Department	  as	  Forest	  Extension	  officers	  and	  this	  has	  
Forest	  Department	                       helped	  to	  continue	  their	  collaboration	  with	  the	  communities	                    3	  
officials	  for	  improved	               and	  to	  take	  forward	  the	  community	  involved	  participatory	  
community	                                  forest	  management	  concept.	  
collaboration.	                        u   Since	  the	  project	  ended	  the	  number	  of	  extension	  officers	  per	  

                                                                                                                                                           76
     Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                                                           Qualitative	  Assessment	                                                Rating	  
       Component	  
                                                 area	  has	  decreased	  and	  they	  have	  expanded	  their	  activities	  to	  
                                                 other	  areas.	  However	  communities	  feel	  that	  for	  greater	  
                                                 dynamism	  the	  interaction	  must	  continue	  as	  before.	  This	  was	  
                                                 not	  intended	  and	  some	  level	  of	  interaction	  does	  continue.	  	  
                                           u    The	  concept	  of	  a	  more	  participatory	  management	  style	  has	  
                                                 been	  internalised	  in	  the	  department.	  

                                           u    Improved	  household	  income	  through	  enhancement	  of	  
                                                 existing	  livelihoods	  and	  training/loans	  for	  alternate	  
                                                 livelihoods.	  	  
                                           u    The	  programmes	  for	  tea	  cultivation	  brought	  the	  widest	  
                                                 benefits	  with	  regard	  to	  preventing	  encroachment.	  Some	  of	  
                                                 the	  alternative	  income	  avenues	  such	  as	  driving,	  sewing	  have	  
                                                 reduced	  the	  pressure	  to	  encroach.	  These	  training	  and	  
                                                 livelihoods	  options	  were	  given	  based	  on	  the	  community	  
Intermediate	  State	  3:	  
                                                 request.	  
Improvement	  in	  
                                           u    Additionally	  limited	  employment	  opportunities	  have	  been	                           3	  
livelihood	  benefits	  to	  
                                                 generated	  through	  the	  improvement	  of	  tourism	  through	  
local	  people	  
                                                 employment	  of	  guides	  from	  the	  community,	  sale	  of	  treacle	  
                                                 and	  jaggery	  and	  accommodation.	  
                                           u    The	  continuation	  and	  extension	  of	  these	  activities	  is	  seen	  as	  
                                                 need	  by	  the	  community	  in	  order	  for	  the	  next	  generation	  to	  
                                                 benefit	  and	  attract	  more	  members	  to	  the	  CBOs.	  Although	  the	  
                                                 same	  intensity	  is	  not	  possible,	  funds	  are	  allocated	  for	  some	  
                                                 training	  such	  as	  English	  classes	  and	  activities	  such	  as	  home	  
                                                 gardening.	  



NOTE:	   The	   ratings	   are	   given	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   achieving	   the	   intermediate	   states	   and	   the	   contribution	  
towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                             77
4.1.2 Strategy#2:	  Conservation	  Action	  

4.1.3 Theory	  of	  Change	  Overview	  

The	   conservation	   action	   strategy	   focuses	   on	   delivering	   three	   intermediate	   states.	   These	   three	  
intermediate	   states	   “Better	   community	   awareness	   and	   active	   involvement	   in	   forest	   conservation”,	  
“Reduction	  in	  forest	  offences”	  and	  “Reduction	  in	  dependency	  on	  NTFPs”	  were	  important	  in	  achieving	  the	  
conservation	  objectives	  of	  the	  project.	  	  

Figure	  3:	  Theory	  of	  Change	  for	  Strategy	  #2	  


       Outcome	  2:	  
       Buffer	  zone	  
                                                              ID2:	  Effective	  training	                              IS4:	  Better	  community	  
       community	  
                                                                     programmes	                                           awareness	  and	  active	  
      cooperate	  in	  
                                                              -­‐    For	  communities	                                   involvement	  in	  forest	  
      conservation	  
                                                              -­‐    For	  FD	  officers/	                                      conservation	  
                                                                     mobilisers	  

     Outcome	  3:	  
   Improved	  forest	                                                                                                   IS5:	  Reduction	  in	  forest	  
   protection	  from	                                                                                                             offences	  
    encroachment	  
   and	  illicit	  logging	  
                                                 ID3:	  Effective	                 ID4:	  Effective	  
                                                    livelihood	                       awareness	  
                                                 development	                        programmes	                            IS6:	  Reduction	  in	  
       Outcome	  4:	                                                                                                      dependency	  on	  NTFPs	  
                                                activities	  leading	              delivered	  via	  
     Sustainable	  use	  
                                                 to	  community	                     mobilisers	  
      of	  non-­‐timber	  
                                                  participation	  
     forest	  products	  
            secured.	  



Project	   outcomes	   #2,	   #3	   and	   #4	   that	   were	   identified	   as	   important	   for	   delivering	   these	   three	  
intermediate	  states	  are	  shown	  in	  Figure	  2	  above.	  



Outcome	  2:	  Buffer	  zone	  community	  cooperated	  in	  conservation	  and	  Outcome	  3:	  Improved	  
forest	  protection	  from	  encroachment	  and	  illicit	  logging	  

  Since	  these	  two	  outcomes	  are	  linked	  to	  each	  other	  and	  most	  of	  the	  activities	  are	  common,	  they	  have	  
  been	  discussed	  together.	  




                                                                                                                                                          78
IS4:	  Better	  community	  awareness	  and	  active	  involvement	  in	  forest	  conservation	  
  The	   importance	   of	   promoting	   the	   buffer	   zone	   communities’	   awareness	   and	   understanding	   of	  
  biodiversity	   and	   other	   associated	   values	   and	   ecosystem	   functions	   of	   the	   wet	   zone	   forests	   was	  
  identified	   during	   the	   project	   designing	   stage.	   Therefore,	   it	   was	   necessary	   to	   create	   awareness	   and	  
  educate	   and	   sensitize	   these	   communities	   on	   the	   value	   of	   forests	   and	   the	   need	   for	   their	   conservation.	  
  As	   the	   next	   step,	   it	   was	   expected	   to	   ensure	   the	   active	   participation	   of	   the	   communities	   in	   forest	  
  conservation.	  	  

Through	  the	  community	  mobilization	  process,	  awareness	  of	  the	  importance	  of	  forest	  conservation	  and	  
participatory	   forest	   management	   were	   created	   among	   buffer	   zone	   communities	   in	   the	   Kanneliya	   and	  
South	  of	  Sinharaja	  forest	  reserves	  through	  awareness	  programmes	  such	  as	  awareness	  of	  forest	  values	  
including	   environmental	   benefits	   and	   threats	   to	   forestry.	   	   Before	   the	   implementation	   of	   the	   project,	  
increasing	   the	   understanding	   of	   the	   value	   of	   conservation	   and	   ecosystem	   functions	   was	   not	   carried	   out.	  	  
In	   the	   community	   focus	   groups	   carried	   out	   as	   part	   of	   this	   review,	   the	   awareness	   programmes	   were	  
ranked	  as	  the	  most	  important	  activity	  that	  helped	  to	  conserve	  the	  forest.	  The	  CBO	  members	  believe	  that	  
this	  awareness	  still	  exists	  amongst	  them,	  even	  seven	  years	  after	  project	  completion.	  However,	  they	  are	  
concerned	   that	   since	   this	   awareness	   creation	   is	   not	   continuing	   with	   the	   same	   level	   of	   intensity,	   the	   new	  
generation	  is	  not	  made	  aware	  of	  the	  importance	  and	  value	  of	  forest	  conservation	  and	  this	  will	  impact	  
the	   conservation	   effort.	   The	   elders	   in	   CBOs	   want	   activities	   that	   can	   interest	   and	   inform	   the	   younger	  
generation	  whose	  expectations	  and	  willingness	  to	  participate	  require	  different	  types	  of	  activities	  which	  
is	  the	  next	  challenge	  that	  the	  Forest	  department	  has	  to	  address.	  	  

        “Awareness	   creation	   is	   the	   most	   important	   aspect	   that	   helped	   conservation,	   since	   without	   this	  
        other	  things	  would	  not	  have	  been	  achieved.	  Earlier,	  people	  did	  not	  think	  about	  the	  damage	  to	  
        the	   environment.	   We	   became	   aware	   that	   this	   forest	   is	   one	   of	   the	   most	   important	   resources	   in	  
        the	  world.”	  
                                                                                                                                   - Community	  FGD	  


Because	   of	   improved	   community	   awareness	   of	   forest	   conservation	   as	   well	   as	   the	   relationship	   built	  
between	   the	   communities	   and	   the	   Forest	   Department	   officials,	   together	   with	   the	   livelihood	   and	  
community	   development	   activities,	   the	   Forest	   Department	   could	   obtain	   the	   active	   involvement	   of	   the	  
communities	  for	  conservation	  activities	  such	  as	  boundary	  marking,	  live	  fence	  establishment,	  enrichment	  
planting,	   weeding,	   etc.	   In	   addition,	   communities	   continue	   to	   actively	   provide	   information	   regarding	  
illegal	  activities	  and	  forest	  offences	  to	  the	  Forest	  Department	  officials.	  

Although,	  during	  the	  post-­‐project	  period	  their	  involvement	  in	  forest	  management	  activities	  is	  less,	  they	  
do	  extend	  their	  support	  to	  Forest	  Department	  officials,	  when	  requested,	  even	  where	  the	  CBOs	  are	  not	  
active.	  	  

        “Even	  though	  our	  CBO	  is	  not	  active	  now,	  we	  still	  extend	  our	  support	  and	  call	  forest	  officers	  when	  
        something	  happens	  inside	  the	  forest.	  	  Then	  they	  come	  to	  have	  a	  look.”	  
                                                                                                                               - Community	  FGD	  

The	   improved	   relationship	   between	   the	   forest	   officers	   and	   the	   community	   as	   well	   as	   the	   presence	   of	  
the	   CBOs	   in	   the	   villages	   are	   acting	   as	   a	   deterrent	   for	   illegal	   activities.	   This	   has	   allowed	   for	   a	   larger	  
                                                                                                                                                                                   79
area	   of	   forest	   to	   be	   under	   vigilance	   which	   was	   not	   possible	   before,	   with	   only	   the	   forest	   officers	  
responsible	  for	  monitoring	  illegal	  activities.	  	  This	  has	  been	  the	  major	  impact	  lasting	  beyond	  the	  life	  of	  
the	  project.	  	  

IS5:	  Reduction	  in	  forest	  offences	  by	  local	  people	  
  The	   project	   expected	   to	   reduce	   threats	   such	   as	   encroachment,	   forest	   clearance,	   tree	   felling,	   etc.	  
  made	  by	   the	   surrounding	   villagers.	  It	  was	   planned	   to	  re-­‐demarcate	   the	   boundaries	   and	   establish	  land	  
  markers	   in	   Kanneliya	  and	   the	   southern	   part	   of	   Sinharaja	  forest	   to	  avoid	  encroachments.	  With	   the	   aim	  
  of	   stopping	   these	   kinds	   of	   forest	   offences,	   it	   was	   expected	   to	   provide	   assistance	   for	   existing	   and	  
  alternative	   livelihoods	   and	   to	   make	   provision	   for	   greater	   mobility	  for	  the	  field	   staff	   to	   visit	  the	  forests	  
  and	   the	   buffer	   zone	   areas.	   The	   nature-­‐based	   tourism	   projects	   were	   also	   intended	   to	   open	   up	  
  opportunities	  for	  local	  people	  and	  reduce	  forest	  offences	  or	  extractive	  practices.	  	  	  

During	  the	  pre-­‐project	  period,	  encroachment	  of	  forest	  lands,	  mainly	  for	  expanding	  tea	  cultivation,	  was	  
very	  common	  in	  the	  Kanneliya	  and	  southern	  part	  of	  the	  Sinharaja	  forests.	  Through	  this	  project,	  amicable	  
re-­‐demarcation	   of	   boundaries	   was	   carried	   out	   and	   land	   markers	   were	   established.	   In	   addition,	   the	  
surrounding	  communities	  were	  educated	  on	  the	  importance	  of	  protecting	  the	  forest.	  	  

The	  decision	  to	  improve	  tea	  cultivation	  and	  assist	  communities	  in	  this	  area	  has	  had	  a	  positive	  effect	  on	  
conservation	  through	  communities	  benefiting	  and	  in	  return	  being	  willing	  to	  take	  on	  a	  watch	  guard	  role.	  
The	   demarcation	   of	   boundaries	   was	   another	   activity	   that	   helped	   to	   clearly	   mark	   the	   boundary,	   allowing	  
better	  management	  of	  the	  forest.	  	  The	  process	  used,	  involving	  discussions	  with	  the	  villagers	  on	  what	  tea	  
land	   they	   could	   keep	   and	   what	   would	   be	   absorbed	   into	   the	   forest,	   has	   also	   helped	   to	   improve	  
relationships	  and	  reduce	  encroachment.	  

        “The	   villagers	   have	   a	   keen	   interest	   in	   conservation.	   If	   they	   heard	   at	   least	   the	   sound	   of	   cutting	   a	  
        tree,	   they	   make	   phone	   calls	   to	   us.	   There	   are	   almost	   no	   encroachments	   in	   Kanneliya.	   It	   is	   not	  
        possible	   to	   encroach	   the	   forest,	   after	   demarcation	   was	   completed.	   If	   somebody	   did,	   people	  
        inform	  us.	  Last	  month	  we	  sued	  a	  person	  in	  Koralegama	  who	  removed	  a	  border	  post	  and	  tried	  to	  
        encroach	   the	   forest	   for	   tea	   plantation.	   It	   was	   easier	   to	   catch	   the	   person,	   since	   we	   got	   the	  
        information	  from	  the	  people.”	  
                                                                                                                             - Divisional	  Forest	  Officer	  


Outcome	  4:	  Sustainable	  use	  of	  non-­‐timber	  forest	  products	  secured.	  

IS6:	  Reduced	  dependency	  on	  over	  extracted	  NTFPs	  
  During	   the	  design	  stage	  of	  the	  project,	  it	  was	  identified	  that	  many	  NTFPs	  are	  harvested	  in	   excess	  of	  
  sustainable	   levels	   in	   Kanneliya	   and	   South	   of	   Sinharaja	   forests.	   Therefore	   the	   project	   expected	   to	  
  create	  awareness,	  identify	  the	  types	  of	  NTFPs	  which	  can	  be	  harvested	  sustainably,	  to	  determine	  the	  
  level	   of	   harvesting	   that	   could	   be	   done	   and	   to	   issue	   permits	   for	   this	   purpose.	   Therefore	   the	   project	  
  expected	   to	   encourage	   the	   enhancement	   of	   NTFPs	   in	   the	   b uffer	  zone	   and	   locate	   demonstration	  plots	  
  in	  state	  forestland	  and	  outside	  the	  buffer	  zone	  in	  order	  to	  reduce	  the	  dependency.	  



                                                                                                                                                                                     80
Although	   it	   was	   identified,	   during	   the	   project	   design	   stage,	   that	   the	   harvesting	   of	   many	   NTFPs	   is	   in	  
excess	  of	  sustainable	  levels	  in	  Kanneliya	  and	  South	  of	  Sinharaja	  forests,	  this	  threat	  has	  already	  reduced	  
to	   some	   extent	   since	   tea	   cultivation	   had	   become	   the	   main	   income	   source	   of	   the	   buffer	   zone	  
communities,	  by	  the	  time	  the	  project	  was	  implemented.	  At	  the	  same	  time,	  the	  younger	  generation	  was	  
not	   keen	   to	   engage	   in	   harvesting	   activities.	   Some	   practices,	   such	   as	   kithul	   tapping31,	   harvesting	   for	  
medicinal	  herbs	  for	  non-­‐commercial	  use,	  and	  gathering	  some	  seasonal	  food	  itemsstill	  continues,	  but	  at	  a	  
lesser	  scale	  and	  mainly	  by	  the	  older	  generation	  or	  the	  very	  poor.	  None	  the	  less,the	  destructive	  nature	  of	  
the	  collection	  of	  NTFPs	  was	  reinforced	  through	  the	  awareness	  programmes	  and	  training	  was	  provided	  
on	  sustainable	  extraction	  measures	  (especially	  for	  resin	  extraction),	  while	  also	  encouraging	  buffer	  zone	  
communities	  to	  grow	  these	  products	  on	  their	  own	  lands	  (e.g.:	  Kitul	  palm	  trees	  –Caryotaurens).	  	  

        “After	   the	   project	   there	   was	   a	   huge	   change.	   In	   most	   cases,	   damage	   to	   the	   forest	   stopped	  
        because	   of	   the	   awareness.	   Also	   raids	   were	   conducted.	   Collecting	   resin	   does	   not	   happen	   now.	  
        Dorana	  oil	  is	  now	  not	  extracted.	  Now	  people	  do	  not	  know	  how	  to	  use	  them.	  Only	  1	  or	  2	  persons	  
        in	  the	  village	  knew	  how	  to	  extract	  dorana	  oil.	  Now	  they	  have	  become	  old.”	  
                                                                                                                             - Community	  FGD	  

Interestingly,	   as	   described	   earlier,	   the	   livelihood	   options	   that	   were	   in	   demand	   by	   the	   community	   also	  
tended	   to	   disconnect	   the	   link	   to	   the	   forest	   products.	   For	   example,	   loans	   and	   training	   were	   given	   in	  
driving,	   dress	   making,	   beauty	   culture,	   computer	   training,	   English	   language,	   etc.,	   hence,	   the	   need	   for	  
sustainable	  use	  of	  forest	  products	  did	  not	  materialize	  as	  expected.	  The	  traditional	  links	  with	  the	  forest	  
are	   changing	   and	   are	   no	   longer	   popular	   with	   the	   young	   and	   the	   types	   of	   training	   selected	   by	   the	  
communities	   themselves	   show	   that	   their	   interest	   lie	   in	   livelihoods	   that	   wean	   them	   away	   from	   forest	  
products.	  Hence,	  the	  disconnect	  has	  afforded	  a	  chance	  for	  conservation.	  	  

Impact	  Drivers	  

ID2:	  Effective	  training	  programmes	  for	  communities	  and	  FD	  officers/mobilisers	  
Forest	   Department	   officials	   who	   were	   engaged	   with	   the	   project	   were	   given	   training	   in	   conservation	   and	  
community	  involved	  participatory	  forest	  management	  that	  involved	  external	  experts	  brought	  in	  by	  the	  
project	   as	   well	   as	   through	   the	   training	   programmes	   carried	   out	   by	   the	   Forest	   Department.	   Due	   to	   these	  
training	  programmes,	  the	  Forest	  Department	  staff	  has	  become	  knowledgeable	  about	  the	  forests	  and	  are	  
comfortable	   with	   working	   with	   communities.	   A	   training	   module	   on	   community	   mobilization	   and	  
participatory	  management	  was	  developed	  and	  included	  in	  the	  curriculum	  for	  training	  of	  forest	  officers	  
of	  the	  Sri	  Lanka	  Forestry	  Institute.	  

Communities	   were	   mobilized	   and	   they	   were	   also	   given	   trainings	   in	   forest	   conservation	   to	   encourage	  
their	   participation	   in	   conservation.	   Apart	   from	   this,	   they	   were	   provided	   training	   on	   NTPF	   sustainable	  
extraction,	  alternative	  income	  generation	  and	  improved	  income	  generation.	  	  	  

ID3:	  Effective	  livelihood	  development	  activities	  leading	  to	  community	  participation	  
The	  success	  of	  the	  livelihoods	  programme,	  especially	  the	  decision	  to	  assist	  the	  community	  to	  improve	  
tea	   cultivation,	   went	   a	   long	   way	   in	   winning	   over	   the	   community.	   The	   training	   and	   the	   revolving	   funds	  
were	  key	  reasons	  the	  community	  members	  stayed	  in	  the	  groups	  and	  continue	  to	  keep	  the	  groups	  active.	  	  

31
     Extraction of inflorescence from the fishtail palm (Caryotaurens) for producing toddy, treacle, and jiggery
                                                                                                                                                                   81
Table	  5:	  Outcomes-­‐impacts	  assessment	  findings	  for	  Strategy	  #2:	  Conservation	  Actions	  
     Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                                                        Qualitative	  Assessment	                                                   Rating	  
       Component	  
Outcome	  2:	                         u   A	  reduction	  of	  threats	  (lasting	  beyond	  the	  life	  of	  the	  project)	  
Buffer	  zone	  community	                to	  the	  two	  forests	  resulting	  in	  better	  conservation	  status	  of	  
cooperate	  in	  the	                     ecosystems,	  	  habitats,	  species	  and	  other	  ecosystem	  services,	  
conservation	                               resulting	  in	  increased	  Global	  environmental	  benefits.	  	  
                                        u   Awareness	  creation,	  building	  relationships	  with	  forest	  officials	  
Outcome	  3:	                              and	  providing	  livelihood	  support	  have	  led	  to	  community	  
Improved	  forest	                         cooperation	  in	  conservation	  activities.	  Even	  at	  present	  they	  
protection	  from	                         have	  more	  or	  less	  the	  same	  collaboration	  with	  forest	  officials	  
                                                                                                                                                     3	  
encroachment	  and	  illicit	             in	  conserving	  the	  forests.	  	  
logging	                               u   Forest	  protection	  has	  improved	  and	  is	  continuing	  because	  of	  
                                             the	  project	  interventions	  for	  tea	  cultivation,	  the	  collaborative	  
                                             demarcating	  of	  boundaries	  and	  establishing	  more	  visible	  
Outcome	  4:	                              markers	  (concrete	  posts,	  live	  fences)	  as	  well	  as	  the	  active	  
Sustainable	  use	  of	  non-­‐           involvement	  of	  the	  community	  for	  vigilance.	  	  
timber	  forest	  products	          u   The	  use	  of	  forest	  products	  is	  declining	  due	  to	  social	  changes	  in	  
secured.	                                   the	  communities	  and	  therefore	  extraction	  has	  reduced.	  	  
                                        u   Trainings	  in	  forest	  conservation,	  sustainable	  extraction	  of	  
                                             NTFPs	  and	  improving	  livelihoods	  were	  given	  to	  the	  
                                             communities.	  Some	  of	  the	  beneficiaries	  are	  still	  experiencing	  
Impact	  Driver	  2:	                     the	  benefits	  and	  they	  acknowledge	  that	  the	  training	  given	  for	  
Effective	  training	                      tea	  cultivation	  has	  improved	  their	  management	  of	  the	  
programmes	  	                             cultivation	  and	  this	  has	  improved	  their	  yields.	                                     3	  
-     For	  communities	              u   A	  training	  module	  on	  community	  mobilization	  and	  
-     For	  officers	                      participatory	  management	  was	  developed	  and	  included	  in	  the	  
                                             curriculum	  for	  training	  of	  forest	  officers	  of	  the	  Sri	  Lanka	  
                                             Forestry	  Institute.	  The	  Extensions	  officers	  trained	  in	  these	  
                                             methods	  use	  the	  experience	  in	  their	  work.	  
                                        u   The	  success	  of	  the	  livelihoods	  programme,	  the	  revolving	  fund,	  
Impact	  Driver	  3:	  
                                             the	  training,	  the	  support	  to	  start	  businesses	  and	  support	  for	  
Effective	  livelihood	  
                                             tea	  cultivation	  were	  the	  reasons	  the	  community	  members	  
development	  activities	                                                                                                                          2	  
                                             stayed	  in	  the	  groups	  and	  continue	  to	  extend	  their	  support.	  
leading	  to	  community	  
                                             Communities	  are	  requesting	  further	  support	  –	  another	  project	  
participation	  
                                             -­‐	  for	  the	  new	  generation,	  in	  order	  to	  keep	  the	  momentum.	  
                                        u   Better	  community	  awareness	  and	  their	  involvement	  in	  forest	  
                                             conservation	  are	  being	  maintained	  at	  a	  satisfactory	  level,	  even	  
Intermediate	  State	  4:	                seven	  years	  after	  the	  completion	  of	  the	  project	  with	  
Better	  community	                        communities	  actively	  involved	  in	  the	  vigilance	  and	  also	  
awareness	  and	  active	                 assisting	  the	  FD	  when	  requested.	  The	  communities	  state	  that	                   3	  
involvement	  in	  forest	                similar	  programmes	  are	  needed	  for	  the	  next	  generation	  to	  
conservation	                               keep	  up	  the	  same	  level	  of	  conservation.	  	  Some	  programmes	  
                                             are	  being	  done	  but	  understandably	  not	  with	  the	  same	  level	  of	  
                                             intensity	  as	  the	  project	  period.	  	  
Intermediate	  State	                 u   Incidents	  of	  forest	  offences	  have	  reduced	  through	  project	  
5:Reduction	  in	  forest	                interventions.	  Training	  to	  enhance	  income	  from	  tea	  and	  re-­‐                    3	  
offences	  by	  local	  people	          demarcation	  of	  boundaries	  and	  establishing	  land	  markers	  has	  
                                                                                                                                                             82
      Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                                                                 Qualitative	  Assessment	                                                     Rating	  
        Component	  
                                                 helped	  to	  stop	  encroachments;	  people’s	  participation	  has	  also	  
                                                 helped	  deter	  encroachment	  and	  logging;	  and	  alternate	  
                                                 income	  generation	  and	  moving	  away	  of	  the	  younger	  
                                                 generation	  from	  extracting	  NTFPs.	  
                                          u     The	  use	  of	  NTFPs	  was	  over-­‐estimated	  at	  the	  design	  stages	  and	  
                                                 was	  later	  changed	  and	  given	  less	  emphasis.	  Activities	  such	  
                                                 collection	  fuel-­‐wood,	  dorana	  oil,	  weniwal	  (a	  medicinal	  vine),	  
                                                 poaching	  are	  less	  frequent	  and	  the	  communities	  showed	  that	  
IS6:	  Reduction	  in	  
                                                 their	  traditional	  links	  with	  the	  forest	  are	  changing	  as	  few	  use	  
dependency	  on	  over	                                                                                                                            2	  
                                                 NTFPs	  in	  the	  same	  way.	  Hence	  most	  of	  the	  livelihoods	  
extracted	  NTFPs	  
                                                 requested	  were	  those	  that	  did	  not	  involve	  forest	  products.	  For	  
                                                 some	  uses	  such	  as	  Kithul	  tapping	  that	  continue	  awareness	  was	  
                                                 provided	  on	  non-­‐destructive	  methods	  as	  well	  as	  planting	  the	  
                                                 tree	  in	  their	  home	  gardens.	  	  	  
NOTE:	   The	   ratings	   are	   given	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   achieving	   the	   intermediate	   states	   and	   the	   contribution	  
towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  	  


      5. Overall	  Conclusions

Overall,	  the	  project	  has	  succeeded	  in	  contributing	  to	  conserve	  endemic	  and	  globally	  threatened	  species	  
in	   the	   South	   of	   Sinharaja	   and	   Kanneliya	   forests	   with	   community	   participation.	   This	   ROtI	   assessment	   is	  
based	  purely	  on	  the	  validation	  and	  assessment	  of	  the	  delivery	  of	  the	  theory	  of	  change	  modelled	  above,	  
which	  has	  been	  developed	  through	  consultation	  with	  the	  project	  stakeholders,	  including	  communities.	  	  

A	  final	  consolidated	  rating	  of	  the	  project’s	  progress	  towards	  impact	  is	  given	  in	  Table	  6	  below	  (using	  the	  
scoring	   system	   given	   in	   Table	   4	   and	   5	   above).	   It	   provides	   an	   assessment	   of	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   the	  
project’s	   theoretical	   design	   is	   in	   line	   with	   the	   validated	   theory	   of	   change	   deemed	   necessary	   for	  
delivering	  impact	  and	  the	  progress	  towards	  delivering	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways.	  

                                                 Table	  6:	  Overall	  rating	  of	  project	  impact	  
                                 Outcomes	  –	  Impact	  Assessment	  

                                 Strategy	  1:Model	  Development	                                                                  3	  

                                 Strategy	  2:Conservation	  Action	                                                                3	  

                                 Overall	  project	                                                                                  3	  



Improved	   awareness,	   better	   relationships	   and	   livelihood	   assistance	   have	   led	   to	   active	   involvement	   of	  
the	   communities	   in	   management	   activities	   such	   as	   boundary	   marking,	   live	   fence	   establishment,	  
enrichment	   planting,	   weeding,	   etc.	   The	   model	   has	   been	   accepted	   and	   practiced	   in	   Protected	   Areas	  
Management	  and	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  project	  and	  Sri	  Lanka	  Australia	  Natural	  Resources	  Management	  
                                                                                                                                                                        83
Project	   (SLANRMP)	   with	   modifications	   to	   suit	   the	   ground	   situation.	   	   It	   has	   also	   led	   to	   the	   continued	  
support	  for	  protection	  and	  law	  enforcement	  which	  is	  directly	  related	  to	  conservation	  of	  the	  forest	  and	  
its	   resources.	   The	   support	   for	   tea	   cultivation	   along	   with	   the	   demarcation	   of	   boundaries	   has	   had	   the	  
greatest	  impact	  on	  reducing	  encroachment.	  The	  improved	  relationship	  between	  forest	  officers	  and	  the	  
community	   and	   the	   benefits	   from	   livelihood	   activities	   have	   resulted	   in	   greater	   vigilance	   that	   is	   a	  
deterrent	   for	   illegal	   activities.	   This	   has	   allowed	   for	   a	   larger	   area	   of	   forest	   to	   be	   monitored	   and	   the	  
vigilance	  has	  continued	  to	  this	  day.	  Hence,	  it	  can	  be	  stated	  that	  the	  project	  played	  an	  important	  role	  in	  
complementing	   Sri	   Lankan	   efforts	   to	   conserve	   globally	   threatened	   species	   in	   the	   rainforests	   of	   the	  
country.	  	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                        84
Annex	  1:	  References	  


    1. Rodgers,	   A.	   &Abayawardana,	   S.	   D.,	   2007.United	   Nations	   Development	   Programme/	   Global
       Environmental	   Facility,	   Terminal	   Evaluation	   of	   The	   Project-­‐	   Final	   Version,	   “Contributing	   to	   the
       Conservation	   of	   Unique	   Biodiversity	   in	   the	   Threatened	   Rain	   Forests	   of	   South-­‐west	   Sri	   Lanka”.
       United	  Nations	  Development	  Programme/	  Global	  Environmental	  Facility.

    2. Edwards,	   P.,	   Hitinayake,	   G.	   &Somaratne,	   H.,	   2003.	   United	   Nations	   Development	   Programme,
       Report	   of	   the	   Mid-­‐Term	   Evaluation	   Mission,	   Contributing	   to	   the	   Conservation	   of	   Unique
       Biodiversity	   in	   the	   Threatened	   Rain	   Forests	   of	   South-­‐West	   Sri	   Lanka.	   United	   Nations
       Development	  Programme.

    3. Project	   Document,n.d.,	   Contributing	   to	   the	   Conservation	   of	   the	   Unique	   Biodiversity	   in	   the
       Threatened	  Rain	  Forests	  of	  Southwest	  Sri	  Lanka.

    4. Jayasuriya,	   A.H.M.	   &Abayawardana,	   S.D.,	   2008.	   Integrated	   Development	   Association,	   A	   Study	   to
       Determine	  The	  Changes	  in	  The	  Biodiversity	  Values	  of	  Southern	  Sinharaja	  and	  Kanneliya	  Forests
       after	  The	  Implementation	  of	  GEF	  Medium	  Sized	  Project.	  Integrated	  Development	  Association.

    5. Dela,	   J	   D	   S,	   2003.	   Periodic	   Review	   of	   the	   Sinharaja	   Biosphere	   Reserve.	   Prepared	   for	   the	   National
       Science	  Foundation	  and	  the	  UNESCO.	  Sri	  Lanka	  MAB	  Committee.

    6. PILF,	  unpublished	  PILF,	  2004.	  Case	  study	  of	  environmental	  justice	  in	  respect	  of	  access	  to	  forest
       resources	  in	  the	  Kanneliya	  Forest	  Reserve	  (unpublished	  report).

    7. International	   Union	   for	   Conservation	   of	   /Food	   and	   Agricultural	   Organization/Forest	   Department
       (IUCN/FAO/FD),	   1997.	   Designing	   an	   optimum	   protected	   areas	   system	   for	   Sri	   Lanka’s	   natural
       forests	  (I).	  IUCN,	  Sri	  Lanka	  (unpublished.).

    8. Ministry	  of	  Agriculture,	  Lands	  and	  Forestry	  (MALF),1995.	  Sri	  Lanka	  Forestry	  Sector	  Master	  Plan.
       Ministry	  of	  Agriculture,	  Lands	  and	  Forestry,	  Sri	  Lanka.




                                                                                                                                                              85
Annex	  2:	  Sites	  Visited	  

March	  13,	  2013	  

Kanneliya-­‐Dediyagala-­‐Nakiyadeniya	  Forest	  Complex	  area	  

Thawalama	  (Range	  Office,	  Forest	  Department),	  Galle	  District	  

-       FGD	  with	  non-­‐active	  CBO	  members	  

                          Name	                       Gender	              Age	                                CBO	  
    G.G.	  AjithPriyanka	                           Male	                             Panangala	  North	  
    W.K.	  Prasanna	                                Male	             35	            Panangala	  North	  
    W.K.	  Kanthi	                                  Female	           40	            Panangala	  North	  
    SomalathaHewawitharana	                          Female	           49	            Malhathaawa,	  Hiniduma	  
    BanduSenanayake	                                 Male	             78	            Malhathaawa,	  Hiniduma	  
    K.A.	  Danawathi	                               Female	           73	            Hinduma	  North	  
    U.G.	  Renuka	                                  Female	           44	            Malhathawa,	  Hiniduma	  

-       FGD	  with	  active	  CBO	  members	  

                         Name	                 Gender	                Age	                                      CBO	  
    J.A.	  MangalikaAmaratunga	              Female	             47	               Malgalla	  Forest	  Conservation	  Society	  
    KanthiKarunarathna	                       Female	             38	               Kanneliya	  Protection	  Leaders,	  Thawalama	  
    H.	  T.	  RenukaMalkanthi	              Female	             34	               Malgalla	  Forest	  Conservation	  Society	  
    L.L.	  Malani	                           Female	             43	               Malgalla	  Forest	  Conservation	  Society	  
                                                                                       Kanneliya	  Protection	  Leaders,	  Hingalgoda,	  
    G.H.D.	  Piyarathna	                     Male	               52	  
                                                                                       Hiniduma	  
                                                                                       Kanneliya	  Protection	  Leaders,	  Hingalgoda,	  
    Neel	  Kaluarachchi	                     Male	               31	  
                                                                                       Hiniduma	  
                                                                                       Kanneliya	  Protection	  Leaders,	  Hingalgoda,	  
    KeerthisenaIhalawithana	                  Male	               50	  
                                                                                       Hiniduma	  
    N.W.	  Karunarathan	                     Male	               65	               Kanneliya	  Protection	  Leaders,	  Thawalama	  
    P.P.	  Chandrika	                        Female	             48	               Kanneliya	  Protection	  Leaders,	  Thawalama	  




                                                                                                                                                86
March	  14,	  2013	  

Sinharaja	  World	  Heritage	  Site	  	  

Neluwa	  (Madugata	  Temple),	  Galle	  District	  

-       FGD	  with	  CBO	  members	  
                       Name	                                  Gender	       Age	                                      CBO	  
GnanaKariyakarawana	                                          Female	         42	       Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Madugeta	  
M.G.	  Premadasa	                                              Male	         50	       Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Kosmulla	  
M.G.	  Premathilaka	                                           Male	         34	       Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Kosmulla	  
SamanPriyankaPathirana	                                         Male	         36	       Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Madugeta	  
N.	  Chandrani	                                              Female	         42	       Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Thambalagama	  
E.B.G.	  Sugathapala	                                          Male	         39	       Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Waarukandeniya	  
G.G.	  Chandradasa	                                            Male	         48	       Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Waarukandeniya	  

Deniyaya	  (Kiriwalegama	  Temple),Matara	  District	  

-       FGD	  with	  CBO	  members	  
                       Name	                                Gender	       Age	                                      CBO	  
    W.	  Nimalawathi	                                      Female	        52	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Dehigampala	  
    K.G.	  NadeekaSandamali	                               Female	        28	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Kiriwalagama	  
    N.	  Thalapalage	                                      Female	        47	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Kiriwaldola	  
    Y.G.	  Pathmananda	                                      Male	        42	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Dehigampola	  
    W.SusilSanjeewa	                                          Male	        31	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Dehigampola	  
    W.	  Priyanganie	  Silva	                             Female	        32	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Dehigampola	  
    W.M.	  Indrani	                                        Female	        42	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Dehigampola	  
    W.	  Ramani	                                           Female	        43	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Dehigampola	  
    SiriyaPanagoda	                                         Female	        41	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Dehigampola	  
    R.L.	  SriyaniRathnayaka	                              Female	        38	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Dehigampola	  
    T.G.	  Wimalasena	                                       Male	        42	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Kiriwalagama	  
    W.G.	  DilanChathuranga	                                 Male	        19	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Kiriwaldola	  
    SarukkaliThakshilaDilrukshi	                            Female	        23	        Society	  of	  Sinharaja	  Friends,	  Kiriwaldola	  

22	  –	  24	  July	  and	  11	  –	  13	  August	  2013	  

Information	  was	  also	  collected	  and	  through	  the	  Man	  and	  Biosphere	  (MAB)	  Reserve	  Periodic	  Review	  in	  
the	  Sinharaja	  World	  Heritage	  Site	  area	  	  




                                                                                                                                                        87
March	  15,	  2013	  

Divisional	  Forest	  Office	  –	  Matara	  District	  (Forest	  Department)	  

-    KPI	  with	  Divisional	  Forest	  Officer	  -­‐	  Matara	  

Divisional	  Forest	  Office	  –	  Galle	  District	  (Forest	  Department)	  

-    KPI	  with	  Divisional	  Forest	  Officer	  –	  Galle	  
-    KPI	  with	  Range	  Forest	  Officer	  -­‐	  Galle	  




                                                                                          88
Annex	  3:	  People	  met	  

      Date	                       Name	                                   Position	                              Organization	  
2013/02/07	         H.G.	  Gunawardena	               Project	  Manager	  -­‐	  Conservation	  of	   Forest	  Department	  
                                                         the	  Biodiversity	  in	  the	  Rain	  Forests	  
2013/02/07	         Mohan	  Heenatigala	              Assistant	  Conservator	  of	  Forests	             Forest	  Department	  
2013/02/20	         Padma	  Abeykoon	                 Director	  –	  Biodiversity	  Secretariat	   Ministry	  of	  
                                                                                                                 Environment	  
2013/03/13	         M.H.	  Asitha	  De	  Silva	     Additional	  Range	  officer	  -­‐	                 Forest	  Department	  
                                                         Kanneliya	  Range	  
2013/03/13	         R.A.	  Dissanayake	               Beat	  Forest	  officer	  -­‐	  Kanneliya	         Forest	  Department	  
                                                         Range	  
2013/03/14	         RasikaSasanka	                     Forest	  Extension	  Officer	  –	  Neluwa	   Forest	  Department	  
                                                         Range	  
2013/03/14	         Sarath	  Chandra	                 Range	  Forest	  Officer	  –	  Deniyaya	           Forest	  Department	  
                     Ranaweera	  
2013/03/15	         H.G.	  Wasantha	                  Divisional	  Forest	  Officer	  –	  Galle	      Forest	  Department	  
2013/03/15	         K.G.	  Sepala	                    Divisional	  Forest	  Officer	  –	  Matara	     Forest	  Department	  
2013/03/15	         UthsukaPrasanga	                   Range	  Forest	  Officer	  –	  Galle	           Forest	  Department	  




                                                                                                                                            89
Annex	  4:	  Schematic	  of	  Conservation	  of	  Biodiversity	  in	  the	  Rain	  Forests	  outcomes-­‐
impacts	  theory	  of	  change	  



                                                                IS1:	  Strengthening	  of	  
                                                                institutional	  mechanisms	  
                                                                for	  community	  
  Outcome	  1:	  Functioning	                                participation	  in	  forest	  
  model	  for	  forest	                                      conservation	  
  conservation	  with	  
  cooperation	  between	  
  local	  community,	  FD	  and	                            IS2:	  Attitudinal	  change	  in	                         PROTECTED	  
  other	  stakeholders	                                       Forest	  Department	  officials	                         ECOSYSTEMS	  IN	  
                                                                for	  improved	                                                    THE	  
                                                                communitycollaboration.	                                    RAINFORESTS	  
                                                                                                                             OF	  SINHARAJA	  
  Outcome	  2:	  Buffer	  zone	                                                                                         AND	  KANNELIYA	  
  community	  cooperate	  in	  
  conservation	  	                                            IS3:	  Improvement	  in	  
                                                                livelihood	  benefits	  to	  local	  
                                                                people	  	  

                                                                                                                              CONSERVED	  
  Outcome	  3:	  Improved	                                   IS5:	  Reduction	  in	  forest	                            GLOABLLY	  
  forest	  protection	  from	                                offenses	  by	  local	  people	                           THREATENED	  
  encroachment	  and	  illicit	  
                                                                                                                                SPECIES	  
  logging	  
                                                                IS4:	  Better	  community	  
                                                                awareness	  and	  active	  
                                                                involvement	  in	  forest	  
                                                                conservation	  	  

  Outcome	  4:	  Sustainable	  
  use	  of	  non-­‐timber	  forest	                         IS6:	  Reduced	  dependency	  
  products	  secured.	                                        on	  over	  extracted	  NTFP	  



   ID1:	  The	  ownership	               ID2:	  Effective	                   ID3:	  Effective	  livelihood	     A1:	  FD	  adopts	  
   of	  the	  project	  by	  the	      training	  programmes	              development	  activities	           community	  based	  
   Forest	  Department	                   for	  communities	  and	           leading	  to	  community	          forest	  management	  
                                            officers/mobilisers	                 participation	  
                                            	  	  




                                                                                                                                                   90
                        TECHNICAL	  DOCUMENT	  D:	  

                     Review	  of	  Outcomes	  to	  Impact	  

Protected	  Areas	  Management	  and	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  Project	  

                                  (GEF	  ID	  878)	  




                                                                                     91
Acronyms	  
A	            Assumptions	  
ADB	          Asian	  Development	  Bank	  
ADF	          Asian	  Development	  Fund	  	  
BCAP	         Biodiversity	  Conservation	  Action	  Plan	  	  
BCS	          Biodiversity	  Conservation	  Secretariat	  
CBD	          Convention	  of	  Biological	  Diversity	  	  
CBO	          Community	  Based	  Organization	  
DWLC	         Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  	  
FGD	          Focus	  Group	  Discussion	  
FSP	          Full	  Sized	  Project	  	  
GEF	          Global	  Environmental	  Facility	  
ID	           Impact	  Drivers	  
IS	           Intermediate	  States	  	  
IUCN	         International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Nature	  
KPI	          Key	  Person	  Interview	  
NWTC	         National	  Wildlife	  Training	  Centre	  	  
PA	           Protected	  Areas	  
PACF	         Protected	  Area	  Conservation	  Fund	  
PACT	         Protected	  Area	  Conservation	  Trust	  	  
PAM&WC	       Protected	  Areas	  Management	  and	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  
PPA	          Pilot	  Protected	  Areas	  	  
ROtI	         Review	  of	  Outcome	  to	  Impact	  	  
TOC	          Theory	  of	  Change	  




                                                                                         92
1. Introduction

As	   a	   part	   of	   the	   Joint	   GEF/Sri	   Lanka	   country	   portfolio	   evaluation,	   the	   review	   of	   “Protected	   Areas	  
Management	   and	   Wildlife	   Conservation	   Project”	   (GEF	   ID	   878)	   was	   carried	   out	   using	   Review	   of	   Outcome	  
to	  Impact	  (ROtI)	  methodology,	  which	  was	  developed	  by	  the	  GEF	  Evaluation	  Office.	  

This	  Full	  Sized	  Project	  (FSP)	  was	  implemented	  between	  September	  2001	  and	  December	  2008.	  The	  total	  
budget	   of	   the	   project	   was	   $	   34.7	   million	   including	   $12	   million	   loan	   from	   Asian	   Development	   Bank’s	  
(ADB)	   Asian	   Development	   Fund	   (ADF),	   $10.1	   million	   grant	   from	   the	   GEF,	   $4.0	   million	   grant	   from	   the	  
Government	  of	  the	  Netherlands,	  $7.7	  million	  from	  the	  Government	  of	  Sri	  Lanka,	  and	  $0.9	  million	  from	  
beneficiaries.	   It	   was	   implemented	   by	   the	   World	   Bank	   together	   with	   Asian	   Development	   Bank	   (ADB)	   and	  
executed	   by	   the	   Department	   of	   Wildlife	   Conservation	   (DWLC)	   and	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Forestry	   and	  
Environment	  of	  the	  government	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.	  	  

The	   Protected	   Areas	   Management	   and	   Wildlife	   Conservation	   Project	   (PAM&WCP)	   intended	   to	   assist	   the	  
Government	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   with	   conserving	   the	   country’s	   natural	   resources	   and	   preserving	   its	   wildlife.	  
More	  specifically,	  the	  project	  expected	  to	  contribute	  to	  the	  protection	  of	  the	  country's	  fauna	  and	  flora,	  
stimulate	   nature	   based	   tourism	   and	   promote	   the	   development	   of	   a	   sustainable	   protected	   area	  
management	   and	   wildlife	   conservation	   system	   for	   Sri	   Lanka.	   It	   also	   aimed	   at	   assisting	   in	   the	  
establishment	  of	  a	  sustainable	  financing	  mechanism	  for	  wildlife	  conservation.	  

Following	  were	  the	  expected	  outcomes	  of	  the	  project;	  
    • Enhanced	  institutional	  capacity	  of	  the	  Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  (DWLC)
    • Improved	  Management	  of	  Protected	  areas	  through	  Participatory	  Adaptive	  Management
        systems
    • Community	  partnership	  for	  livelihoods	  and	  conservation	  established
    • Improved	  collaborative	  conservation	  planning

The	   project	   was	   implemented	   in	   seven	   selected	   protected	   areas	   (PAs).	   They	   were	  Bundala,	   Udawalawe,	  
Horton	  Plains,	  Peak	  Wilderness,	  Ritigala,	  Minneriya32,	  and	  Wasgomuwa.	  

At	   the	   end	   of	   the	   project	   the	   completion	   report	   rates	   the	   performance	   of	   the	   project	   as	   satisfactory	  
(ADB,	  2010).	  	  This	  current	  review	  expects	  to	  assess	  whether	  in	  time	  the	  successfully	  achieved	  outputs	  
have	  actually	  contributed	  in	  achieving	  long-­‐lasting	  and	  favourable	  environmental	  impact.	  	  

This	   ROtI	   assessment	   followed	   several	   steps.	   First	   the	   project	   documents	   were	   reviewed	   and	   a	   TOC	   was	  
developed	  with	  the	  project	  stakeholders.	  To	  validate	  it	  and	  to	  discover	  the	  sustainability	  of	  the	  project	  
benefits,	  key	  person	  interviews	  (KPIs)	  were	  done	  with	  the	  Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  (DWLC)	  
officials,	   consultants/ex-­‐project	   officials	   and	   implementing	   agencies,	   and	   focus	   group	   discussions	   (FGDs)	  
with	  buffer	  zone	  communities	  in	  Minneriya,	  and	  Wasgamuwa	  pilot	  protected	  areas	  (PPAs).	  Comparative	  
data	   were	   also	   drawn	   from	   the	   Periodic	   Review	   of	   Man	   and	   Biosphere	   (MAB)	   Reserves	   in	   Sri	  
Lanka,which	   replicated	   the	   ROtI	   data	   collection	   format	   for	   focus	   group	   discussions	   at	   the	   Bundala	  
Biosphere	   Reserve	   (BBR),	   Ritigala	   Strict	   Reserve	   and	   Kaudulla	   National	   Park	   and	   also	   gathered	  
information	  from	  interviews	  with	  the	  Park	  Officials.	  	  

32
     Some implementation was also done in KaudullaNational Park that adjoins Minneriya.
                                                                                                                                                                  93
The	   report	   is	   structured	   according	   to	   the	   ROtI	   methodology,	   starting	   with	   the	   characterization	   of	   the	  
intended	   project	   environmental	   impacts,	   or	   GEBs	   (section	   2).	   The	   logical	   sequence	   of	   conditions	   (i.e.	  
theory	  of	  change)	  deemed	  necessary	  to	  convert	  outcomes	  to	  impacts	  was	  then	  modelled	  (sections	  3),	  
followed	  by	  an	  assessment	  of	  the	  extent	  to	  which	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways	  have	  been	  realized,	  
which	  in	  turn	  provides	  an	  indirect	  measure	  of	  impact	  that	  is	  likely	  to	  be	  achieved	  over	  time	  (section	  4).	  
Section	  5	  provides	  a	  summary	  of	  the	  overall	  conclusions	  of	  the	  ROtI	  assessment.	  


2. The	  project’s	  global	  environmental	  benefits

In	  Sri	  Lanka,	  protected	  areas	  (PAs)	  account	  for	  9,700	  square	  kilometres	  and	  it	  is	  15	  percent	  of	  the	  total	  
land	   area.	   A	   separate	   Protected	   Area	   (PA)	   network	   was	   set	   up	   under	   the	   1937	   Fauna	   and	   Flora	  
Protection	   Ordinance	   (FFPO),	   in	   order	   to	   conserve	   areas	   with	   significant	   wildlife	   biodiversity.	   Some	   of	  
these	  PAs	  contain	  high	  endemism,	  including	  relict	  species,	  and	  some	  of	  the	  highest	  species	  richness	  per	  
unit	   area	   in	   Asia.	   Hence	   they	   provide	   global	   benefits	   by	   maintaining	   endemic	   lineages,	   species,	   and	  
higher	  taxa	  that	  would	  otherwise	  go	  extinct.	  

Out	  of	  the	  seven	  pilot	  protected	  areas	  (PPAs)	  selected	  for	  the	  project,	  Peak	  Wilderness	  PPA	  is	  cited	  as	  
one	   of	   the	   most	   valuable	   conservation	   areas	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   and	   is	   a	   part	   of	   the	   central	   highlands	   world	  
heritage.	  Due	  to	  its	  geo-­‐evolutionary	  history	  and	  topographic	  variation	  it	  has	  a	  large	  number	  of	  endemic	  
fauna,	  with	  highest	  endemicity	  among	  freshwater	  fish,	  amphibians	  and	  reptiles,	  while	  more	  than	  50%	  of	  
its	  woody	  plant	  species	  are	  endemic.	  Ritigala	  Strict	  Nature	  Reserve	  is	  an	  isolated	  mountain	  where	  a	  large	  
number	  of	  plant	  species	  that	  are	  generally	  scattered	  in	  different	  climates	  and	  growing	  conditions	  can	  be	  
found	  in	  a	  small	  area.	  It	  supports	  over	  400	  of	  plant	  species,	  20%	  of	  them	  endemic,	  and	  three	  tree	  and	  
shrub	   species	   known	   only	   from	   this	   site	   (Coleus	   elongates,	   Dendrocalumus	   cinctus	   and	   Madhuca	  
clavata),	  more	  than	  100	  plant	  species	  are	  used	  in	   ayurvedic	  medicine.	  Although	  located	  in	  the	  Dry	  Zone,	  
this	  forest	  has	  a	  unique	  vegetation	  type	  in	  the	  summits	  and	  upper	  slopes,	  including	  montane	  and	  sub-­‐
montane	   species	   of	   the	   wet	   zone.	   In	   Horton	   Plains	   PPA,	   over	   50%	   woody	   plants	   are	   endemic	   and	   the	  
vegetation	   includes	   wild	   relatives	   of	   cultivated	   pepper,	   guava,	   tobacco,	   and	   cardamom	   that	   offer	   vital	  
germ	   plasm	   reserves.	   Horton	   Plains	   and	   Peak	   Wilderness	   PPAs	   are	   also	   part	   of	   the	   Central	   Highlands	  
World	   Heritage	   site.	   The	   Bundala	   PPA	   is	   one	   of	   the	   six	   wetlands	   of	   international	   importance	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	  
designated	   under	   the	   Ramsar	   Convention.	   This	   Park	   provides	   shelter	   for	   wide	   range	   of	   species	   including	  
two	  endemic	  species,	  a	  toad	  (Bufo	  atukoralei)	   and	  a	  snake	  (Xenochrophis	  asperrimus)	   and	  nesting	  sites	  
for	   all	   five	   of	   the	   threatened	   marine	   turtles	   found	   in	   Sri	   Lankan	   waters.	   	   Bundala	   is	   among	   the	   best	   sites	  
to	   watch	   birds	   in	   Sri	   Lanka,	   with	   over	   200	   species	   recorded	   in	   the	   Park;	   its	   wetlands	   are	   famous	   for	  
migratory	   birds.	   Wasgomuwa	   PPA	   lies	   in	   the	   central	   lowland	   and	   covers	   both	   dry	   and	   intermediate	  
zones.	  The	  known	  fauna	  comprises	  23	  species	  of	  mammals,	  163	  species	  of	  birds	  (8	  endemic),	  35	  reptiles	  
(7	  endemic),	  15	  amphibians,	  17	  freshwater	  fishes,	  and	  52	  butterflies	  (9	  endemic).	  	  Minneriya	  contains	  a	  
unique	   concentration	   of	   intact	   ecosystem	   types	   that	   support	   populations	   of	   most	   dry-­‐zone	   mammals,	  
including	   elephants,	   bear	   and	   leopards,	   while	   the	   lakes	   support	   a	   wide	   variety	   of	   waterfowl	   and	   at	   least	  
31	  species	  of	  native	  fish.	  Udawalawe	  in	  the	  southern	  lowlands	  is	  located	  in	  the	  catchment	  area	  of	  the	  
walawe	  reservoir.	  	  Much	  of	  the	  semi	  deciduous	  monsoon	  forest	  was	  cleared	  for	  shifting	  cultivation	  while	  
the	  northern	  areas	  some	  old	  growth	  vegetation	  can	  be	  found.	  The	  riverine	  stands	  in	  this	  area	  contain	  an	  


                                                                                                                                                                                    94
endangered	   endemic	   tree	   Hopea	   cordifolia.	   The	   endemic	   gold	   civet	   is	   found	   here	   along	   with	   herds	   of	  
migratory	  and	  resident	  elephants33.	  	  

DWLC	   was	   established	   in	   1949	   to	   take	   over	   responsibility	   (from	   the	   Forest	   Department)	   of	   the	   PA	  
network.	  Long	  term	  park	  management	  planning	  commenced	  in	  the	  early	  90s	  with	  the	  "Development	  of	  
Wildlife	  Conservation	  and	  Protected	  Area	  Management"	  (GEF	  ID	  352).	  The	  project	  under	  review	  was	  a	  
follow	   on	   project	   to	   this	   one.	   At	   the	   time,	   the	   PAs	   and	   the	   services	   provided	   by	   them	   were	   not	  
effectively	   protected	   due	   to	   weak	   institutional	   set	   up,	   lack	   of	   resources,	   inadequate	   managerial	   skills	  
and	   technical	   capacity	   throughout	   the	   institution,	   and	   lack	   of	   cooperation	   between	   conservation	  
agencies	   in	   order	   to	   provide	   more	   integrated	   coverage	   and	   protection.	   The	   project	   aimed	   to	   address	  
these	  issues	  by	  providing	  support	  for	  human	  resource	  development,	  improving	  managerial	  systems	  and	  
technical	  skills,	  and	  provision	  of	  infrastructure	  and	  equipment.	  	  

A	   considerable	   pressure	   on	   Sri	   Lanka’s	   PAs	   has	   been	   generated	   by	   the	   high	   population	   density,	   levels	   of	  
poverty	   and	   unemployment	   in	   the	   surrounding	   communities,	   and	   their	   dependence	   on	   subsistence	  
agriculture.	   The	   project	   identified	   that	   effective	   PA	   management	   cannot	   take	   place	   in	   the	   long	   term	  
without	  the	  involvement	  and	  support	  of	  the	  local	  communities.	  Therefore	  the	  community	  participation	  
for	   conservation	   was	   promoted	   under	   the	   sustainable	   financing	   mechanism	   of	   the	   Protected	   Area	  
Conservation	   Fund	   (PACF)	   that	   looked	   to	   support	   community	   livelihoods	   including	   nature	   based	  
activities	   to	   serve	   a	   dual	   purpose	   of	   reducing	   the	   pressure	   on	   the	   forest	   through	   improved	   economic	  
conditions	  for	  the	  surrounding	  communities.	  	  


3. PAM&WC	  Outcome	  to	  Impact	  Theory	  of	  Change

The	   theory	   of	   change	   of	   a	   project	   is	   the	   logical	   sequence	   of	   conditions	   and	   factors	   that	   are	   necessary	   to	  
deliver	   the	   ultimate	   project	   impact.	   The	   basic	   project	   theory	   of	   change	   starts	   with	   activities	   and	  
develops	   through	   delivery	   of	   outputs	   and	   achievement	   of	   expected	   outcomes	   at	   the	   end	   of	  
implementation,	   i.e.	   through	   a	   means-­‐ends	   hierarchy	   that	   ultimately	   puts	   in	   place	   the	   conditions	   to	  
reach	  impact	  sometime	  after	  project	  completion.	  The	  GEF	  project	  terminal	  evaluations	  assess	  the	  basic	  
theory	  of	  change	  as	  far	  as	  outcomes,	  but	  do	  not	  usually	  go	  far	  in	  assessing	  the	  crucial	  last	  step	  to	  impact.	  
The	   ROtI	   assessment	   focuses	   on	   this	   last	   step	   and	   develops	   and	   assesses	   a	   detailed	   theory	   of	   change	  
between	   outcomes	   and	   impacts,	   referred	   to	   as	   outcomes-­‐impacts	   pathways,	   measured	   at	   least	   two	  
years	  after	  project	  completion.	  Each	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathway	  represents	  a	  specific	  strategy.	  Figure	  1	  
below	  illustrates	  the	  key	  elements	  and	  relationships	  of	  the	  detailed	  theory	  of	  change	  between	  outcomes	  
and	  impacts.	  




33
     All data unless otherwise specified within the text is taken from the project document.
                                                                                                                                                                               95
Figure1:	  Generic	  theory	  of	  change	  for	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways	  

                                                  ASSUMPTIONS	  




       	                        OUTCOMES	                            INTERMEDIATE	                        IMPACT/	  GEBs	  
Strategy	                                                                STATES	  




                                                     IMPACT	  
                                                     DRIVERS	  




The	   key	   ingredients	   in	   the	   outcomes-­‐impacts	   pathways	   (or	   strategies)	   that	   are	   examined	   according	   to	  
the	   ROtI	   methodology	   are	   intermediate	   states,	   impact	   drivers	   and	   assumptions,	   which	   are	   defined	   in	  
table	   1	   below.	   Impact	   in	   terms	   of	   global	   environmental	   benefits	   can	   be	   achieved	   either	   through	  
environmental	  threat/stress	  reduction	  or	  improvement	  in	  the	  environmental	  conservation	  status	  of	  the	  
resource.	   If	   the	   project	   outcomes	   are	   assessed	   to	   be	   successfully	   delivered	   and	   the	   key	   ingredients	   of	  
the	  theory	  of	  change	  between	  outcomes	  and	  impacts	  are	  in	  place,	  then	  it	  is	  reasonable	  to	  conclude	  that	  
that	   the	   barriers	   and	   threats	   to	   impact	   have	   been	   overcome,	   the	   environmental	   status	   has	   improved,	  
and	   that	   consequently	   impact	   has	   or	   will	   be	   achieved,	   with	   time.	   In	   the	   evaluation	   the	   focus	   is	   on	  
performance	  beyond	  the	  life	  of	  the	  project	  –	  therefore	  beyond	  outcomes	  to	  assess	  the	  progress	  made	  
towards	  achieving	  the	  intermediate	  states	  and	  the	  contribution	  towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  
at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  	  

Table	  1:	  Definitions	  of	  theory	  of	  change	  elements	  in	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways	  
TOC	  terms	                Definition	  

Intermediate	                These	  are	  the	  transitional	  conditions	  between	  the	  project’s	  outcomes	  and	  
States	  (IS)	              impacts	  that	  must	  be	  achieved	  in	  order	  to	  deliver	  the	  intended	  impacts	  
Impact	  Drivers	           These	  are	  the	  significant	  factors	  that,	  if	  present,	  are	  expected	  to	  contribute	  to	  
(ID)	                        the	  ultimate	  realisation	  of	  project	  impacts	  and	  that	  are	  within	  the	  ability	  of	  the	  
                              project	  to	  influence	  
Assumptions	                 These	  are	  the	  significant	  factors	  that,	  if	  present,	  are	  expected	  to	  contribute	  to	  
(A)	                         the	  ultimate	  realisation	  of	  project	  impacts,	  but	  that	  are	  largely	  beyond	  the	  power	  
                              of	  the	  project	  to	  influence	  or	  address	  

The	  development	  of	  the	  PAM&WC	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  theory	  of	  change	  was	  based	  on	  document	  review	  
followed	  by	  validating	  it	  with	  the	  key	  informants	  and	  the	  buffer	  zone	  communities	  of	  the	  selected	  pilot	  
protected	   areas.	   Due	   to	   disagreements	   on	   the	   objectives,	   modes	   and	   structures	   to	   be	   used	   in	   the	  
project,	  the	  designs	  stage	  went	  through	  several	  revolutions.	  The	  TOC	  presented	  below	  was	  constructed	  
based	   on	   the	   final	   logical	   framework,	   activities	   carried	   out	   based	   on	   the	   information	   available,	   the	  
impacts	  described	  in	  the	  project	  completion	  report	  and	  with	  the	  participation	  of	  stakeholders.	  

                                                                                                                                                                    96
Table	  2:	  The	  PAM&WC	  outcomes-­‐impact	  theory	  of	  change	  
Project	                                                      Impact	  Drivers	  &	  
               Outcomes	                                                                            Intermediate	  States	                     Impact	  
Strategies	                                                   Assumptions	  
                                                                                                     IS1:	  DWLC	  restructured	  
                                                                                                     with	  	  decentralized	  power	  
                                                               A1:Willingness	  of	  DWLC	        and	  better	  legal	  coverage	  
Capacity	  Development	  




                                                               to	  accept	  the	  proposed	     for	  management	  
    STRATEGY	  #1	  




                                      Outcome	  1:	          structural	  changes	  
                                                                                                     IS2:	  Enhanced	  technical	  
                                      DWLC	  
                                                                                                     capacity	  of	  DWLC	  staff	  
                                      Institutional	          A2:	  Structural	  changes	  
                                      capacity	               proposed	  for	  DWLC	  	         IS3:	  Enhanced	  ecotourism	  
                                      enhanced	               supported	  by	  the	  State	     capacity	  	  for	  DWLC	  staff	  
                                                               administrative	  system	  
                                                                                                     IS4:	  Strengthened	  wildlife	  
                                                                                                     biodiversity	  monitoring	  and	  
                                                                                                     evaluation	  of	  DWLC	  
                                                                                                                                                    ENHANCED	  
                                                               ID1:	  Effective	  training	       IS5:	  Area	  management	                   PROTECTED	  
                                                               and	  capacity	  building	         plans	  prepared	  and	                           AREA	  
                                                                                                                                                  MANAGEMENT	  
Protected	  Area	  Management	  




                                                                                                     mandated	  by	  law	  
                                      Outcome	  2:	          ID2:	  Livelihood	  benefits	                                                           AND	  
                                      Improved	               incentivises	  participation	                                                     BIODIVERSITY	  
       STRATEGY	  #2	  




                                      Management	  of	       in	  conservation	                                                               CONSERVATION	  
                                      Protected	  areas	                                           IS6:	  Implemented	  adaptive	             IN	  SRI	  LANKA	  	  
                                      through	                ID3:	  Facilities	  and	           management	  systems	  
                                      Participatory	          infrastructure	  assists	  
                                      Adaptive	               adaptive	  management	  
                                      Management	  
                                      systems	                A3:	  Financial	  and	  
                                                               technical	  support	  for	         IS7:	  Developed	  ecotourism	  
                                                               DWLC	  available	                   products	  and	  services	                  PROTECTED	  
                                                               continuously	                                                                      ECOSYSTEMS	  
                                                                                                                                                    WITH	  HIGH	  
                                                               ID4:	  Better	  relationships	                                                     LEVELS	  OF	  
                                                                                                     IS8:	  Sustainable	  financing	  
                                      Outcome	  3:	          between	  DWLC	  and	                                                               SPECIES	  
STRATEGY	  #3	  




                                                                                                     available	  for	  participatory	  
 Partnership	  
 Community	  




                                      Building	  of	         communities	                                                                      RICHNESS	  AND	  
                                                                                                     community	  mobilization	  	  
                                      community	                                                                                                  ENDEMICITY	  	  
                                      partnership	  for	     A4:	  DWLC’s	  willingness,	  
                                      livelihoods	  and	     technical	  and	  financial	       IS9:	  Improved	  
                                      conservation	           support	  to	  continue	           livelihoods	  of	  buffer	  
                                                               community	  activities	             zone	  communities	  

                                                                                                     IS10:	  Addendum	  prepared	  
Conservation	  Planning	  




                                                                                                     for	  the	  National	  Biodiversity	  
                                                                                                     Conservation	  Action	  Plan	  
    Collaborative	  
    STRATEGY	  #4	  




                                      Outcome	  4:	  
                                                               A5:	  Relevant	  Ministries	       IS11:	  Reviewed	  and	  
                                      Improved	  
                                                               and	  Departments	  will	          enhanced	  protected	  area	  
                                      collaborative	  
                                                               cooperate	  to	  put	  in	        system	  
                                      conservation	  
                                                               place	  joint	  actions	  	  
                                      planning	  
                                                                                                     IS12:	  Prepared	  endangered	  
                                                                                                     species	  recovery	  plans	  



                                                                                                                                                                                97
4. Assessment	  of	  achievement	  of	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways

The	   assessment	   of	   achievement	   of	   the	   outcomes-­‐impact	   pathways	   was	   done	   through	   review	   of	  
documents,	  interviews	  with	  key	  persons	  and	  focus	  group	  discussions	  with	  the	  buffer	  zone	  communities	  
of	   the	   selected	   pilot	   protected	   areas.	   The	   rating	   system	   used	   for	   the	   assessment	   is	   given	   in	   Table	   4	  
below	  as	  per	  the	  ROtI	  Handbook,	  and	  is	  applied	  at	  the	  different	  levels	  of	  the	  Theory	  of	  Change;	  i.e.	  at	  
the	  individual	  TOC	  element	  level	  (outcomes,	  impact	  drivers,	  assumptions	  and	  intermediate	  states)	  and	  
at	  the	  overall	  project	  level.	  

Table	  3:	  Field	  ROtI	  Rating	  System	  

                                                    Rating	                       Description	  
                                                      0	            Not	  achieved	  
                                                      1	            Poorly	  achieved	  
                                                      2	            Partially	  achieved	  
                                                      3	            Well	  achieved	  

The	   reporting	   starts	   off	   by	   providing	   a	   justification	   for	   why	   the	   identified	   intermediate	   state	   for	   the	  
strategy	  is	  considered	  important	  in	  delivering	  ultimate	  impact.	  The	  theory	  of	  change	  for	  the	  strategy	  is	  
then	   examined	   through	   its	   logical	   steps,	   firstly	   validating	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   the	   outcomes	   were	  
achieved	   at	   project	   closure,	   followed	   by	   an	   assessment	   of	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   the	   impact	   drivers	   and	  
assumptions	   were	   realized.	   The	   section	   concludes	   with	   an	   assessment	   of	   achievement	   of	   the	  
intermediate	  state	  itself.	  


4.1          Strategy	  1:	  Capacity	  Development	  

4.1.1 Theory	  of	  Change	  Overview	  
The	  capacity	  development	  strategy	  focuses	  on	  delivering	  four	  intermediate	  states.	  
        i) DWLC	  restructured	  with	  decentralized	  powersbetter	  legal	  coverage	  for	  management
        ii) Enhanced	  technical	  capacity	  of	  DWLC	  staff
        iii) Enhanced	  ecotourism	  capacity	  of	  DWLC	  staff
        iv) Strengthened	  wildlife	  biodiversity	  monitoring	  and	  evaluation	  of	  DWLC

Altogether,	  it	  was	  aimed	  to	  upgrade	  institutional	  capacity	  of	  the	  DWLC	  –	  both	  the	  in	  terms	  of	  
operational	  systems	  and	  human	  capacity	  to	  improve	  the	  management	  the	  PAs.	  




                                                                                                                                                                      98
Figure	  2:	  Theory	  of	  Change	  for	  Strategy	  #1	  


                                                                                                                          IS1:	  DWLC	  restructured	  with	  
                                                                                                                            decentralized	  power	  and	  
                                                                                                                            better	  legal	  coverage	  for	  
                                                                                                                                 management


                                                                                                                             IS2:	  Enhanced	  technical	  
       Outcome	  1:	                                                                                                        capacity	  of	  DWLC	  staff	  
          DWLC	  
       Institutional	  
         capacity	                                                                                                         IS3:	  Enhanced	  ecotourism	  
        enhanced	                                                                                                            capacity	  for	  DWLC	  staff	  
                                    A1:	  Willingness	  of	          A2:	  Structural	  changes	  
                                     DWLC	  to	  accept	             proposed	  for	  DWLC	  
                                       the	  proposed	                supported	  by	  the	  State	                   IS4:	  Strengthened	  wildlife	  
                                    structural	  changes	             administrative	  system	  	                     biodiversity	  monitoring	  and	  
                                                                                                                               evaluation	  of	  DWLC	  


The	  project	  theory	  identified	  for	  delivering	  these	  four	  intermediate	  states	  is	  shown	  in	  Figure	  2	  above.	  

Outcome	  1:	  DWLC	  Institutional	  capacity	  enhanced	  

Intermediate	  States	  

IS1:	  DWLC	  restructured	  with	  decentralized	  power	  and	  better	  legal	  coverage	  for	  management	  
  The	   project	   expected	   to	   strengthen	   human	   resources,	   financial	   and	   administrative	   capacity	  
  (including	   infrastructure	   such	   as	   a	   building,	   communication	   equipment	   and	   a	   MIS),	   and	  
  transparent	   management	  system	  of	  DWLC	  in	  order	  to	  improve	  its	  credibility	  and	  effectiveness	  in	  
  managing	   wildlife.	   One	   of	   the	   key	   components	   was	   to	   include	   a	   decentralized	   system	   with	  
  regional	   offices	   that	   could	   make	   decisions	   about	   work	   objectives,	   resource	   needs,	   and	   work	  
  programmes	  with	  decentralized	  budgets	  to	  increase	  the	  efficiency	  of	  PA	  operations.	  The	  project	  
  also	   looked	   to	   improve	   the	   Fauna	   and	   Flora	   protection	   ordinance	   to	   enhance	   PA	   management.	  
  The	   ultimate	   aim	   of	   this	   was	   to	   improve	   the	   management	   structure	   and	   style	   to	   increase	  
  efficiency	  in	  a	  relatively	  new	  institution.	  


The	  new	  organizational	  structure	  was	  introduced,	  but	  the	  restructuring	  was	  delayed	  due	  to	  procedural	  
and	   other	   institutional	   problems.	   Restructuring	   delays	   meant	   that	   interactions	   between	   DWLC	  
counterpart	   staff	   with	   the	   consultants	   and	   experts	   which	   was	   expected	   to	   enhance	   the	   technical	  
capacity	  of	  the	  Department	  took	  place	  in	  a	  much	  shorter	  space	  of	  time.	  These	  delays	  were	  partly	  due	  to	  
internal	   resistance	   of	   some	   aspects	   of	   restructuring/cadre	   positions	   and	   the	   State	   Administrative	  
Procedures	  for	  restructuring	  of	  Government	  Department,	  which	  needed	  approvals	  from	  Public	  Service	  
Commission	  (PSC)	  and	  Scientific	  Service	  Commission	  (SSC).	  If	  there	  is	  staff	  resistance	  and	  the	  proposals	  
need	  some	  amendment,	  the	  procedure	  is	  such	  that	  the	  approval	  process	  has	  to	  restart	  all	  over	  again.	  	  

                                                                                                                                                            99
The	   restructuring	   created	   a	   range	   of	   new	   units	   and	   Deputy	   Directors	   at	   the	   head	   office.	   However	   as	  
there	   was	   internal	   resistance	   to	   new	   recruits,	   the	   new	   positions	   were	   filled	   by	   internal	   staff	   on	   acting	  
basis	   as	   a	   temporary	   measure.	   However,	   some	   of	   these	   positions	   are	   still	   vacant	   (i.e.	   Director	   of	  
Protected	  Area	  Management)	  and	  some	  are	  still	  at	  acting	  basis	  (i.e.	  Deputy	  Director	  of	  Outreach).	  While	  
the	   appointment	   of	   Regional	   Deputy	   Directors	   (RDD)	   was	   a	   main	   feature	   of	  the	   restructuring	   effort,	   and	  
took	  place	  at	  the	  latter	  stages	  of	  the	  project,	  this	  too	  was	  carried	  out	  without	  adequate	  funds	  from	  the	  
project	  to	  set-­‐up	  staff	  in	  these	  offices.	  At	  the	  time	  of	  writing	  this	  report,	  the	  DWLC	  stated	  that	  the	  RDDs	  
appointed	   have	   been	   promoted	   and	   moved	   to	   head	   office	   and	   the	   positions	   are	   now	   vacant.	   Hence	  
there	   are	   only	   Assistant	   Directors	   at	   regional	   level,	   so	   that	   approvals	   have	   to	   revert	   back	   to	   the	   head	  
office,	  which	  reduces	  the	  impact	  of	  the	  expected	  decentralization	  where	  decisions	  can	  be	  taken	  at	  the	  
regional	   level.	   No	   indication	   was	   given	   on	   whether	   or	   not	   new	   RDDs	   will	   be	   appointed.	   Some	  
stakeholders	  feel	  that	  there	  is	  no	  real	  commitment	  to	  the	  expected	  decentralization	  and	  that	  the	  RDDs	  
have	  only	  added	  an	  extra	  layer	  of	  bureaucracy	  to	  field	  level	  financial	  management.	  	  In	  addition	  during	  
the	  time	  of	  the	  project	  as	  well	  as	  after	  the	  DWLC	  has	  changed	  Ministries	  several	  times	  and	  this	  too	  was	  
stated	  as	  a	  reason	  for	  the	  disruption	  in	  the	  smooth	  flow	  of	  operations.	  	  

It	   was	   also	   intended	   to	   upgrade	   the	   head	   office	   under	   this	   project.	   	   However	   the	   funding	   for	   it	   was	  
suspended	  due	  to	  a	  court	  case	  filed	  on	  the	  land	  and	  so	  these	  renovations	  did	  not	  take	  place.	  After	  the	  
completion	   of	   this	   project,	   government	   funds	   were	   used	   to	   set	   up	   a	   new	   office	   and	   the	   DWLC	   relocated	  
to	  a	  new	  premises	  in	  2010	  as	  agreed	  at	  the	  time	  of	  project	  closure.	  	  

With	  a	  delayed	  start,	  annual	  work	  plans	  were	  formulated	  and	  accounting	  procedures	  were	  established.	  
The	   borrowers’	   project	   completion	   report	   states	   that	   the	   accounting	   has	   been	   very	   good.	   A	  
communication	   network	   was	   established	   to	   increase	   the	   efficiency	   of	   management,	   but	   field	   work	  
indicated	   that	   some	   are	   not	   functioning	   in	   some	   parks	   and	   the	   equipment	   is	   not	   maintained.	   Some	  
activities	  such	  as	  budgets	  and	  tourism	  figures	  are	  computerized	  and	  have	  helped	  to	  improve	  efficiency	  
and	   these	   activities	   have	   continued.	   However,	   it	   is	   not	   a	   system	   where	   the	   head	   office	   and	   PPAs	   are	  
connected	   but	   one	   where	   the	   information	   is	   manually	   given	   to	   the	   head	   office	   and	   entered	   into	   a	  
computerized	  system.	  	  

A	  new	  DWLC	  website	  was	  developed	  which	  is	  currently	  functioning	  and	  a	  facebook	  page	  has	  also	  been	  
developed	  and	  updated	  with	  recent	  activities.	  Other	  informational	  magazines	  and	  leaflets	  are	  printed.	  
When	   the	   project	   was	   being	   implemented	   25	   research	   projects	   were	   undertaken	   and	   some	   findings	  
have	  been	  used	  for	  PA	  management.	  	  According	  to	  the	  DWLC	  annual	  performance	  reports,	  the	  2011	  and	  
2012	  research	  projects	  by	  the	  staff,	  sometimes	  in	  collaboration	  with	  others,	  does	  take	  place	  still	  but	  at	  a	  
smaller	   scale	   than	   at	   project	   closure.	   In	   2011,	   12	   individual	   projects	   and	   4	   joint	   projects	   are	   reported	  
and	  in	  2012,	  nine	  projects	  are	  mentioned.	  

IS2:	  Enhanced	  technical	  capacity	  of	  DWLC	  staff	  
  To	   provide	   technical	   capacity	   for	   the	   DWLC	   staff,	   the	   project	   expected	   to	   provide	   technical	  
  trainings	   in	   areas	   such	   as	   ecology	   and	   habitat	   management,	   communications,	   enforcement,	  
  conflict	   resolution,	  GIS,	   remote	  sensing,	   etc.	  in	   order	  to	  improve	  the	  technical	   knowledge	   and	   put	  
  in	  place	  a	  professional/qualified	  staff	  that	  was	  identified	  as	  lacking.	  	  	  


                                                                                                                                                                         100
The	  completion	  report	  states	  that	  543	  oversees	  trainings	  including	  2	  post	  graduate	  degrees,	  5	  diplomas,	  
short	   term	   trainings	   for	   46	   officers	   and	   study	   tours	   for	   490	   officers.	   Regarding	   the	   local	   trainings,	   7	  
DWLC	   and	   Biodiversity	   Secretariat	   staff	   received	   post	   graduate	   degrees	   and	   large	   number	   of	   DWLC	  
officers,	  other	  government	  officers,	  school	  children	  and	  community	  members	  around	  buffer	  zone	  parks	  
received	  training	  in	  terms	  of	  short	  term	  trainings,	  workshops	  and	  awareness	  programmes.	  	  

Some	   of	   the	   external	   trainers,	   consultants	   used	   in	   this	   project	   have	   been	   acknowledged	   to	   have	  
enhanced	  capacity	  and	  is	  seen	  as	  a	  positive	  contributor	  to	  building	  this	  capacity.	  	  

The	   National	   Wildlife	   Training	   Centre	   (NWTC)	   was	   renovated	   and	   its	   curricula	   were	   revised	   including	  
new	   concepts	   introduced	   through	   the	   project	   (including	   ecotourism).	   Regular	   programmes	   are	   held	   and	  
training	  is	  still	  carried	  out	  with	  budget	  allocations.	  

The	   training	   programmes	   that	   have	   integrated	   components	   developed	   in	   this	   project	   are	   a	   regular	  
feature	  in	  the	  department	  activities.	  In	  2012	  DWLC	  annual	  report	  to	  the	  parliament	  states	  that	  training	  
of	   250	   new	   recruits,	   2	   wildlife	   certification	   courses	   at	   junior	   and	   senior	   levels,	   Tamil	   language	   skills	  
course	   for	   25	   officers,	   and	   2	   post	   graduate	   opportunities.	   Similar	   efforts	   are	   reported	   in	   2011	   with	  
budget	   allocations.	   Hence	   continuity	   of	   the	   programmes	   and	   the	   focus	   on	   staff	   development	   can	   be	  
seen.	  	  

There	  is	  acknowledgement	  that	  the	  staff’s	  technical	  capacity	  and	  understanding	  of	  wildlife	  management	  
on	   an	   individual	   level	   was	   collectively	   increased	   at	   project	   closure,	   with	   enhanced	   professional	   skill	  
levels	  of	  the	  institution.	  Stakeholders,	  however,	  state	  that	  use	  of	  skills	  so	  provided	  (and	  hence	  impact)	  
tends	   to	   vary	   with	   individual	   attitudes,	   leadership	   position	   and	   location	   (i.e.	   whether	   based	   at	   head	  
office	   or	   at	   the	   park	   level).	   Also	   some	   trained	   personal	   are	   not	   in	   positions	   that	   can	   use	   the	   training.	   For	  
example,	   some	   PPAs	   with	   visitor	   services	   and	   outreach	   activities	   no	   longer	   have	   the	   trained	   offices.	  
Hence	   it	   can	   be	   stated	   that	   the	   training	   has	   improved	   capacity	   but	   may	   not	   be	   adequate	   for	   desired	  
impact	  over	  time.	  	  

IS3:	  Enhanced	  ecotourism	  capacity	  for	  DWLC	  staff	  
  The	   project	   will	   support	   capacity	   building	   in	   DWLC	   to	   assist	   in	   the	   future	   development	   of	  
  ecotourism	   in	   Sri	   Lanka.	   At	   the	   time	   this	   was	   seen	   as	   a	   new	   feature	   that	   could	   enhance	   the	  
  management	   of	   the	   park	   through	   visitor	   awareness.	   Additional	   capacity	   will	   be	  achieved	   through	  
  establishing	   incremental	   staff	   positions,	   training,	   inter-­‐sectoral	   workshops,	   and	   technical	  
  assistance.	  

Visitor	   Services	   and	   Ecotourism	   (VSE)	   officers	   were	   trained	   and	   assigned	   to	   the	   newly	   created	   Park	  
visitor	   centres	   where	   visitor	   information	   and	   exhibits	   were	   displayed.	   	   With	   the	   aim	   of	   building	   DWLC	  
staff	   capacity	   on	   ecotourism,	   study	   visits	   were	   conducted	   to	   Nepal,	   Philippines	   and	   Malaysia.	   Visitor	  
surveys	   were	   conducted	   and	   findings	   were	   used	   for	   the	   VSE	   plans.	   The	   VSE	   instructions	   have	   been	  
incorporated	   into	   the	   National	   Wildlife	   Training	   Centre	   curriculum.	   Park	   entry	   fees	   have	   been	   revised	  
after	  reviewing	  pricing	  structure.	  VSE	  still	  continues	  to	  be	  a	  feature	  in	  the	  institutional	  working	  structure	  
and	   training	   programme.	   However,	   it	   is	   not	   clear	   whether	   VSE	   in	   these	   parks	   is	   getting	   the	   same	  
attention	   at	   project	   closure,	   as	   some	   PPAs	   no	   longer	   have	   a	   trained	   VSE	   officers.	   Although	   the	   visitor	  
centres	   provided	   are	   attractive,	   some	   have	   imposed	   a	   heavy	   burden	   of	   upkeep	   on	   the	   DWLC	   due	   to	  
                                                                                                                                                                                      101
problems	   of	   building	   design.	   The	   value	   of	   this	   training	   in	   terms	   of	   the	   ability	   of	   the	   VSE	   officers	   to	  
improve	  the	  visitor	  awareness	  may	  not	  be	  as	  expected	  as	  at	  project	  closure.	  	  	  

IS4:	  Strengthened	  wildlife	  biodiversity	  monitoring	  and	  evaluation	  of	  DWLC	  
  Under	  this,	  it	  was	  expected	  to	  strengthen	  DWLC’s	  capacity	  to	  systematically	  monitor	  biodiversity	  in	  
  the	  protected	  areas	  under	  its	  mandate	  as	  an	  important	  step	  towards	  managing	  the	  wildlife.	  	  


A	   biodiversity	   baseline	   survey	   was	   undertaken	   in	   seven	   pilot	   protected	   areas	   to	   assess	   the	   status	   of	  
biodiversity	   by	   assigned	   Technical	   Assistance	   (TA)	   consultants.	   Together	   with	   DWLC	   officials,	   Ministry	   of	  
Environment	  officials,	  academics	  and	  International	  Union	  for	  Conservation	  of	  Nature	  (IUCN)	  members,	  
an	  advisory	  committee	  was	  established.	  	  

For	   all	   the	   pilot	   protected	   areas,	   the	   biodiversity	   survey	   and	   habitat	   maps	   were	   completed	   by	   early	  
2008.	   However	   due	   to	   delays	   in	   commencing	   the	   survey	   (due	   to	   public	   concern	   and	   need	   to	   change	   the	  
procedures),	   the	   initial	   plan	   to	   repeat	   biodiversity	   surveys	   every	   3	   years	   did	   not	   take	   place	   during	   the	  
project	  time	  frame.	  These	  initial	  Biodiversity	  Baseline	  Surveys	  are	  available	  on	  the	  department	  website.	  
The	   use	   of	   the	   documents	   for	   monitoring	   progress	   and	   planning	   is	   not	   clear.	   The	   2011	   DWLC	   Annual	  
report	  to	  the	  parliament	  mentions	  that	  the	  surveys	  are	  being	  continued	  but	  this	  was	  not	  confirmed	  in	  
the	  interviews	  carried	  out	  and	  that	  further	  work	  has	  not	  been	  possible	  due	  to	  lack	  of	  funds.	  

Assumptions	  

A1:	  Willingness	  of	  DWLC	  to	  accept	  the	  proposed	  structural	  changes	  
Resistance	  to	  this	  project	  by	  staff	  due	  to	  lack	  of	  buy-­‐in	  to	  the	  project	  was	  a	  major	  constraint	  at	  the	  initial	  
stages	  -­‐	  but	  this	  appears	  to	  be	  partly	  due	  to	  design	  errors	  in	  the	  project	  and	  lack	  of	  consultation	  with	  
staff	  during	  project	  design.	  The	  delay	  in	  commencing	  most	  of	  the	  training	  programmes	  may	  also	  have	  
affected	  staff	  buy-­‐in	  but	  this	  was	  addressed	  later	  during	  the	  project.	  	  

The	   project	   sought	   to	   create	   structural	   changes	   in	   the	   department	   by	   changing	   the	   cadre	   positions.	  
While	   some	   of	   the	   changes	   were	   accepted,	   others	   met	   with	   several	   problems.	   Firstly,	   there	   was	  
resistance	   to	   external	   recruitment	   of	   qualified	   staff	   for	   the	   new	   posts,	   by	   some	   categories	   of	   internal	  
staff	  who	  saw	  this	  as	  impeding	  their	  promotional	  prospects.	  Secondly,	  even	  several	  years	  after	  project	  
closure,	   some	   positions	   of	   Deputy	   Directors	   (DD)	   continue	   to	   be	   on	   an	   acting	   basis,	   while	   some	   DD	  
positions	  remain	  vacant	  (i.e.	  Protected	  Areas	  Management).	  Further	  project	  staff	  trained	  as	  community	  
mobilisers	  and	  expected	  to	  be	  absorbed	  into	  the	  Department	  to	  strengthen	  capacity	  in	  this	  sphere	  did	  
not	  materialize	  despite	  strong	  efforts	  to	  absorb	  trained	  personnel.	  Similarly	  the	  transfer	  of	  trained	  VSE	  
and	  community	  outreach	  officers	  as	  per	  departmental	  procedures	  from	  the	  PPAs	  where	  their	  presence	  
seems	   vital	   to	   continue	   the	   outcomes	   of	   the	   projects	   has	   also	   reduced	   long	   term	   impact.	   The	  
establishment	   of	   RDDs	   which	   was	   an	   important	   aim	   of	   the	   re-­‐structuring	   process	   is	   not	   in	   place	   at	  
present.	   While	   this	   precluded	   the	   expected	   decentralization,	   there	   has	   been	   notable	   delegation	   of	  
financial	   and	   management	   authority	   to	   the	   Deputy	   Directors	   in	   the	   Head	   Office	   who	   are	   now	  
responsible	  to	  ensure	  effective	  use	  of	  the	  allocated	  funds.	  The	  DWLC	  has	  also	  adopted	  a	  new	  improved	  
accounting	   system	   that	   is	   of	   vital	   importance	   for	   effective	   management	   and	   can	   be	   viewed	   as	   change	   in	  
the	  right	  direction.	  

                                                                                                                                                                            102
A2:	  Structural	  changes	  proposed	  for	  DWLC	  supported	  by	  the	  State	  administrative	  system	  	  
Agreement	   on	   institutional	   reforms	   and	   recruitment	   were	   also	   protracted	   because	   the	   restructuring	  
agreed	   upon	   through	   a	   consultative	   process	   via	   the	   project,	   was	   changed	   by	   other	   institutions	   (Public	  
Service	   Commission	   (PSC),	   Scientific	   Services	   Board	   (SSB)	   that	   had	   to	   approve	   the	   reforms.	   This	   led	   to	  
requests	   for	   redress	   by	   affected	   staff	   members.	   Changes	   made	   in	   this	   regard	   had	   to	   be	   re-­‐submitted	   for	  
approval	   by	   the	   PSC	   and	   the	   SSB	   which	   further	   delayed	   submission	   of	   the	   proposed	   institutional	   reform	  
structure	  to	  the	  Cabinet.	  	  The	  complex	  procedure	  involved	  in	  filling	  key	  posts	  externally	  had	  not	  been	  
factored	  into	  the	  project’s	  design,	  although	  it	  was	  known	  at	  the	  project	  appraisal	  stage	  that	  DWLC	  had	  
insufficient	  staff	  with	  the	  relevant	  experience	  and	  qualifications.34	  	  Additionally	  the	  changing	  of	  the	  law,	  
which	   was	   expected	   in	   the	   first	   year	   of	   the	   project	   took	   3	   years	   due	   to	   procedural	   issues.	   Hence	   this	  
assumption	   implies	   that	   the	   issues	   of	   state	   process	   and	   procedures	   were	   not	   given	   due	   consideration	   in	  
the	  project	  design.	  	  




   34
        A DD post requires ten years of experience in an AD post plus a post graduate qualification
                                                                                                                                                                           103
Table	  4:	  Outcomes-­‐impacts	  assessment	  findings	  for	  Strategy	  #1:	  Capacity	  Development	  
Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                          Qualitative	  Assessment	                                                                                        Rating	  
Component	  
                                          u   Institutional	   strengthening	   of	   the	   DWLC	   has	   provided	   a	   more	  
                                               conducive	   base	   for	   future	   activities	   pertaining	   to	   national	  
                                               wildlife	   conservation.	   The	   project	   has	   helped	   to	   bring	   a	   degree	  
                                               of	   professionalism	   to	   the	   cadre,	   with	   delegation	   and	  
                                               management	   of	   duties	   at	   the	   top	   to	   qualified	   staff	   and	  
                                               upgrading	  of	  physical	  infrastructure	  and	  accounting	  processes.	  	  
                                          u   However	   in	   some	   areas	   structural	   changes	   such	   as	  
                                               decentralisation	   and	   assigning	   Regional	   Directors	   (RDs)	   have	  
Outcome	  1:	  DWLC	  
                                               not	  been	  used	  as	  well	  to	  reduce	  the	  administrative	  process	  of	  
Institutional	  capacity	  
                                               needing	   approvals	   from	   head	   office.	   At	   the	   time	   of	   writing	   this	  
                                                                                                                                                                2	  
enhanced	  
                                               report	  the	  RDs	  positions	  were	  vacant	  
                                          u   While	   the	   trained	   staff	   has	   increased	   there	   is	   also	   a	  
                                               stakeholders,	   state	   that	   use	   of	   skills	   vary	   with	   individual	  
                                               attitudes,	   leadership	   position	   and	   location,	   hence	   reducing	  
                                               overall	  impact.	  	  
                                          u   Overall	   long	   term	   impacts	   fall	   somewhat	   short	   of	   project	  
                                               expectations.	  	  

                                          u   The	  initial	  lack	  of	  participation	  and	  buy-­‐in	  by	  the	  staff	  seems	  to	  
                                               have	   carried	   over,	   resulting	   in	   some	   activities	   remaining	  
A1:Willingness	  of	  DWLC	  
                                               incomplete	  (i.e.	  filling	  key	  positions).	  	  
to	  accept	  the	  proposed	  	  
                                          u   The	   DWLC	   has	   also	   moved	   Ministries	   several	   times	   and	  
                                                                                                                                                                1	  
changes	  
                                               therefore	  changes	  in	  leadership	  is	  also	  disrupting	  the	  process	  

                                          u   The	  time	  needed	  and	  complex	  nature	  of	  the	  state	  protocol	  and	  
A2:	  Structural	  changes	                 procedures	  to	  put	  in	  place	  legal	  or	  structural	  changes	  was	  not	  
supported	  by	  the	  State	              fully	   appreciated	   into	   the	   project	   design	   that	   has	   carried	                     1	  
administrative	  system	                     through	  the	  project.	  	  

                                          u   Restructuring	   delays	   meant	   that	   interactions	   between	   DWLC	  
                                               counterparts	  staff	  with	  the	  consultants	  and	  experts	  took	  place	  
                                               in	  a	  short	  space	  of	  time	  reducing	  the	  final	  impact.	  	  
IS1:DWLC	  restructured	                u   Some	  of	  the	  positions	  created	  still	  remain	  vacant	  while	  others	  
with	  	  decentralized	                    still	  have	  staff	  on	  acting	  basis	  indicating	  that	  permanent	  
power	  and	  better	  legal	              change	  has	  not	  happened.	  	                                                                          1	  
coverage	  for	                         u   Established	  decentralization	  process	  did	  not	  achieve	  the	  levels	  
management	                                   expected.	  
                                          u   More	  powers	  through	  the	  legal	  process	  for	  protected	  area	  
                                               management	  has	  been	  established	  as	  expected.	  	  

                                          u   Wide	   range	   of	   trainings	   was	   provided	   for	   all	   levels	   of	   DWLC	  
                                               staff.	   The	   National	   Wildlife	   Training	   Centre	   (NWTC)	   was	  
IS2:	  Enhanced	  technical	  
capacity	  of	  DWLC	  staff	  
                                               renovated	   and	   its	   curricula	   were	   revised	   including	   new	                             2	  
                                               concepts	   introduced	   through	   the	   project	   and	   trainees	   are	  
                                               continuously	  benefiting	  from	  it.	  
                                                                                                                                                                    104
Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                         Qualitative	  Assessment	                                                                                               Rating	  
Component	  
                                         u    Increasing	   staff	   technical	   capacity	   is	   effective,	   since	   most	   of	  
                                               them	   are	   retained	   within	   the	   institution.	   However	   this	   is	  
                                               mostly	   effective	   at	   an	   individual	   level,	   with	   some	   officers	   using	  
                                               this	  knowledge	  to	  improve	  management	  of	  the	  parks.	  	  
                                         u    This	   was	   a	   new	   area	   for	   the	   DWLC	   and	   the	   Project	   has	  
                                               supported	   to	   build	   capacity	   for	   the	   future	   development	   of	  
                                               ecotourism	   in	   Sri	   Lanka.	   The	   visitor	   services	   and	   ecotourism	  
IS3:	  Enhanced	  
                                               (VSE)	   instructions	   have	   been	   incorporated	   in	   to	   the	   National	  
ecotourism	  capacity	  for	  
                                               Wildlife	   Training	   Centre	   (NWTC)	   curriculum	   and	   it	   will	   improve	  
                                                                                                                                                                      1	  
DWLC	  staff	  
                                               the	  ecotourism	  capacity	  of	  future	  DWLC	  staff.	  
                                         u    The	   use	   of	   trained	   VSE	   officers	   to	   carry	   out	   the	   tasks	   is	   not	  
                                               found	  in	  all	  the	  parks.	  	  
                                         u    The	  biodiversity	  survey	  and	  habitat	  maps	  were	  completed	  by	  
                                               early	  2008.	  However	  due	  to	  project	  delays,	  the	  initial	  plan	  to	  
IS4:	  Strengthened	                         repeat	  biodiversity	  surveys	  in	  every	  3	  years	  was	  dropped.	  
wildlife	  biodiversity	                     And	  now	  there	  is	  no	  initiative	  to	  continue	  BBS	  as	  envisaged	  by	  
                                                                                                                                                                      0	  
                                         u

monitoring	  and	                            the	  project	  to	  monitor	  the	  management	  of	  the	  PPAs.	  So	  while	  
evaluation	  of	  DWLC	                     it	  is	  valuable	  to	  have	  a	  baseline	  there	  is	  danger	  that	  this	  may	  
                                               become	  a	  one	  -­‐off	  activity.	  

NOTE:	   The	   ratings	   are	   given	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   achieving	   the	   intermediate	   states	   and	   the	   contribution	  
towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                              105
4.2 Strategy	  2:	  Protected	  Area	  Management	  

4.2.1 Theory	  of	  Change	  Overview	  

The	  protected	  area	  management	  strategy	  focuses	  on	  delivering	  four	  intermediate	  states.	  
        i) Area	  management	  plans	  prepared	  and	  mandated	  by	  law
        ii) Implemented	  adaptive	  management	  systems
        iii) Developed	  ecotourism	  products	  and	  services

These	   three	   intermediate	   states	   were	   important	   to	   achieve	   the	   protected	   area	   management	   strategy	   of	  
the	  project.	  

Figure	  3:	  Theory	  of	  Change	  for	  Strategy	  #2	  

                                    ID1:	               ID2:	  Livelihood	           ID3:	  Facilities	  
                                  Effective	                benefits	                         and	                      IS5:	  Area	  management	  plans	  
                                  training	               incentivises	              infrastructure	                     prepared	  and	  mandated	  by	  
                                     and	                participation	                  assists	                                         law	  
                                  capacity	                       in	                   adaptive	  
   Outcome	  2:	                building                conservation                 management
   Improved	  
   Management	  
   of	  Protected	  
                                                                                                                            IS6:	  Implemented	  adaptive	  
   areas	  through	  
                                                                                                                               management	  systems	  
   Participatory	  
   Adaptive	  
   Management	  
                                                      A3:	   Financial	   and	  
   systems	  
                                                      technical	   support	                                                IS7:	  Developed	  ecotourism	  
                                                      for	  DWLC	  available	                                                products	  and	  services	  
                                                      continuously	  



The	   project	   outcome	   that	   was	   identified	   as	   important	   for	   delivering	   these	   four	   intermediate	   states	   is	  
shown	  in	  Figure	  2	  above.	  

Outcome	  2:	  Improved	  Management	  of	  Protected	  areas	  through	  Participatory	  Adaptive	  
Management	  systems	  

Intermediate	  States	  

IS5:	  Area	  management	  plans	  prepared	  and	  mandated	  by	  law	  
  It	   was	   expected	   to	   continue	   to	   base	   protected	   area	   management	   through	   the	   application	   of	  
  management	   plans	   and	   that	   it	   will	   be	   done	   through	   a	   multi-­‐stakeholder	   process	   for	   reviewing	   the	  
  existing	  protected	  area	  management	  plans	  to	  establish	  priorities	  and	  work	  programmes.	  




                                                                                                                                                            106
During	   the	   project	   some	   existing	   management	   plans	   were	   revised	   and	   others	   that	   did	   not	   have	  
management	   plans	   prepared	   management	   plans	   to	   establish	   priorities	   and	   work	   programmes.	   In	   the	  
project	  this	  was	  done	  by	  the	  existing	  staff	  with	  assistance	  from	  the	  consultants	  with	  the	  view	  to	  build	  up	  
a	  core	  group	  of	  staff	  who	  will	  be	  able	  to	  revise	  the	  management	  plans	  periodically	  (earlier	  these	  plans	  
were	   made	   by	   external	   staff).	   	   This	   has	   been	   done	   with	   stakeholder	   consultation.	   The	   plans	   are	   being	  
used	  to	  create	  a	  rolling	  three	  year	  work	  plan	  with	  follow	  up	  for	  necessary	  updates.	  Guidelines	  have	  been	  
prepared	  to	  extend	  planning	  to	  other	  protected	  areas	  as	  well.	  The	  World	  Bank	  also	  reported	  that	  when	  
parks	  were	  asked	  to	  submit	  proposals	  for	  proposed	  project	  the	  Parks	  responded	  using	  the	  structure	  of	  
the	   management	   plans.	   While	   after	   the	   project	   there	   has	   not	   been	   a	   complete	   revision	   of	   the	  
management	   plans.	   Very	   recently	   (September	   2013)	   some	   parks	   reported	   that	   an	   initiative	   to	   revise	   the	  
management	  plans	  has	  been	  started	  by	  the	  Head-­‐office.	  

In	   general,	   the	   updating	   and	   use	   of	   management	   plans	   is	   not	   optimal,	   even	   though	   preparing	   a	  
management	   plan	   for	   each	   protected	   area	   under	   the	   DWLC	   is	   a	   gazetted	   activity	   as	   per	   the	   2009	  
amendment	   to	   the	   Fauna	   and	   Flora	   Ordinance	   prepared	   under	   this	   project.	   The	   budgetary	   allocations	  
happen	   annually	   and	   even	   though	   each	   park	   may	  prioritize	   based	   on	   their	   plans	   and	   needs,	   these	   are	  
then	  amalgamated	  into	  regional	  plans.	  The	  eventually	  budget	  allocations	  are	  made	  not	  based	  on	  each	  
park	  but	  the	  units	  set	  up	  at	  the	  head	  office	  such	  as	  natural	  resource	  management,	  protection	  and	  law	  
enforcement,	   wildlife	   health,	   elephant	   conservation	   etc.	   As	   such,	   the	   requirements	   for	   each	   park	   may	  
not	  match	  the	  funds	  it	  receives,	  making	  it	  difficult	  to	  implement	  the	  management	  plan	  holistically.	  	  

IS6:	  Implemented	  adaptive	  management	  systems	  
  After	  revising	  the	  protected	  area	  management	  plans,	  the	  proposal	  of	  the	  project	  was	  to	  design	  the	  
  activities	   to	   institutionalize	   the	   implementation	   of	   adaptive	   management	   approaches	   to	   strategic	  
  threats	  at	  each	  of	  the	  pilot	  site.	  

Adaptive	  management	  experiments	  have	  been	  devised	  for	  key	  issues	  which	  were	  specific	  to	  each	  pilot	  
protected	   area.	   The	   activities	   carried	   out	   under	   this	   were	   electric	   fencing,	   habitat	   enrichment,	   water	  
source	   development,	   maintenance	   of	   grasslands,	   live	   fencing,	   etc.	   By	   the	   time	   of	   project	   closure,	  
invasive	  species	  were	  removed	  from	  over	  7,841	  hectares	  of	  pilot	  protected	  areas	  by	  contracting	  CBOs.	  
Removal	   of	   invasive	   species	   has	   continued	   even	   after	   the	   project	   period	   in	   several	   pilot	   protected	   areas	  
with	   CBOs,	   private	   contractors	   as	   well	   as	   with	   sponsorship	   from	   private	   sector.	   However	   habitat	  
enrichment	  does	  take	  place	  but	  varied	  within	  parks.	  In	  terms	  electric	  fences	  erected	  with	  the	  support	  of	  
the	   CBOs	   show	   varied	   maintenance	   levels.	   315	   km	   of	   electric	   fences	   were	   constructed	   to	   reduce	   human	  
elephant	  conflict.	  195	  km	  of	  this	  was	  done	  by	  the	  contractors	  and	  120	  km	  was	  done	  by	  the	  CBOs	  under	  
protected	   area	   conservation	   trust.	   Some	   are	   extremely	   well	   maintained	   and	   others	   have	   fallen	   into	  
disrepair	  giving	  rise	  to	  the	  human	  elephant	  conflict.	  The	  DWLC	  also	  continues	  to	  have	  some	  allocations	  
to	  maintain	  these	  fences.	  One	  of	  the	  other	  benefits	  of	  the	  well-­‐functioning	  electric	  fences	  is	  that	  it	  has	  
separated	  villages	  and	  protected	  areas	  and	  has	  decreased	  the	  encroachment	  into	  protected	  areas.	  	  

In	   addition	   to	   the	   electric	   fences,	   live	   fences	   have	   been	   established	   along	   the	   electric	   fence	   using	   plants	  
such	   as	   bougainvillea,	   lime,	   hana	   to	   control	   elephants	   entering	   in	   to	   the	   villages.	   This	   has	   been	   done	  
with	   community	   participation.	   Earlier	   villagers	   who	   involved	   in	   establishing	   live	   fences	   were	   paid	   for	  
their	   labour	   and	   they	   were	   established	   inner	   boundaries	   of	   the	   protected	   areas.	   However	   currently	   in	  

                                                                                                                                                                         107
some	  protected	  areas,	  they	  are	  given	  lime	  plants	  free	  by	  the	  DWLC	  and	  they	  have	  to	  establish	  them	  as	  
live	   fence	   outer	   boundaries	   of	   the	   protected	   areas.	   They	   are	   responsible	   for	   maintenance	   of	   it	   and	   they	  
are	  benefiting	  by	  harvesting	  the	  yield.	  

      “It	  was	  expected	  to	  make	  a	  live	  fence,	  using	  lime,	  orange	  and	  hana	  plants.	  Because	  of	  the	  thorns,	  
      the	   elephants	   do	   not	   come	   closer	   to	   those	   trees.	   It	   was	   also	   simultaneously	   expected	   that	   the	  
      income	  receiving	  from	  lime	  cultivation	  could	  be	  earned	  by	  the	  villagers.”	  

                                                                                                                                    -­‐   Community	  FGD	  

Under	  adaptive	  management	  347	  km	  of	  fire	  lines	  were	  cleared	  to	  reduce	  fire	  hazards	  and	  in	  some	  
parks	  indications	  of	  continuing	  this	  activity	  was	  mentioned.	  In	  addition	  boundary	  surveys	  and	  
demarcation	  was	  done	  following	  a	  participatory	  process	  with	  local	  people	  in	  all	  pilot	  protected	  areas	  
covering	  627km	  this	  has	  helped	  to	  reduce	  encroachment	  and	  conflicts	  in	  many	  areas.	  	  

IS7:	  Developed	  ecotourism	  products	  and	  services	  
  Raising	   the	   capabilities	   of	   DWLC	   staff,	   enhancing	   the	   quality	   of	   the	   visitor	   experience,	   increasing	   the	  
  involvement	  and	   capabilities	  of	   other	   stakeholders	   in	   the	  provision	  of	   ecotourism	  opportunities	   and	  
  increasing	   local	   opportunities	   for	   benefit	   sharing	   without	   consumption	   of	   park	   resources	   were	   the	  
  designed	  activities	  under	  this	  component	  to	  develop	  ecotourism	  products	  and	  services.	  Also	  it	  was	  
  expected	   to	   develop	   a	   visitor	   services	   and	   ecotourism	   plan	   for	   each	   pilot	   protected	   area	   in	   a	  
  participatory	  manner.	  


The	   visitor	   services	   and	   ecotourism	   plans	   for	   each	   pilot	   protected	   area	   have	   been	   formed	   and	  
implemented	  within	  the	  project	  period.	  Under	  those	  plans,	  visitor	  centres	  have	  been	  established	  in	  each	  
pilot	   protected	   area	   with	   information	   displays.	   To	   raise	   the	   capabilities	   of	   DWLC	   staff	   in	   ecotourism	   and	  
visitor	  serves,	  several	  overseas	  training	  opportunities	  have	  been	  provided	  to	  them	  through	  the	  project.	  
A	  dedicated	  officer	  for	  VSE	  also	  has	  been	  appointed	  for	  each	  visitor	  centre.	  These	  resources	  are	  being	  
used	  to	  inform	  visitors	  about	  the	  protected	  area	  as	  well	  as	  to	  conduct	  awareness	  programmes	  for	  school	  
children,	   but	   the	   use	   of	   visitor	   centre	   depends	   on	   visitors’	   (local	   and	   foreign	   tourist)	   keenness.	   After	  
project	   closure	   most	   of	   the	   trained	   as	   officers	   dedicated	   to	   VSE	   have	   been	   transferred	   to	   other	  
protected	   areas.	   Also	   in	   terms	   of	   maintaining	   these	   facilities,	   while	   in	   some	   parks	   they	   are	   well	  
maintained,	  with	  functioning	  displays,	  toilets	  and	  other	  in	  some	  parks	  design	  faults	  have	  led	  to	  less	  than	  
optimal	  use	  of	  these	  centres.	  Maintenance	  is	  found	  to	  be	  difficult.	  	  

However	  benefits	  of	  improvements	  in	  ecotourism	  products	  and	  services	  haven’t	  transferred	  much	  to	  the	  
bordering	  communities	  of	  the	  pilot	  protected	  areas.	  Only	  a	  few	  opportunities	  for	  volunteer	  trackers	  and	  
jeep	   drivers	   have	   been	   created	   for	   communities	   adjacent	   to	   the	   park.	   Communities	   say	   that	   it	   is	  
outsiders	  who	  own	  many	  of	  the	  hotels	  and	  jeep/safari	  owners	  who	  benefit	  the	  most	  while	  only	  a	  few	  
local	   people	   from	   the	   buffer	   zone	   areas	   are	   involved.	   Hence	   a	   key	   component	   of	   ecotourism	   where	  
communities	   also	   benefit	   from	   the	   tourism	   activities	   seems	   to	   be	   lacking.	   The	   ecotourism	   related	  
activities	  were	  much	  more	  focused	  on	  staff	  capacity	  and	  infrastructure	  improvements	  for	  the	  park.	  	  

      “When	   it	   comes	   to	   tourism,	   the	   people	   in	   the	   village	   get	   almost	   nothing.	   We	   can’t	   have	   a	   safari	  
      vehicle	  as	  we	  have	  to	  pay	  Rs.50,000	  to	  the	  company	  in	  charge.	  The	  majority	  of	  the	  safari	  jeep	  owners	  
                                                                                                                                                                       108
      are	   from	   Matale,	   Hiriwadunna	   etc.	   They	   are	   the	   people	   who	   benefit.	   We	   have	   participated	   to	  
      conserve	   the	   forest,	   we	   have	   stopped	   cutting	   trees,	   killing	   animals,	   reduced	   income	   sources	   that	  
      harm	  the	  forest,	  but	  we	  don’t	  get	  a	  benefit	  [from	  tourism	  activities].	  	  
                                                                                                                         -­‐	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Community	  FGD	  

Impact	  Drivers	  

ID1:	  Effective	  training	  and	  capacity	  building	  
NOTE:	  This	  impact	  driver	  is	  relevant	  to	  both	  outcome	  2	  and	  3	  but	  is	  reported	  here.	  

Valuable	  training	  and	  capacity	  building	  opportunities	  were	  provided	  for	  the	  DWLC	  staff	  through	  training,	  
exposure	  visits,	  working	  with	  consultants	  and	  experts	  both	  foreign	  and	  local,	  degrees,	  with	  the	  aim	  of	  
enhancing	   DWLC’s	   institutional	   capacity	   for	   protected	   area	   management	   through	   skills	   enhancement	  
based	   on	   an	   identified	   need.	   Different	   training	   opportunities	   were	   provided	   for	   officers	   in	   different	  
levels	   while	   also	   allowing	   for	   new	   trained	   positions	   such	   as	   Visitor	   Services	   and	   Ecotourism	   (VSE)	  
Officers.	  The	  development	  of	  management	  plans	  was	  done	  by	  the	  officers	  in	  the	  respective	  parks	  and	  
hence	  the	  capacity	  to	  develop	  the	  plan	  was	  created	  and	  can	  be	  seen	  in	  their	  ability	  to	  prepare	  similar	  
plans	   for	   other	   projects	   –	   as	   reported	   by	   the	   World	   Bank.	   While	   the	   capacity	   developed	   in	   terms	   of	  
community	   mobilization	   and	   group	   dynamics	   were	   used	   to	   set	   up	   the	   livelihoods	   component	   but	   as	   this	  
cadre	  was	  not	  hired	  the	  training	  benefits	  have	  been	  lost	  to	  the	  department.	  Although	  there	  were	  initial	  
delays	  for	  the	  training	  programmes	  to	  commence	  it	  is	  seen	  a	  motivation	  that	  provided	  personal	  growth	  
opportunities.	   Some	   individuals	   continuing	   to	   use	   to	   the	   training	   to	   improve	   the	   Parks	   at	   both	   at	   the	  
headquarters	   and	   local	   level	   is	   acknowledged	  by	  stakeholders.	  This	  can	  be	  deemed	  overall	  as	  one	  of	  the	  
most	  positive	  driver	  of	  the	  project.	  The	  transferring	  of	  technical	  ability	  and	  knowledge	  of	  some	  of	  the	  
external	   consultants	   was	   acknowledged	   as	   a	   contributing	   factor	   for	   the	   improvement	   in	   skills	   among	  
DWLC	  staff.	  Training	  is	  still	  a	  feature	  in	  the	  regular	  activities	  of	  the	  department.	  	  

ID2:	  Livelihood	  benefits	  incentivizes	  participation	  in	  conservation	  
Many	   of	   the	   adaptive	   management	   activities	   (i.e.	   erecting	   and	   maintaining	   electric	   fences,	   removal	   of	  
alien	  invasive	  species)	  required	  community	  participation.	  Support	  for	  these	  activities	  were	  possible	  due	  
to	   the	   livelihood	   benefits	   offered	   to	   the	   project	   reviewed	   under	   outcome	   3.	   Community	   participation	  
was	   promoted	   under	   the	   sustainable	   financing	   mechanism	   of	   the	   Protected	   Area	   Conservation	   Fund	  
(PACF)	  and	  the	  activities,	  as	  well	  as	  commitment	  of	  both	  the	  project	  and	  DWLC	  outreach	  staff,	  played	  a	  
vital	   role	   during	   to	   enlist	   the	   support	   of	   the	   communities	   during	   project	   duration.	   The	   livelihood	  
component	  that	  had	  direct	  benefits	  to	  individuals	  and	  to	  the	  community	  at	  large	  in	  terms	  of	  income	  and	  
wellbeing	  were	  incentives	  used	  to	  solicit	  community	  participation	  in	  conservation.	  Due	  to	  these	  benefits	  
and	  in	  some	  cases	  with	  the	  continuation	  of	  the	  CBOs	  and	  revolving	  fund,	  the	  willingness	  to	  support	  the	  
DWLC	   still	   remains	   –	   albeit	   with	   less	   active	   involvement	   and	   reduced	   membership.	   Due	   to	   greatly	  
reduced	  interactions	  with	  the	  DWLC	  resulting	  from	  the	  transfer	  of	  the	  15	  trained	  outreach	  officers	  in	  the	  
DWLC	   to	   other	   areas	   as	   per	   regular	   institutional	   practice,	   in	   addition	   to	   the	   lack	   of	   social	   mobilisers	  
employed	   during	   the	   project,	   the	   community	   outreach	   activities	   have	   greatly	   lost	   momentum	   and	   its	  
effectiveness	  as	  a	  driver	  has	  reduced.	  This	  is	  perceived	  by	  the	  community	  as	  the	  cause	  of	  the	  restart	  of	  
illegal	   activities	   such	   as	   hunting.	   Commitment	   to	   this	   type	   of	   community	   based	   activities	   is	   also	   not	   a	  
priority	  for	  the	  DWLC	  at	  present	  and	  the	  model	  is	  not	  replicated	  in	  other	  parks	  by	  the	  DWLC.	  	  

                                                                                                                                                                                  109
ID3:	  Facilities	  and	  infrastructure	  assists	  adaptive	  management	  	  
Improvements	   of	   management	   of	   pilot	   protected	   areas	   were	   facilitated	   by	   providing	   infrastructure	  
facilities	  such	  as	  office	  amenities,	  vehicles,	  communication	  systems,	  improved	  roads	  and	  water	  supplies.	  	  

The	   facilities	   provided	   through	   the	   project	   for	   the	   pilot	   protected	   areas	   were	   useful	   for	   better	  
management	   of	   the	   parks.	   However	   during	   the	   post-­‐project	   period,	   some	   of	   them	   have	   become	  
unusable	   due	   to	   lack	   of	   funding	   for	   operation	   and	   maintenance.	   Some	   of	   the	   structures	   which	   had	   been	  
built	  by	  the	  project	  in	  the	  pilot	  protected	  areas	  are	  not	  suitable	  for	  the	  location	  and	  some	  are	  difficult	  to	  
maintain	  and	  some	  are	  not	  necessary	  for	  management	  of	  the	  pilot	  protected	  areas.	  	  Some	  of	  the	  staff	  
quarters	  are	  also	  difficult	  to	  maintain	  and	  are	  not	  in	  use.	  

      “Road	   network	   inside	   the	   park,	   buildings,	   and	   electric	   fences	   have	   been	   constructed	   by	   the	  
      project.	   Also	   office	   equipment,	   furniture	   etc.	   have	   been	   received	   through	   the	   project.	   However	  
      some	   buildings	   have	   been	   constructed	   unnecessarily.	   We	   don’t	   use	   some	   of	   the	   buildings	   for	   any	  
      purpose.	   Vehicles	   and	   machines	   to	   maintain	   the	   park	   have	   been	   given	   by	   the	   project.	   But	   we	  
      cannot	  use	  them	  since	  we	  don’t	  get	  fuel	  to	  operate	  them.”	  
                                                                                          -­‐ Park	  warden	  of	  a	  Pilot	  Protected	  Area	  

      “The	   visitor	   centre	   has	   been	   built	   in	   2005.	   After	   that	   it	   has	   not	   been	   maintained	   properly.	   It	   is	  
      difficult	   to	   maintain	   even	   this	   office.	   Due	   to	   the	   design	   of	   the	   buildings,	   it	   is	   hard	   to	   protect	  
      these.	  In	  the	  visitor	  centre	  the	  rain	  beats	  in	  from	  one	  side	  to	  another	  and	  the	  pillars	  and	  railings	  
      are	  rotting.”	  
                                                                                                      -­‐ Park	  warden	  of	  a	  Pilot	  Protected	  Area	  

      “Some	  aspects	  of	  the	  design	  structures	  are	  not	  suitable	  for	  national	  parks.	  There	  are	  bungalows	  
      which	  are	  wide	  open	  and	  the	  animals	  can	  go	  inside.	  Some	  bungalows	  are	  too	  big	  and	  it	  is	  really	  
      difficult	  to	  maintain	  them.”	  
                                                                                     -­‐ Former	  official	  of	  the	  PAM	  &	  WC	  project	  



Assumptions	  

A3:	  Financial	  and	  technical	  support	  for	  DWLC	  available	  continuously	  
Although	  Parks	  are	  managing	  with	  less	  financial	  resources	  than	  during	  the	  project,	  budgetary	  allocations	  
are	   provided	   for	   the	   continuation	   of	   the	   adaptive	   management	   activities	   and	   for	   some	   of	   the	   most	  
pressing	  maintenance	  of	  equipment	  and	  infrastructure.	  However	  allocations	  are	  not	  sufficient	  to	  meet	  
all	   the	   needs	   identified	   by	   the	   parks.	   Though	   external	   technical	   support	   is	   not	   available	   in	   the	   same	  
manner	  as	  during	  the	  project,	  they	  are	  managing	  with	  technical	  resources	  within	  the	  Department	  and	  
other	  externals	  resource	  people	  via	  various	  wildlife	  experts	  and	  groups	  with	  whom	  the	  Department	  has	  
built	  relationships.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                                  110
Table	  5:	  Outcomes-­‐impacts	  assessment	  findings	  for	  Strategy	  #2:	  Protected	  Area	  Management	  
     Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                                                       Qualitative	  Assessment	                                                    Rating	  
       Component	  
                                      u   The	  project	  supported	  adaptive	  management	  programmes	  
                                           that	  addressed	  strategic	  threats	  and	  opportunities	  at	  each	  
                                           PPA.	  The	  Park	  Wardens	  are	  using	  the	  management	  plans	  and	  
                                           have	  capacity	  to	  revise	  them.	  However	  due	  to	  budgetary	  
Outcome	  2:	  Improved	  
                                           restrictions	  and	  how	  the	  budgetary	  allocations	  are	  made	  for	  
Management	  of	  
Protected	  areas	  through	  
                                           various	  activities	  it	  cannot	  be	  holistically	  implemented.	  Hence	  	                    2	  
                                           it	  is	  not	  at	  the	  expected	  optimal	  implementation	  level.	  
Participatory	  Adaptive	  
                                      u   Continuation	  of	  adaptive	  management	  also	  takes	  place	  at	  
Management	  systems	  
                                           various	  levels	  in	  the	  Parks	  (i.e.	  electric	  fences,	  invasive	  species	  
                                           removal,	  habitat	  enrichment,	  etc.).	  
                                      u   Encroachment	  and	  illegal	  activities	  by	  the	  buffer	  zone	  have	  
                                           reduced	  considerably	  	  
ID1:	  Effective	  training	            The	   training	   have	   to	   some	   extent	   improved	   skills	   and	  
                                                                                                                                                         2	  
                                      u

and	  capacity	  building	  	          motivation	  to	  carry	  out	  duties	  to	  some	  extent.	  	  	  
                                      u   Community	  participation	  was	  a	  driver	  that	  contributed	  to	  the	  
                                           success	   of	   some	   of	   the	   conservation	   and	   management	  
ID2:	  Livelihood	  benefits	           activities.	   Livelihood	   development	   was	   promoted	   under	   the	  
incentivises	  participation	            sustainable	   financing	   mechanism	   of	   the	   Protected	   Area	  
in	  conservation	                       Conservation	  Fund	  (PACF).	  Even	  now	  communities	  continue	  to	                             2	  
                                           participate	   in	   the	   CBOs,	   though	   diminished	   compared	   to	   the	  
                                           project	   period.	   The	   alternative	   livelihoods	   and	   training	   has	  
                                           helped	   to	   improve	   relationships	   with	   the	   park	   officials	   and	  
                                           also	  to	  provide	  alternatives	  to	  using	  forest	  products.	  
                                      u   The	   facilities	   provided	   through	   the	   project	   for	   the	   PPAs	   were	  
                                           useful	  for	  better	  management	  of	  the	  parks	  (i.e.	  vehicles).	  	  
                                      u   However	   design	   of	   some	   structures	   is	   not	   appropriate	   and	   has	  
ID3:	  Facilities	  and	  
                                           created	   a	   burden	   on	   the	   DWLC	   for	   maintenance.	   Some	  
infrastructure	  assists	  
                                           buildings	   are	   not	   under-­‐	   used.	   	   Some	   machinery	   and	  
                                                                                                                                                         2	  
adaptive	  management	  
                                           equipment	  are	  unusable	  due	  to	  lack	  of	  funds	  for	  maintenance	  
                                           during	  the	  post-­‐project	  period.	  	  

                                      u   Although	   parks	   are	   managing	   with	   less	   financial	   resources	  
                                           than	  during	  the	  project,	  budgetary	  allocations	  are	  provided	  for	  
                                           the	   continuation	   of	   the	   adaptive	   management	   activities	   and	  
A3:	    Financial	      and	  
                                           for	  some	  of	  the	  most	  pressing	  maintenance	  of	  equipment	  and	  
technical	   support	   for	  
                                           infrastructure.	  	  
DWLC	            available	  
                                      u   Though	  external	  technical	  support	  is	  not	  available	  in	  the	  same	  
                                                                                                                                                         2	  
continuously	  
                                           manner	   as	   during	   the	   project,	   DWLC	   has	   technical	   resources	  
                                           within	   the	   Department	   and	   other	   externals	   resource	   people	  
                                           via	   various	   wildlife	   experts	   and	   groups	   with	   whom	   the	  
                                           Department	  has	  built	  relationships.	  
IS5:	  Area	  management	               Management	   plans	   have	   been	   done	   for	   all	   the	   pilot	   parks	   with	  
                                                                                                                                                         2	  
                                      u

plans	  prepared	  and	                 internal	  staff	  assisted	  by	  consultants.	  The	  capacity	  to	  prepare	  
mandated	  by	  law	                    management	  plans	  now	  exists	  to	  meet	  the	  legal	  requirement	  

                                                                                                                                                             111
     Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                                                            Qualitative	  Assessment	                                                  Rating	  
       Component	  
                                                of	  management	  plans	  for	  all	  protected	  areas	  managed	  by	  the	  
                                                DWLC.	  The	  plans	  have	  not	  been	  revised	  up	  to	   now	  but	  there	  is	  
                                                a	  recent	  move	  to	  start	  the	  revision	  of	  these	  plans.	  	  
                                          u    The	   manner	   in	   which	   budget	   decisions	   are	   made	   centrally	  
                                                through	   the	   different	   units	   of	   the	   DWLC	   restricts	   the	   holistic	  
                                                implementation	   of	   these	   plans,	   and	   only	   some	   activities	   get	  
                                                priority	  and	  institutional	  funding.	  	  	  
                                          u    Establishment	   of	   electric	   fences,	   removal	   of	   invasive	   species,	  
                                                and	   clearing	   of	   fire	   lines	   were	   done	   successfully	   with	   some	           2	  
IS6:	  Implemented	  
                                                participation	  of	  communities.	  These	  activities	  are	  a	  part	  of	  the	  
adaptive	  management	  
                                                regular	   management	   of	   the	   park	   however	   activities	   continue	  
systems	  
                                                at	  a	  lower	  scale	  compared	  to	  the	  project	  period.	  	  

                                          u    The	  visitor	  services	  and	  ecotourism	  plans	  were	  formulated	  and	  
                                                structures	  put	  in	  place.	  	  
                                          u    Issues	   with	   maintenance	   and	   suitability	   of	   the	   structures	   in	  
                                                some	  of	  the	  sites	  have	  been	  raised.	  
                                          u    During	  the	  post-­‐project	  period,	  most	  of	  the	  officers	  dedicated	  
IS7:	  Developed	  
ecotourism	  products	  and	  
                                                to	   ecotourism	   have	   been	   transferred	   and	   not	   replaced	   hence	                1	  
                                                discontinuing	  some	  of	  the	  focus	  on	  the	  issue.	  
services	  
                                          u    Use	   of	   visitor	   centres,	   and	   value	   of	   awareness	   raising	   to	  
                                                change	  behaviour	  is	  not	  clear	  
                                          u    Benefits	  of	  ecotourism	  through	  tourism	  initiatives	  have	  not	  
                                                transferred	  adequately	  to	  the	  bordering	  communities	  of	  the	  
                                                PPAs.	  	  
NOTE:	   The	   ratings	   are	   given	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   achieving	   the	   intermediate	   states	   and	   the	   contribution	  
towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                112
4.3 Strategy	  3:	  Community	  Participation	  

4.3.1 Theory	  of	  Change	  Overview	  
The	  protected	  community	  partnership	  strategy	  focuses	  on	  delivering	  two	  intermediate	  states.	  
          i) Sustainable	  financing	  available	  for	  participatory	  community	  mobilization
          ii) Improved	  livelihoods	  of	  buffer	  zone	  communities

These	   three	   intermediate	   states	   were	   important	   to	   achieve	   the	   protected	   area	   management	   strategy	   of	  
the	  project.	  	  

Figure	  4:	  Theory	  of	  Change	  for	  Strategy	  #3	  


                                         ID4:	  Better	                      ID1:	  Effective	  
                                        relationships	                         training	  and	  
                                       between	  DWLC	                     capacity	  building	                          IS8:	  Sustainable	  financing	  
                                      and	  communities	                                                                   available	  for	  participatory	  
                                                                                                                              community	  mobilization	  	  
        Outcome	  3:	  
        Building	  of	  
        community	  
     partnership	  for	  
     livelihoods	  and	  
       conservation                                                                                                         IS9:	  Improved	  livelihoods	  of	  
                                                     A4:	  DWLC’s	  willingness,	                                          buffer	  zone	  communities	  
                                                     technical	  and	  financial	  
                                                      support	  to	  continue	  
                                                      community	  activities

The	  project	  outcome	  that	  was	  identified	  as	  important	  for	  delivering	  these	  three	  intermediate	  states	  is	  
shown	  in	  Figure	  4	  above.	  


Outcome	  3:	  Building	  of	  community	  partnership	  for	  livelihoods	  and	  conservation	  

Intermediate	  States	  

IS8:	  Sustainable	  financing	  available	  for	  participatory	  community	  mobilization	  
  The	  project	  plan	  for	  this	  was	  to	   establish	  a	  Protected	  Area	  Conservation	  Trust	  (PACT)	  with	  the	  aim	  of	  
  financing	   activities	   which	   enhance	   the	   wellbeing	   of	   the	   communities	   in	   the	   buffer	   zone	   while	  
  respecting	   the	   conservation	   function	   of	   the	   protected	   areas.	   The	   implementation	   modality	   of	   the	  
  Trust	  was	  changes	  into	  the	  Protected	  Area	  Conservation	  Fund	  (PACF).	  	  	  	  

Protected	   Area	   Conservation	   Fund	   (PACF)	   had	   been	   established	   through	   the	   project	   with	   the	   aim	   of	  
supporting	   the	   empowerment	   process	   in	   bordering	   communities	   of	   the	   pilot	   protected	   areas.	   This	  
component	   was	   delayed	   due	   to	   issues	   raised	   by	   various	   parties	   on	   the	   modality	   of	   the	   original	  
component	  D	  and	  later	  due	  to	  the	  inability	  to	  find	  suitable	  local	  NGO	  to	  conduct	  community	  outreach	  
programmes.	   Local	   consultancy	   firms	   that	   were	   eventually	   engaged	   could	   not	   perform	   and	   the	   tasks	  
were	   taken	   over	   by	   the	   DWLC	   following	   the	   model	   piloted	   by	   the	   Forest	   Department	   under	  
                                                                                                                                                             113
Conservation	  of	  Globally	  Threatened	  Species	  in	  the	  Rainforests	  of	  Southwest	  Sri	  Lanka	  (GEF	  ID	  818).	  The	  
DWLC	   recruited	   and	   trained	   social	   mobilisers	   for	   this	   purpose	   and	   while	   this	   too	   took	   some	   time,	   the	  
approach	   was	   successful	   and	   feedback	   verifies	   that	   through	   their	   efforts	   a	   better	   relationship	   was	  
established	  between	  communities	  and	  DWLC.	  

The	  borrowers	  completion	  report	  states	  that	  by	  2007,	  the	  project	  had	  mobilized	  167	  CBOs	  in	  198	  Grama	  
Niladhari	   divisions	   around	   the	   border	   of	   the	   pilot	   protected	   areas.	   CBOs	   had	   prepared	   micro-­‐projects	  
based	  on	  their	  priority	  needs.	  A	  part	  of	  the	  PACF	  was	  allocated	  for	  infrastructure	  development	  projects	  
in	  the	  villages.	  This	  was	  used	  by	  some	  CBOs	  to	  build	  community	  centres	  that	  have	  helped	  to	  facilitate	  
community	   meetings,	   conduct	   medical	   clinics,	   classes	   for	   children,	   etc.	   Irrigation	   projects	   were	   also	  
done	   and	   have	   helped	   farmers	   to	   cultivate	   during	   both	   yala	   and	   maha	   seasons	   and	   to	   expand	   the	  
cultivation	  extent.	  Main	  grid	  electricity	  for	  the	  villages	  have	  improved	  beneficiaries’	  quality	  of	  life,	  and	  
establishment	  of	  electric	  fences	  have	  helped	  to	  reduce	  human	  elephant	  conflicts.	  

      “In	   the	   past,	   we	   were	   not	   able	   to	   cultivate	   anything	   because	   of	   the	   elephants.	   All	   our	   cultivation	  
      was	  destroyed	  by	  the	  elephants.	  After	  the	  electric	  fence	  was	  built,	  the	  elephants	  entering	  to	  the	  
      village	   have	   reduced	   a	   lot.	   People	   are	   able	   to	   engage	   in	   their	   agricultural	   works	   with	   more	  
      security.	  	  As	  a	  result	  our	  economy	  has	  improved.”	  
                                                                                                                                      -­‐ Community	  FGD	  


Some	  of	  the	  CBOs	  established	  through	  the	  project	  are	  still	  functioning,	  while	  some	  are	  not	  functioning	  
well.	   Even	   so,	   communities	   and	   PA	   staff	   report	   that	   these	   communities	   remain	   committed	   to	  
conservation	   of	   the	   PPAs	   to	   varying	   degrees,	   and	   most	   have	   not	   reverted	   to	   adverse	   practices.	   Thus	   the	  
CBOs	  can	  still	  be	  resurrected	  if	  funds	  and	  staff	  dedicated	  to	  outreach	  are	  available.	  	  The	  main	  reason	  for	  
collapsing	   of	   the	   CBOs	   is	   lack	   of	   loan	   repayment	   due	   to	   the	   lack	   of	   monitoring	   by	   the	   DWLC	   after	   the	  
project	  period.	  This	  occurred	  as	  all	  field	  mobilisers	  and	  Project	  officers	  recruited	  under	  this	  project	  were	  
discontinued.	   The	   regular	   departmental	   transfer	   system	   also	   means	   that	   trained	   staff	   taking	   on	   the	   role	  
of	  outreach	  officers	  during	  the	  project	  to	  interact	  with	  these	  communities	  have	  also	  been	  transferred	  to	  
other	  parks	  where	  similar	  activities	  do	  not	  take	  place.	  The	  lack	  of	  dedicated	  Outreach	  Officers	  places	  a	  
heavy	  burden	  on	  the	  regular	  DWLC	  staff	  members	  who	  have	  other	  protection	  related	  activities	  and	  are	  
expected	  to	  carry	  out	  community	  mobilization.	  However	  in	  some	  locations,	  the	  DWLC	  regular	  field	  staff	  
have	  taken	  over	  the	  task	  to	  monitor	  CBO	  activities	  and	  mobilization.	  CBOs	  that	  are	  functioning	  well	  do	  
so	   due	   to	   self-­‐motivation	   of	   members	   and	   good	   CBO	   leadership,	   external	   support	   and	   in	   a	   few	   cases	  
commitment	  of	  the	  Park	  Wardens.	  	  

      “People	   were	   repaying	   their	   loans	   without	   any	   problem.	   When	   involvement	   of	   the	   wildlife	  
      officials	  was	  reduced,	  they	  stopped	  to	  repayment.	  Though	  we	  asked	  them	  to	  repay	  their	  loans,	  
      they	  don’t	  care	  about	  that.	  If	  a	  wildlife	  officer	  tells	  them,	  they	  may	  accept	  that.	  We	  have	  to	  keep	  
      the	  relationship	  with	  all	  the	  villagers.	  If	  we	  go	  for	  legal	  activities,	  they	  will	  be	  annoyed	  with	  us.”	  
                                                                                                                                      -­‐ Community	  FGD	  

      “Commitment	   of	   every	   CBO	   member	   and	   CBO	   official	   helped	   for	   its	   success.	   Rev.	   Thero’s	  
      leadership	  is	  also	  a	  contributor	  for	  that.	  It	  is	  a	  strength	  for	  our	  CBO.”	  
                                                                                                                           -­‐ Community	  FGD	  

                                                                                                                                                                               114
Currently	   some	   voluntary	   community	   work	   on	   shramadhana	   basis	   (donating	   labour)	   to	   clean	   the	  
temples,	  constructions	  in	  temples,	  New	  Year	  festivals,	  meditation	  programmes	  and	  preschool	  festivals	  
are	  also	  carried	  out	  by	  the	  active	   CBOs.	   In	   some	   occasions,	   these	   things	   are	   done	   with	   the	   support	   of	  
wildlife	  officials.	  

IS9:	  Improved	  livelihood	  of	  buffer	  zone	  communities	  
The	   PACF	   was	   used	   for	   individual	   loans	   through	   CBOs.	   Microfinance	   loans	   were	   given	   through	   the	  
established	   CBOs	   to	   improve	   livelihoods	   in	   the	   area.	   Some	   of	   them	   are	   retail	   shops,	   dairy	   production,	  
animal	  husbandry,	  cultivation,	  and	  self-­‐employment.	  The	  loan	  scheme	  had	  become	  a	  revolving	  fund	  for	  
the	  CBOs.	  Apart	  from	  the	  financial	  support,	  the	  project	  had	  given	  training	  especially	  for	  those	  who	  were	  
involving	  in	  self-­‐employment.	  Training	  and	  micro-­‐finance	  to	  start	  new	  livelihoods	  included	  activities	  like	  
rush	  and	  read	  cultivation,	  banana	  cultivation,	  and	  production	  of	  soap,	  incense	  stick	  etc.	  In	  addition,	  the	  
project	  officials	  had	  helped	  them	  to	  find	  raw	  materials	  and	  market	  for	  their	  products.	  This	  support	  had	  
created	   a	   positive	   impact	   on	   the	   beneficiaries’	   household	   economy.	   However	   after	   completion	   of	   the	  
project,	   some	   of	   the	   newly	   started	   livelihoods	   have	   collapsed	   due	   to	   failure	   to	   find	   market	   for	   their	  
products	   as	   well	   as	   inability	   to	   find	   raw	   materials.	   Much	   of	   the	   livelihood	   development	   projects	  
promoted	   under	   this	   initiative	   was	   with	   the	   aim	   of	   reducing	   the	   dependence	   and	   illegal	   activities	   within	  
the	  parks	  and	  illegal	  activities	  have	  reduced.	  	  


Impact	  Drivers	  

ID1:	  Effective	  training	  and	  capacity	  building	  
Trained	   staff	   and	   expert	   support	   was	   central	   to	   the	   implementation	   of	   the	   livelihoods	   component	  
and	   gaining	   support	   for	   conservation.	   However	   trained	   project	   staff	   were	   not	   absorbed	   into	   the	  
Department	   and	   trained	   staff	   in	   the	   pilot	   parks	   have	   been	   transferred	   leading	   to	   less	   focus	   on	  
community	   outreach	   activities	   in	   most	   of	   the	   pilot	   parks.	   Some	   Park	   Officials	   have	   however	   made	  
efforts	  to	  continue	  these	  activities	  with	  their	  other	  duties	  and	  find	  it	  a	  burden.	  

ID4:	  Better	  relationships	  between	  DWLC	  and	  communities	  
During	  the	  pre-­‐project	  period,	  illegal	  activities	  such	  as	  poaching,	  tree	  felling	  and	  sand	  mining	  were	  very	  
common	   in	   the	   pilot	   protected	   areas	   and	   boundary	   communities	   frequently	   have	   entered	   in	   to	   the	  
protected	   areas	   to	   collect	   materials	   to	   fulfill	   their	   needs.	   Some	   of	   them	   have	   collected	   firewood	   from	  
the	  park	  as	  an	  income	  generating	  activity.	  Sending	  animals	  into	  the	  protected	  areas	  for	  grazing	  also	  took	  
place	  in	  some	  of	  the	  pilot	  protected	  areas.	  

Through	   the	   community	   outreach	   programmes,	   a	   good	   relationship	   was	   built	   between	   the	   communities	  
and	   the	   DWLC	   staff	   through	   the	   joint	   activities	   undertaken	   and	   the	   livelihoods	   component.	   It	   has	  
reduced	   the	   frequent	   conflicts	   between	   two	   parties.	   The	   awareness	   programmes	   on	   wildlife	  
conservation	  and	  the	  efforts	  to	  uplift	  their	  socio-­‐economic	  situation	  are	  seen	  to	  be	  main	  reason	  for	  the	  
improved	  relationship	  and	  support	  for	  conservation.	  	  

      “Earlier	   we	   didn’t	   have	   any	   kind	   of	   relationship	   with	   the	   wildlife	   officers.	   The	   wildlife	   officers	  
      implement	  their	  law	  strictly	  before	  starting	  the	  project.	  Even	  when	  we	  collect	  firewood	  from	  the	  
                                                                                                                                                                       115
       park,	  they	  tried	  to	  catch	  us	  by	  law.	  Now	  it	  is	  not	  so.	  They	  are	  very	  much	  friendly	  with	  us.	  When	  
       they	   are	   friendly,	   we	   cannot	   do	   wrong	   things.	   Also	   when	   the	   villagers	   received	   benefits	   from	   the	  
       project,	  a	  good	  relationship	  was	  established	  with	  the	  wildlife	  officers.”	  
                                                                                                                                       -­‐ Community	  FGD	  

Post	   project,	   illegal	   activities	   such	   as	   poaching,	   tree	   felling,	   collection	   of	   fuel-­‐wood,	   bees	   honey	  
medicinal	   plants,	   and	   sand	   mining	   have	   been	   minimized	   through	   livelihood	   development,	   awareness,	  
improvement	   of	   mobility	   of	   the	   staff	   with	   the	   vehicles,	   improved	   communications,	   and	   improvement	   of	  
their	   relationship	   with	   DWLC	   staff.	   	   In	   addition	   some	   of	   the	   adaptive	   management	   activities	   such	   as	  
establishing	   electric	   fences,	   boundary	   demarcation	   have	   also	   helped	   reduce	   encroachment	   into	   the	  
park.	  	  

       	  “Earlier	   villagers	   cut	   a	   lot	   of	   trees.	   Some	   of	   them	   did	   this	   as	   a	   business.	   They	   went	   into	   the	   park	  
       at	   night	   and	   cut	   trees.	   It	   was	   difficult	   to	   stop	   this	   by	   law.	   After	   the	   project,	   this	   has	   reduced	   very	  
       much.	   Villagers	   were	   informed.	   Also	   with	   the	   establishment	   of	   the	   electric	   fence,	   the	   park	   and	  
       villages	  got	  divided.	  Beyond	  the	  electric	  fence,	  villagers	  didn’t	  come	  in	  to	  the	  park.	  The	  number	  of	  
       wildlife	   officers	   in	   the	   park	   increased	   and	   also	   villagers’	   awareness	   on	   importance	   of	  
       environmental	  protection	  contributed	  to	  this.”	  
                                                                                                                                                         -­‐ Community	  FGD	  


However	   community	   focus	   groups	   indicate	   that	   poaching	   incidents	   have	   increased	   in	   some	   parks	   as	  
compared	   to	   the	   project	   completion	   period.	   Cattle	   grazing	   is	   also	   seen	   to	   have	   reduced	   due	   to	   better	  
awareness	  and	  training	  on	  cattle	  rearing	  as	  well	  as	  a	  decrease	  in	  the	  number	  of	  people	  rearing	  cattle.	  
However	   in	   some	   of	   the	   parks	   cattle	   grazing	   has	   increased	   since	   project	   completion.	   Communities	  
believe	   that	   not	   having	   awareness	   programmes,	   lack	   of	   new	   livelihoods	   programmes	   and	   lack	   of	  
interaction	  between	  the	  community	  and	  park	  officers	  after	  completion	  of	  the	  project	  have	  created	  this	  
situation.	  The	  community	  feel	  that	  it	  is	  important	  to	  continue	  educating	  the	  new	  generation	  about	  the	  
importance	  of	  wildlife	  conservation	  and	  continuing	  these	  links	  if	  conservation	  benefits	  are	  to	  continue	  
into	  the	  future.	  	  


Assumptions	  

A4:	  DWLC’s	  willingness,	  technical	  and	  financial	  support	  to	  continue	  community	  activities	  	  
Outreach	   activities	   and	   some	   training	   does	   continue	   in	   terms	   of	   general	   awareness	   programmes	   and	  
joint	   activities	   such	   as	   live	   fences	   and	   clean	   ups	   in	   pilot	   areas	   and	   in	   other	   parks.	   	   In	   the	   pilot	   areas	  
efforts	  are	  made	  to	  maintain	  links	  with	  the	  communities.	  However	  the	  model	  used	  in	  this	  project	  with	  
group	   formation,	   loan	   schemes,	   targeted	   livelihoods	   and	   community	   engagement	   in	   conservation	   has	  
not	   been	   replicated	   elsewhere	   and	   not	   a	   part	   of	   the	   management	   models	   used.	   Technical	   expertise	   was	  
also	  not	  retained.	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                 116
Table	  6:	  Outcomes-­‐impacts	  assessment	  findings	  for	  Strategy	  #3:	  Community	  Partnership	  
     Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                                                          Qualitative	  Assessment	                                                      Rating	  
       Component	  
                                        u   The	   community	   outreach	   programme	   successfully	   developed	  
                                             rapport	   and	   mutual	   respect	   between	   the	   DWLC	   staff	  
                                             (including	  project	  staff	  assisting	  the	  DWLC)	  and	  communities.	  
                                             The	   links	   are	   reducing	   due	   to	   lack	   of	   dedicated	   staff	   to	  
                                             outreach	  activities	  but	  other	  officials	  try	  to	  continue	  this	  work	  
                                             along	  with	  their	  other	  activities	  	  	  
Outcome	  3:	  
                                        u   The	  PACF	  provided	  financial	  support	  for	  village	  infrastructure	  
Building	  of	  community	  
                                             development	   and	   livelihood	   development	   has	   benefited	  
partnership	  for	  
                                             communities	   and	   enlisted	   their	   support	   for	   conservation.	                               2	  
livelihoods	  and	  
                                             These	  benefits	  continue	  with	  some	  CBOs	  still	  active.	  
conservation	  
                                        u   Illegal	   activities	   by	   the	   community	   have	   reduced	   due	   to	   the	  
                                             activities	  and	  awareness	  	  
                                        u   	  The	   community	   collaboration	   established	   through	   this	  
                                             component	  existed	  even	  after	  completion	  of	  the	  project,	  but	  
                                             now	   it	   has	   weakened	   in	   some	   PPAs	   but	   not	   overall	   and	  
                                             depends	  on	  the	  project	  staff	  in	  place.	  
                                        u   Trained	   staff	   and	   expert	   support	   was	   central	   to	   the	  
                                             implementation	   of	   the	   livelihoods	   component	   and	   gaining	  
                                             support	  for	  conservation.	  However	  trained	  project	  staff	  were	  
ID1:	  Effective	  training	              not	   absorbed	   into	   the	   department	   and	   trained	   staff	   in	   the	  
and	  capacity	  building	                pilot	   parks	   have	   been	   transferred	   leading	   to	   less	   focus	   on	                 1	  
                                             community	   outreach	   activities	   in	   most	   of	   the	   pilot	   parks.	  
                                             However	  Park	  Officials	  in	  some	  pilot	  parks	  are	  making	  efforts	  
                                             to	  continue	  these	  activities	  with	  their	  other	  duties.	  
                                        u   Through	   the	   community	   outreach	   programme,	   relationships	  
                                             were	   built	   with	   the	   community	   and	   community	   awareness	   on	  
                                             conservation	  still	  exists.	  
ID4:Better	  relationships	  
                                             Illegal	   activities	   have	   reduced	   in	   general,	   but	   in	   parks	   some	  
                                                                                                                                                              1	  
                                        u
between	  DWLC	  and	  
                                             activities	   such	   as	   cattle	   grazing,	   poaching	   continues.	   The	  
communities	  
                                             reduction	  in	  the	  interactions	  with	  the	  park	  officials	  and	  lack	  of	  
                                             livelihoods	   activities	   is	   seen	   for	   the	   reason	   some	   activities	   are	  
                                             increasing	  again	  
                                        u   Outreach	  activities	  and	  some	  training	  does	  continue	  in	  terms	  
                                             of	  general	  awareness	  programmes	  and	  joint	  activities	  such	  as	  
A4:DWLC’s	  willingness,	                  live	  fences	  and	  clean	  ups	  in	  pilot	  areas	  and	  in	  other	  parks.	  	  In	  
technical	  and	  financial	              the	   pilot	   areas	   efforts	   are	   made	   to	   maintain	   links	   with	   the	  
support	  to	  continue	                  communities.	   However	   the	   model	   used	   in	   this	   project	   with	                       1	  
community	  activities	                    group	   formation,	   loan	   schemes,	   targeted	   livelihoods	   and	  
                                             community	   engagement	   in	   conservation	   has	   not	   been	  
                                             replicated	  elsewhere.	  
                                        u   PACF	  established	  for	  financing	  of	  community	  mobilization,	  
IS8:Sustainable	  financing	               planning	  and	  support,	  operated	  well	  through	  established	  
available	  for	  participatory	          CBOs	  during	  the	  project	  period.	  	                                                                2	  
community	  mobilization	  	         u   Some	  CBOs	  have	  continued	  to	  revolve	  the	  fund	  and	  operate	  
                                             successfully	  and	  still	  remain	  active.	  Some	  CBOs	  have	  
                                                                                                                                                                  117
      Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                                                             Qualitative	  Assessment	                                              Rating	  
        Component	  
                                                 collapsed	  due	  to	  lack	  of	  repayment	  of	  loans.	  
                                           u    Financial	   and	   capacity	   building	   support	   were	   provided	   to	  
                                                 improve	   existing	   livelihoods	   or	   start	   new	   livelihoods	   and	  
IS9:	  Improved	  livelihoods	                buffer	   zone	   communities	   have	   benefited	   a	   lot	   through	   these	  
of	  buffer	  zone	                           and	  acknowledge	  this	  contribution.	  	                                                        2	  
communities	                              u    The	   alternative	   livelihoods,	   training	   have	   helped	   to	   improve	  
                                                 relationships	   with	   the	   park	   officials	   and	   also	   to	   provide	  
                                                 alternatives	  to	  using	  forest	  products.	  
NOTE:	   The	   ratings	   are	   given	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   achieving	   the	   intermediate	   states	   and	   the	   contribution	  
towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  	  



4.4 Strategy	  4:	  Collaborative	  Conservation	  Planning	  

4.4.1 Theory	  of	  Change	  Overview	  
The	  collaborative	  conservation	  planning	  strategy	  focuses	  on	  delivering	  three	  intermediate	  states.	  
     i)        Addendum	  prepared	  for	  the	  National	  Biodiversity	  Conservation	  Action	  Plan
     ii)       Reviewed	  and	  enhanced	  protected	  area	  system
     iii)      Prepared	  endangered	  species	  recovery	  plans

These	   three	   intermediate	   states	   were	   important	   to	   achieve	   the	   protected	   area	   management	   strategy	   of	  
the	  project.	  

Figure	  5:	  Theory	  of	  Change	  for	  Strategy	  #4	  

                                                              A5:	  Relevant	                                             IS10:	  Addendum	  prepared	  
                                                             Ministries	  and	                                           for	  the	  National	  Biodiversity	  
                                                           Departments	  will	                                             Conservation	  Action	  Plan	  
                                                          cooperate	  to	  put	  in	  
                                                           place	  joint	  actions	  

              Outcome	  4:	  
               Improved	                                                                                                       S11:	  Reviewed	  and	  
             collaborative	                                                                                                 enhanced	  protected	  area	  
             conservation	                                                                                                              system	  
                planning


                                                                                                                            IS12:	  Prepared	  endangered	  
                                                                                                                               species	  recovery	  plans	  



The	  project	  outcome	  that	  was	  identified	  as	  important	  for	  delivering	  these	  three	  intermediate	  states	  is	  
shown	  in	  Figure	  5	  above.	  



                                                                                                                                                           118
Outcome	  4:	  Improved	  collaborative	  conservation	  planning	  

  Within	   the	   project,	   this	   is	   the	   component	   which	   was	   funded	   by	   GEF.	   This	   component	   expected	   to	  
  establish	  a	   platform	  on	  which	  to	   develop	  increased	  collaborative	  conservation	   planning	   among	  the	  
  involved	   institutions	   and	   other	   stakeholders.	   Also	   it	   has	   planned	   to	   strengthen	   the	   Biodiversity	  
  Conservation	  Secretariat	  (BCS)	  to	  prepare	  Biodiversity	  Conservation	  Action	  Plan	  (BCAP).	  In	  addition	  
  to	   that,	   this	   project	   component	   has	   proposed	   to	   review	   and	   enhance	   protected	   area	   system	   and	  
  prepare	  endangered	  species	  recovery	  plan.	  

Intermediate	  States	  

IS10:	  Addendum	  prepared	  for	  the	  National	  Biodiversity	  Conservation	  Action	  Plan	  
This	   project	   chose	   to	   develop	   a	   biodiversity	   action	   plan	   in	   its	   design	   when	   the	   Biodiversity	   Conservation	  
Action	  Plan	  (BCAP)	  had	  been	  published	  in	  1999	  and	  was	  at	  its	  early	  stages	  of	  implementation.	  Hence	  the	  
need	   for	   a	   new	   one	   was	   questioned	   and	   the	   eventual	   outcome	   was	   that	   the	   existing	   document	   –	  
entitled	   the	   Biodiversity	   Conservation	   in	   Sri	   Lanka:	   A	   Framework	   for	   Action	   (1999)	   was	   reviewed	   and	  
issues	   that	   threatened	   biodiversity	   which	   had	   emerged	   as	   important	   since	   the	   BCAP	   were	   addressed	  
through	   an	   addendum	   titled	   Biodiversity	   Conservation	   in	   Sri	   Lanka:	   A	   Framework	   for	   Action;	   Addendum	  
(1997).	   The	   addendum	   was	   prepared	   based	   on	   recommendations	   made	   by	   Task	   forces	   on	   In-­‐situ	  
Conservation,	   Ex-­‐situ	   Conservation,	   Agricultural	   Biodiversity,	   institutional	   Capacity	   building	   Impacts	   on	  
Biodiversity,	  Monitoring	  and	  coordination,	  Biodiversity	  Information	  Management	  Education,	  Awareness	  
and	   Training,	   Biodiversity	   valuation	   and	   &	   Mainstreaming	   Economics	   of	   Conservation,	   and	   emerging	  
areas	   such	   as	   Bio-­‐safety,	   Biodiversity	   Dimensions	   in	   Traditional	   Knowledge	   and	   life	   styles,	   Access	   to	  
Genetic	   Resources,	   Sustainable	   Use	   and	   Benefit	   Sharing,	   Bio-­‐safety,	   and	   some	   process	   issues	   such	   as	  
Policies,	   Strategies	   and	   Action	   Planning,	   Monitoring	   and	   coordination.	   The	   Biodiversity	   Action	   Plan	  
(BCAP)	  of	  1999	  is	  thus	  updated	  by	  the	  Addendum	  prepare	  under	  the	  PAM&WC	  project.	  

The	  preparation	  was	  done	  through	  16	  Task	  Forces	  formed	  by	  the	  Biodiversity	  Secretariat.	  To	  assist	  this	  
activity,	   the	   project	   facilitated	   physical	   and	   human	   development	   in	   the	   Biodiversity	   Secretariat.	  
Preparation	   of	   BCAP	   improved	   the	   Ministry	   of	   Environment’s	   know-­‐how	   on	   issues	   of	   biodiversity	   and	  
also	  fulfills	  one	  of	  the	  requirements	  under	  the	  Convention	  of	  Biological	  Diversity	  (CBD)	  while	  also	  being	  a	  
base	  document	  for	  other	  conventions	  and	  strategy	  formulations	  processes.	  	  However	  stakeholders	  state	  
that	  implementation	  of	  the	  stated	  recommendations,	  actions,	  research	  areas	  etc.	  are	  not	  taking	  place	  as	  
expected.	  

IS11:	  Reviewed	  and	  enhanced	  protected	  area	  system	  
The	  Project	  carried	  out	  to	  review	  of	  the	  adequacy	  of	  the	  PA	  system	  to	  assemble	  a	  portfolio	  of	  strategic	  
conservation	   sites	   for	   Sri	   Lanka	   that	   would	   adequately	   represent	   biological	   diversity	   and	   ecological	  
systems.	   All	   PAs	   managed	   by	   the	   FD	   and	   DWLC	   were	   included	   in	   the	   analysis	   as	   well	   as	   other	   sites	  
considered	   important	   to	   provide	   landscape	   functional	   integrity	   to	   connect	   existing	   PAs	   or	   to	   provide	  
buffer	   zones.	   The	   process	   utilized	   existing	   information,	   although	   some	   information	   that	   was	   not	  
commonly	   available	   was	   generated	   anew.	   The	   process	   actively	   involved	   a	   wide	   range	   of	   stakeholders	  
and	  expert	  review	  teams.	  	  	  


                                                                                                                                                                    119
The	  PA	  gap	  analysis	  served	  to:	  (a)	  to	  identify	  and	  describe	  a	  portfolio	  of	  strategic	  conservation	  sites	  for	  
Sri	   Lanka,	   and	   (b)	   to	   compare	   the	   existing	   PA	   system	   with	   this	   portfolio	   and	   to	   identify	   areas	   of	  
conservation	   importance	   that	   were	   not	   among	   the	   existing	   PAs	   (gaps).	   This	   resulted	   in	   mapping	   a	  
network	  of	  PAs	  and	  linkages.	  It	  is	  not	  clear	  whether	  this	  analysis	  is	  consulted	  when	  DWLC	  identifies	  new	  
PAs	  -­‐	  as	  expected.	  	  

IS12:	  Prepared	  endangered	  species	  recovery	  plans	  
With	   the	   aim	   of	   monitoring	   the	   endangered	   species,	   the	   species	   conservation	   advisory	   group	   was	  
established	   by	   the	   Biodiversity	   Secretariat.	   Also	   the	   national	   red	   list	   was	   updated	   in	   2012	   and	   a	   national	  
data	   base	   was	   prepared	   for	   threatened	   species	   while	   preparing	   profiles	   for	   122	   faunal	   and	   270	   floral	  
species.	   Recovery	   plans	   had	   been	   prepared	   for	   two	   red	   list	   species	   (Puntius	   bandula	   and	   Ravana	  
politissima).	  The	  Biodiversity	  Secretariat	  has	  trained	  3	  officials	  to	  conduct	  that	  task	  of	  updating	  the	  red	  
list	  with	  time.	  These	  activities	  have	  helped	  to	  form	  a	  base	  for	  future	  national	  biodiversity	  conservation.	  
The	  national	  red	  list	  activity	  is	  one	  of	  the	  activities	  under	  this	  component	  that	  is	  continuing.	  

A5:	  Relevant	  Ministries	  and	  Departments	  will	  cooperate	  to	  put	  in	  place	  joint	  actions	  
The	   DWLC,	   the	   Forest	   Department,	   and	   the	   Biodiversity	   Secretariat	   were	   the	   key	   biodiversity	   related	  
institutes.	   Having	   a	   greater	   collaboration	   among	   them	   has	   provided	   direct	   benefits	   for	   sharing	  
experiences	   and	   joint	   actions.	   However	   this	   did	   not	   take	   place	   as	   intended,	   even	   though	   the	   planning	  
was	  done	  in	  a	  collaborative	  manner,	  there	  are	  still	  clear	  boundaries	  as	  to	  whose	  document/efforts	  it	  is.	  
Each	  department	  also	  relies	  on	  their	  own	  systems	  rather	  than	  the	  joint	  action	  plans	  such	  as	  the	  BCAP.	  
However	  use	  of	  activities	  such	  as	  the	  gap	  analysis	  and	  red	  listing	  is	  acknowledged.	  In	  practice	  however	  
the	  departments	  are	  still	  compartmentalized	  and	  do	  not	  collaborate	  easily.	  The	  fact	  that	  the	  two	  main	  
departments	  the	  Forest	  and	  wildlife	  are	  in	  two	  separate	  ministries	  is	  also	  not	  conducive	  to	  joint	  efforts.	  
However	  there	  was	  no	  impact	  of	  this	  lack	  of	  collaboration	  on	  the	  protected	  area	  management	  efforts	  
under	  the	  project.	  




                                                                                                                                                                      120
Table	  7:	  Outcomes-­‐impacts	  assessment	  findings	  for	  Strategy	  #4:	  Collaborative	  Conservation	  
Planning	  
      Theory	  of	  Change	  
                                                                                Qualitative	  Assessment	                                                           Rating	  
        Component	  
                                            u    This	   component	   produced	   outputs	   that	   helped	   to	   improve	  
                                                  the	  scientific	  database	  for	  national	  biodiversity	  conservation	  
                                                  planning	   and	   contributed	   to	   meeting	   Sri	   Lanka’s	   obligations	  
                                                  to	  Convention	  of	  Biological	  Diversity	  (CBD).	  	  
                                            u    Developing	   capacity	   within	   the	   BDS	   helped	   for	   the	  
Outcome	  4:	  Improved	  
                                                  continuation	  of	  these	  activities.	  
collaborative	  
                                            u    However	  the	  collaborative	  planning	  and	  management	  is	  not	                                        1	  
conservation	  planning	  
                                                  taking	  place.	  
                                            u    The	   fit	   of	   this	   component	   to	   the	   rest	   of	   the	   project	   logic	   of	  
                                                  this	  component	  was	  that	  it	  would	  improve	  conservation	  as	  a	  
                                                  whole	   and	   the	   intended	   joint	   activities;	   planning,	  etc.	  did	   not	  
                                                  take	  place	  as	  intended	  
A5:	  Relevant	  Ministries	             u    Though	   it	   was	   expected	   to	   have	   a	   greater	   collaboration	  
and	  Departments	  will	                      among	   them	   has	   provided	   direct	   benefits	   for	   sharing	  
cooperate	  to	  put	  in	  place	           experiences	   and	   joint	   actions,	   this	   did	   not	   take	   place	   as	                        1	  
joint	  actions	                                intended.	  
                                            u    BCAP	  was	  done	  only	  a	  few	  years	  back	  the	  need	  for	  a	  new	  one	  
IS10:Addendum	  prepared	  
                                                  was	   questioned,	   and	   eventually	   only	   an	   addendum	   was	  
for	  the	  National	  
Biodiversity	  Conservation	  
                                                  done.	   The	   action	   plan	   is	   also	   not	   being	   implemented	   as	                           1	  
                                                  intended	  and	  was	  also	  not	  directly	  used	  in	  the	  project.	  Both	  
Action	  Plan	  
                                                  BCAP	  and	  Addendum	  are	  still	  not	  implemented	  holistically.	  	  
IS11:	  Reviewed	  and	                  u    Though	   this	   valuable	   review	   was	   done	   through	   the	   project	  
enhanced	  protected	  area	                   use	   of	   the	   gap	   analysis	   for	   enhancing	   the	   PA	   system	   is	   not	               1	  
system	                                          apparent.	  
                                            u    Updating	   national	   red	   list,	   preparing	   data	   base	   for	  
IS12:	  Prepared	                               threatened	   species	   and	   preparation	   of	   recovery	   plans	   for	   2	  
endangered	  species	                           red	   list	   species	   were	   done	   through	   the	   project.	   Updating	                             3	  
recovery	  plans	                               national	   red	   list	   is	   still	   continuing,	   and	   some	   recovery	   plans	  
                                                  are	  being	  done.	  	  
NOTE:	   The	   ratings	   are	   given	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   achieving	   the	   intermediate	   states	   and	   the	   contribution	  
towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                          121
5. Overall	  conclusions

Overall,	   the	   project	   has	   partially	   succeeded	   in	   moving	   towards	   the	   desired	   impact	   of	   assisting	   the	  
Government	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   to	   conserve	   the	   country’s	   wildlife.	   This	   ROtI	   assessment	   is	   based	   purely	   on	   the	  
validation	   and	   assessment	   of	   the	   delivery	   of	   the	   theory	   of	   change	   modeled	   above,	   which	   has	   been	  
developed	  through	  consultation	  with	  the	  project	  stakeholders	  including	  communities.	  

A	  final	  consolidated	  rating	  of	  the	  project’s	  progress	  towards	  impact	  is	  given	  in	  Table	  8	  below	  (using	  the	  
scoring	   system	   given	   in	   Table	   4,	   5,	   6	   and	   7	   above).	   It	   provides	   an	   assessment	   of	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   the	  
project’s	   theoretical	   design	   is	   in	   line	   with	   the	   validated	   theory	   of	   change	   deemed	   necessary	   for	  
delivering	  impact	  and	  the	  progress	  towards	  delivering	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways.	  

Table	  8:	  Overall	  rating	  of	  project	  impact	  
                                                               Outcomes	  –	  Impact	  assessment	  
Strategy	  1:	  Capacity	  Development	                                                                                                                  1	  
Strategy	  2:	  Protected	  Area	  Management	                                                                                                          2	  
Strategy	  3:	  Community	  Partnership	                                                                                                                 2	  
Strategy	  4:	  Collaborative	  Conservation	  Planning	                                                                                                1	  
Overall	  project	                                                                                                                                         2	  


Given	  the	  status	  before	  the	  project,	  the	  project	  has	  contributed	  to	  improve	  the	  institutional	  processes	  
and	  technical	  capacity	  of	  the	  staff	  to	  manage	  wildlife	  and	  protected	  areas.	  However	  impacts	  are	  reduced	  
due	  to	  some	  institutional	  restructuring	  processes	  not	  achieving	  its	  full	  potential	  with	  some	  key	  positions	  
remaining	  vacant,	  the	  decentralization	  process	  not	  implemented	  in	  the	  way	  it	  was	  envisioned.	  In	  terms	  
of	  technical	  capacity	  of	  staff	  this	  is	  acknowledged	  to	  have	  built	  a	  more	  professional	  cadre	  in	  the	  DWLC.	  
The	  use	  of	  the	  knowledge	  is	  seen	  to	  be	  dependent	  on	  the	  individuals	  and	  some	  trained	  staff	  have	  been	  
transferred	   as	   per	   the	   regular	   transfer	   system	   that	   has	   reduced	   some	   activities	   continuing	   effectively	  
(outreach).	  The	  infrastructure	  too	  has	  enhanced	  the	  facilities	  that	  help	  manage	  the	  park	  and	  the	  visitor	  
experience	   and	   funds	   continue	   to	   be	   allocated	   for	   their	   maintenance.	   However	   funds	   don’t	   cover	   all	  
maintenance	   costs	   and	   in	   some	   parks	   design	   faults	   have	   led	   to	   some	   buildings	   being	   unusable.	   The	  
adaptive	  management	  activities	  continue	  through	  removal	  of	  invasive	  species,	  maintaining	  electric	  and	  
live	   fences	   continue	   with	   some	   variations	   on	   the	   pilot	   protected	   areas.	   In	   terms	   of	   community	   based	  
activities	  some	  of	  the	  CBOs	  set	  up	  continue	  to	  function	  due	  to	  strong	  leadership	  from	  the	  community	  as	  
well	  as	  interactions	  with	  the	  Park	  officials.	  This	  is	  not	  the	  same	  for	  all	  parks.	  The	  cadre	  trained	  to	  work	  
on	  community	  issues	  were	  not	  retained	  these	  types	  of	  activities	  are	  not	  continued	  despite	  the	  some	  of	  
the	   positive	   outcomes	   in	   terms	   of	   less	   encroachment	   and	   illegal	   activities	   in	   the	   park	   by	   the	  
communities.	   Some	   parks	   have	   made	   attempts	   to	   maintain	   relationships	   and	   manage	   these	   activities	  
with	   other	   park	   staff.	   Overall	   a	   contribution	   has	   been	   made	   to	   put	   in	   place	   better	   structures	   and	  
processes	  to	  protect	  important	  habitats	  and	  species	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  but	  it	  has	  been	  sub	  optimal.	  



                                                                                                                                                                                   122
Annex	  1:	  References	  


    1. Asian	  Development	  Bank	  (ADB),	  2010.	  Project	  Completion	  Report:	  Protected	  Area	  Management
       and	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  Project.	  Asian	  Development	  Bank.

    2. Project	  Document,	  n.d.,	  Protected	  Area	  Management	  and	  Wildlife	  Conservation	  Project.

    3. Hitinayake,	   G.,	   2008.	   Review	   of	   Community	   outreach	   Activities	   Carried	   out	   by	   the	   Protected
       Area	  Conservation	  Fund	  (PACF)	  in	  Buffer	  Zone	  Villagers	  of	  Seven	  Pilot	  Protected	  Areas.

    4. Hirimuthugodage,	  D.,	  2013.	  ‘Biodiversity	  as	  a	  Cornerstone	  of	  Sustainable	  Development:	  A	  Sri
       Lankan	  Perspective’,	  The	  Island,	  21	  May.
       AccessedonAugust2013.<http://www.island.lk/index.php?page_cat=articledetails&page=article-­‐
       details&code_title=79554>

    5. Ministry	   of	   Forestry	   and	   Environment,	   1999.	   Biodiversity	   Conservation	   in	   Sri	   Lanka:	   A
       Framework	  for	  Action.	  Ministry	  of	  Forestry	  and	  Environment.

    6. Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources,	  2007.	  Biodiversity	  Conservation	  in	  Sri	  Lanka:	  A
       Framework	  for	  Action:	  Addendum.	  Ministry	  of	  Environment	  and	  Natural	  Resources.

    7. Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation,	  Sri	  Lanka,	  accessed	  7	  August	  2013.
       <http://www.dwc.gov.lk/index.php/en/>

    8. Department	   of	   Wildlife	   Conservation,	   Sri	   Lanka	   [Facebook],	   accessed	   7	   August	   2013,
       <https://www.facebook.com/pages/Department-­‐of-­‐Wildlife-­‐Conservation-­‐Sri-­‐
       Lanka/158637584161188?fref=ts>

    9. Department	  of	  Wildlife	  Conservation,	  Sri	  Lanka,	  2011.	  Performance	  Report	   –	  2011	  -­‐	  Department
       of	  Wildlife	  Conservation.	  Report	  to	  the	  Parliament,	  accessed	  July	  2013.
       <http://www.parliament.lk/papers_presented/08012013/performance_report_department_of_
       wildlife_conservation_2011.pdf>

    10. Ministry	   of	   Agrarian	   Services	   and	   Wildlife,	   Sri	   Lanka,	   2013.	   Performance	   Report	   -­‐	   Department	   of
        Wildlife	  Conservation	  2012.Pgs	  36	  -­‐46.Report	  to	  the	  Parliament,	  accessed	  July	  2013.
        <http://www.parliament.lk/uploads/documents/paperspresented/performance_report_ministr
        y_of_agrarian_services_wildlife_2012.pdf>.




                                                                                                                                                      123
Annex	  2:	  Sites	  Visited	  
April	  08,	  2013	  

Minneriya	  National	  Park,	  Polonnaruwa	  District	  

Eerige	  Oya	  village	  (temple)	  (Polonnaruwa	  District)	  
    -­‐ FGD	  with	  CBO	  members	  

                     Name	                   Gender	        Age	                                CBO	  
 Rev.	  Thero	                                                        Society	  for	  protecting	  the	  electric	  fence	  	  -­‐	  
                                             Male	  
                                                                        Eerige	  oya	  
                                                                        Society	  for	  protecting	  the	  electric	  fence	  	  -­‐	  
                                             Male	         60	  
 Hapuarachchige	  Gunadasa	                                           Eerige	  oya	  
                                                                        Society	  for	  protecting	  the	  electric	  fence	  	  -­‐	  
                                             Male	         42	  
 T.	  Gamini	  Vimal	  Gunarathne	                                  Eerige	  oya	  
 G.R.Dissanayake	                                                      Society	  for	  protecting	  the	  electric	  fence	  	  -­‐	  
                                             Male	         31	  
                                                                        Eerige	  oya	  
 K.P.P.	  	  Wilbert	                                                Society	  for	  protecting	  the	  electric	  fence	  	  -­‐	  
                                             Male	         45	  
                                                                        Eerige	  oya	  
                                                                        Wanasarana	  Community	  Based	  Organization,	  
 A.	  Ananda	  Bandara	                   Male	         50	  
                                                                        Moragaswewa,	  Habarana	  


April	  09,	  2013	  

Katukeliyawa	  village	  (community	  hall)	  (Polonnaruwa	  District)	  
    -­‐ FGD	  with	  communities	  

                          Name	              Gender	        Age	                                     CBO	  
 Ven.	  Katukaliyawe	  Gunadassi	  
                                             Male	         46	        Katukeliyawa	  Pubudu	  wildlife	  CBO	  
 Thero	  
 D.M.	  Lokubanda	                         Male	         58	        Katukeliyawa	  Pubudu	  wildlife	  CBO	  
 W.	  M.	  Madduma	  Bandara	            Male	         57	        Katukeliyawa	  Pubudu	  wildlife	  CBO	  
 P.	  G.	  Yasomenike	                    Female	       58	        Katukeliyawa	  Pubudu	  wildlife	  CBO	  
 T.	  G.	  Abeyrathne	  	  Banda	       Male	         50	        Katukeliyawa	  Pubudu	  wildlife	  CBO	  
 M.	  A.	  K.	  Nuradhani	  
                                             Female	       34	        Katukeliyawa	  Pubudu	  wildlife	  CBO	  
 Senarathne	  
 P.	  G.	  Indrani	  Chandralekha	       Female	       39	        Katukeliyawa	  Pubudu	  wildlife	  CBO	  
 H.	  M.	  Senanayake	                    Male	         53	        Katukeliyawa	  Pubudu	  wildlife	  CBO	  
 H.	  M.	  P.	  G.	  Jayabandara	                                  Community	  Participatory	  Wildlife	  
                                             Male	         34	  
 Gunassekera	                                                          Development	  Society	  –	  Nawa	  Katukeliyawa	  
                                                                        Community	  Participatory	  Wildlife	  
 R.	  Sunil	  Bandara	                    Male	         37	  
                                                                        Development	  Society	  –	  Nawa	  Katukeliyawa	  




                                                                                                                                                  124
April	  10,	  2013	  

Wasgamuwa	  National	  Park	  (Matale	  District)	  

Pallegama	  village	  (Park	  office	  building),	  Matale	  District	  
    -­‐ FGD	  with	  communities	  
    -­‐ 6	  members	  participated	  from	  2	  societies	  

Dehiattakandiya	  village	  (at	  a	  community	  leaders’	  house),	  Ampara	  District	  
   -­‐ FGD	  with	  communities	  
   -­‐ 25	  members	  participated	  from	  3	  societies	  


16	  –	  19	  May,	  and	  29	  –	  31	  July	  2013	  
Consultations	   held	   during	   the	   Man	   and	   Biosphere	   (MAB)	   Reserve	   Periodic	   Review	   of	   the	   Bundala	  
National	  Park	  (International	  Biosphere	  Reserve)	  

21	  July	  2013	  
Observations	  at	  Udawalawe	  National	  Park	  

29	  September	  2013	  
Observations	  and	  conversations	  at	  Kaudulla	  National	  Park	  




                                                                                                                                             125
Annex	  3:	  People	  met	  


       Date	                         Name	                             Position	                        Organization	  
2013/02/07	            Easha	  Nanayakkara,	           Head	  –	  Community	                 Department	  of	  Wildlife	  
                                                          Outreach	                               Conservation	  

2013/02/07	            Lakshman	  Peiris	              Assistant	  Director	                  Department	  of	  Wildlife	  
                                                                                                   Conservation	  

2013/02/20	            Gamini	  Gamage	                Additional	  Secretary	  -­‐	  	     Ministry	  of	  Environment	  
                                                          Environment	  Policy	  

2013/04/09	            Buddhika	  Vithana	             Park	  Warden	                         Minneriya	  National	  Park	  


2013/04/10	            R.A.D.D.D.	  Samaranayake	   Park	  Warden	                            Wasgamuwa	  National	  
                                                                                                   Park	  
2013/05/03	            H.G.	  Gunawardena	             Former	  Additional	  Project	        Department	  of	  Wildlife	  
                                                          Manager	  -­‐	  PAM&WC	               Conservation	  
                                                          Project	  
2013/05/03	            K.W.P.	  Thilakeratne	          Former	  Manager	  -­‐	               Department	  of	  Wildlife	  
                                                          Community	  Outreach,	                 Conservation	  
                                                          PAM&WC	  Project	  
                                                          Lead	  Environmental	  
2013/07/10	            Dr.	  Sumith	  Pilapitiya	                                              World	  Bank	  
                                                          Specialist	  
                        W.S.K.	  Pathiratne	                                                     Department	  of	  Wildlife	  
2013/08/08	                                              Director	  -­‐	  Operations	  
                        (Telephone	  Interview)	                                                 Conservation	  




                                                                                                                                      126
Annex	  4:	  Schematic	  of	  PAM&WCP	  theory	  of	  change	  
                                                        A2:	  Structural	  changes	  proposed	                 IS1:	  DWLC	  restructured	  w ith	  
                                                        for	  DWLC	  supported	  by	  the	  State	           decentralized	  power	  and	  
                                                        Administrative	  system	                                 better	  legal	  coverage	  for	  
     Outcome	  1:	  DWLC	  
                                                                                                                   management	  
     Institutional	  capacity	                                                                                   IS2:	  Enhanced	  technical	  
     enhanced	                                                 A1:	  Willingness	  of	  DWLC	  to	           capacity	  o f	  DWLC	  staff	                    ENHANCED	  
                                                                accept	  the	  structural	  changes	           IS3:	  Enhanced	  ecotourism	                  PROTECTED	  
                                                                                                                   capacity	  of	  DWLC	  staff	                           AREA	  
                                                                                                                   IS4:	  Strengthened	  wildlife	               MANAGEMENT	  
                                                                                                                   biodiversity	  M	  and	  E	  of	  DWLC                  AND	  
                                                                             A3:	  Financial	  and	  
                                     ID1:	  Effective	                     technical	  support	                                                                 BIODIVERSITY	  
     Outcome	  2:	                 training	  and	                       for	  DWLC	  available	            IS5:	  Area	  management	  plans	            CONSERVATIO
     Improved	                      capacity	  building	                                                        prepared	  and	  mandated	  by	  law	       N	  IN	  SRI	  LANKA	  
                                                                             continuously	  
     Management	  of	  PAs	                                                                                     IS6:	  Implemented	  adaptive	  
                                                                                                                   management	  systems	  
     through	  Participatory	  
                                                                                                                   IS7:	  Developed	  ecotourism	  
     Adaptive	                      ID3:	  Facilities	  and	  
                                                                                                                   products	  and	  services	  
     Management	  systems	         infrastructure	  assists	  
                                     adaptive	  
                                     management	  
                                                                                                                   IS9:	  Sustainable	  financing	  
     Outcome	  3:	  Building	  
                                                                                                                   available	  for	  participatory	  
     of	  community	                                                                                             community	  mobilization	  	  
                                     ID2:	  Livelihood	                                                                                                            PROTECTED	  
     partnership	  for	            benefits	  incentivises	                                                    IS	  11:	  Improved	  livelihoods	  of	      ECOSYSTEMS	  
     livelihoods	  and	            participation	  in	                   A4:	            DWLC’s	             buffer	  zone	  communities	                    WITH	  HIGH	  
     conservation	                  conservation	                          willingness,	                                                                           LEVELS	  OF	  
                                                                             technical	          and	                                                                SPECIES	  
                                                                             financial	   support	   to	                                                         RICHNESS	  A ND	  
                                     ID4:	  Better	                                                              IS12:	  Addendum	  prepared	  for	             ENEMICITY
                                                                             continue	   community	  
                                     relationships	                         activities                            the	  National	  Biodiversity	  
     Outcome	  4:	  Improved	     between	  DWLC	  and	                                                      Conservation	  Action	  Plan	  
     collaborative	                 communities	                              A5:	  Relevant	                  S13:	  Reviewed	  and	  enhanced	  
                                                                                Ministries	  and	                protected	  area	  system	  
     conservation	  plan	  
                                                                                Departments	  will	              IS14:	  Prepared	  endangered	  
                                                                                cooperate	  to	  put	  in	     species	  recovery	  plans	  
                                                                                place	  joint	  actions	  
                     TECHNICAL	  DOCUMENT	  E:	  

                  Review	  of	  Outcomes	  to	  Impact	  

                 Energy	  Services	  Delivery	  Project	  

                               (GEF	  ID	  104)	  

                                      and	  

Renewable	  Energy	  for	  Rural	  Economic	  Development	  Project	  

                              (GEF	  ID	  1545)	  




                                                                                129
Acronyms	  

A	            Assumptions	  
AU	           Administration	  Unit	  	  
CEB	          Ceylon	  Electricity	  Board	  	  
DSM	          Demand	  Side	  Management	  	  
ECS	          Electricity	  Consumer	  Societies	  	  
ESCO	         Energy	  Service	  Company	  
ESD	          Energy	  Services	  Delivery	  	  
FECS	         Federation	  of	  Electricity	  Consumers’	  Societies	  	  
FSP	          Full	  Sized	  Projects	  	  
GEB	          Global	  Environmental	  Benefit	  
GEF	          Global	  Environmental	  Facility	  
ID	           Impact	  Drivers	  
IS	           Intermediate	  States	  	  
MFI	          Micro	  Finance	  Institutions	  	  
MOE	          Ministry	  of	  Environment	  
NGO	          Non-­‐government	  Organization	  
PCI	          Participatory	  Credit	  Institution	  
PEU	          Pre-­‐Electrification	  Unit	  	  
RERED	        Renewable	  Energy	  for	  Rural	  Economic	  Development	  	  
ROtI	         Review	  of	  Outcome	  to	  Impact	  	  
SEEDS	        Sarvodaya	  Economic	  and	  Enterprise	  Development	  Services	  
SHSs	         Solar	  Home	  Systems	  
SLBDC	        Sri	  Lanka	  Business	  Development	  Center	  	  
SPPA	         Small	  Power	  Purchase	  Agreement	  	  
SME	          Small	  and	  Medium	  Enterprise	  
UNFCCC	       United	  Nations	  Framework	  Convention	  on	  Climate	  Change	  	  




                                                                                                 130
1. Introduction

As	   a	   part	   of	   the	   GEF	   Sri	   Lanka	   country	   portfolio	   evaluation	   (CPE),	   reviews	   of	   the	   “Energy	   Services	  
Delivery”	   (ESD)	   Project	   (GEF	   ID	   104)	   and	   the	   “Renewable	   Energy	   for	   Rural	   Economic	   Development”	  
(RERED)	   Project(GEF	   ID	   1545)were	   carried	   out	   using	   the	   Review	   of	   Outcome	   to	   Impact	   (ROtI)	  
methodology,	   which	   was	   developed	   by	   the	   GEF	   Evaluation	   Office.	   Since	   the	   RERED	   project	   was	   an	  
extension	  of	  the	  ESD	  project,	  these	  two	  projects	  were	  reviewed	  together.	  This	  was	  accommodated	  as	  it	  
was	  requested	  by	  the	  stakeholders	  who	  see	  these	  two	  projects	  as	  one	  project.	  

Both	  the	  ESD	  project	  and	  RERED	  project	  were	  Full	  Sized	  Projects	  (FSP)	  implemented	  under	  the	  Climate	  
Change	  GEF	  Focal	  Area.	  The	  ESD	  project	  was	  implemented	  between	  July	  1997	  and	  December	  2002and	  
the	   total	   budget	   of	   the	   project	   was	   $55.3	   million	   including	   $5.9	   million	   of	   GEF	   grant	   and	   $49.4	   of	   co-­‐
financing.	   The	   project	   expected	   to	   overcome	   barriers	   to	   renewable	   energy	   uptake	   and	   energy	   efficiency	  
market	   development	   while	   promoting	   and	   improving	   the	   provision	   of	   grid	   connected	   and	   off-­‐grid	  
renewable	   energy	   technologies/services	   by	   the	   private	   sector,	   non-­‐government	   organizations	   (NGOs)	  
and	   cooperatives.	   It	   also	   aimed	   at	   strengthening	   the	   environment	   for	   Demand	   Side	   Management	   (DSM)	  
implementation.	   The	   project	   was	   implemented	   by	   the	   World	   Bank	   and	   executed	   by	   the	   Ministry	   of	  
Finance	  and	  Ceylon	  Electricity	  Board	  (CEB)	  of	  the	  government	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.	  	  

The	   RERED	   project	   was	   implemented	   between	   July	   2002	   and	   December	   2011,	   that	   included	   a	   further	  
extension	   from	   2008	   –	   2011 .The	   total	   budget	   included	   $8	   million	   of	   GEF	   grant	   and	   $115.8	   million	   of	   co-­‐
financing	   from	   the	   World	   Bank	   ($75	   million	   for	   the	   main	   project	   component	   and	   $40	   million	   for	   the	  
extension).RERED	   concentrated	   on	   extending	   the	   ESD	   objectives	   of	   increasing	   off-­‐grid	   and	   on-­‐grid	  
renewable	   energy	   uptake.	   The	   additional	   objective	   included	   was	   to	   improve	   the	   quality	   of	   life	   of	   the	  
remote	   communities	   by	   providing	   electricity.	   The	   implementing	   mechanism	   remained	   the	   same	   as	   for	  
the	  ESD	  project.	  	  

Ultimately	   both	   projects	   expected	   to	   reduce	   the	   impact	   of	   greenhouse	   gasses	   by	   reducing	   carbon	  
emission.	  Following	  were	  the	  general	  expected	  outcomes	  of	  the	  two	  projects.	  
    • Promoted	   adoption	   of	   renewable	   energy	   by	   removing	   market	   barriers	   and	   reducing
       implementation	  costs.	  
    • Provided	  training	  and	  technical	  support	  in	  the	  area	  of	  renewable	  energy	  and	  energy	  efficiency
       for	  the	  different	  stakeholders	  and	  implementing	  entities	  in	  the	  public	  and	  private	  sector.	  
    • Piloted	  the	  feasibility	  of	  small-­‐scale	  (3	  MW)	  wind	  power	  generation	  project	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  from	  a
       technical	  and	  commercial	  standpoint.	  


2. The	  project’s	  global	  environmental	  benefits

As	   a	   part	   of	   its	   environmental	   strategy,	  Sri	   Lanka	   has	   ratified	   the	   United	   Nations	   Framework	   Convention	  
on	  Climate	  Change	  (UNFCCC).	  Sri	  Lanka	  recognizes	  the	  global	  significance	  of	  greenhouse	  gas	  emissions	  
due	   to	   fossil	   fuel	   based	   electricity	   generation.	   Electricity	   generation	   is	   the	   second	   highest	   source	   of	  
carbon	   dioxide	   gas	   emission	   (27%	   of	   total	   emissions)	   in	   Sri	   Lanka	   (MOE,	   2011).Increasing	   renewable	  
energy	   and	   energy	   efficiency	   are	   identified	   as	   mitigation	   strategies	   for	   greenhouse	   gas	   emissions.	   While	  
recognizing	  the	  need	  to	  increase	  the	  use	  of	  energy,	  there	  are	  also	  policy	  targets	  that	  include	  reducing	  
business-­‐as-­‐usual	  energy	  demand	  by	  2020	  by	  20%,	  having	  a	  40%	  share	  of	  renewables	  which	  include	  20%	  
from	   non-­‐conventional	   renewable	   energy	   sources	   by	   2020.	   Hence,	   this	   project	   contributed	   directly	   to	  
addressing	  the	  global	  benefits	  of	  increasing	  the	  use	  of	  renewable	  energy	  and	  reducing	  greenhouse	  gas	  
emissions.	  	  	  

                                                                                                                                                                        131
3. ESD	  &	  RERED	  Outcome	  to	  Impact	  Theory	  of	  Change

The	   theory	   of	   change	   of	   a	   project	   is	   the	   logical	   sequence	   of	   conditions	   and	   factors	   that	   are	   necessary	   to	  
deliver	   the	   ultimate	   project	   impact.	   The	   basic	   project	   theory	   of	   change	   starts	   with	   activities	   and	  
develops	   through	   delivery	   of	   outputs	   and	   achievement	   of	   expected	   outcomes	   at	   the	   end	   of	  
implementation,	   i.e.	   through	   a	   means-­‐ends	   hierarchy	   that	   ultimately	   puts	   in	   place	   the	   conditions	   to	  
reach	  impact	  sometime	  after	  project	  completion.	  The	  GEF	  project	  terminal	  evaluations	  assess	  the	  basic	  
theory	  of	  change	  as	  far	  as	  outcomes,	  but	  do	  not	  usually	  go	  far	  in	  assessing	  the	  crucial	  last	  step	  to	  impact.	  
The	   ROtI	   assessment	   focuses	   on	   this	   last	   step	   and	   develops	   and	   assesses	   a	   detailed	   theory	   of	   change	  
between	   outcomes	   and	   impacts,	   referred	   to	   as	   outcomes-­‐impacts	   pathways,	   measured	   at	   least	   two	  
years	  after	  project	  completion.	  Each	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathway	  represents	  a	  specific	  strategy.	  0	  below	  
illustrates	  the	  key	  elements	  and	  relationships	  of	  the	  detailed	  theory	  of	  change	  between	  outcomes	  and	  
impacts.	  

Figure1:	  Generic	  theory	  of	  change	  for	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways	  


                                                              ASSUMPTIONS	  




                                                                                     INTERMEDIATE	  
      Strategy	  
          	                                OUTCOMES	                                                                          IMPACTS/	  GEBs	  
                                                                                        STATES	  




                                                                   IMPACT	  
                                                                   DRIVERS	  




The	   key	   ingredients	   in	   the	   outcomes-­‐impacts	   pathways	   (or	   strategies)	   that	   are	   examined	   according	   to	  
the	  ROtI	  methodology	  are	  intermediate	  states,	  impact	  drivers	  and	  assumptions,	  which	  are	  defined	  in	  0	  
below.	  Impact	  in	  terms	  of	  global	  environmental	  benefits	  can	  be	  achieved	  either	  through	  environmental	  
threat/stress	  reduction	  or	  improvement	  in	  the	  environmental	  conservation	  status	  of	  the	  resource.	  If	  the	  
project	   outcomes	   are	   assessed	   to	   be	   successfully	   delivered	   and	   the	   key	   ingredients	   of	   the	   theory	   of	  
change	   between	   outcomes	   and	   impacts	   are	   in	   place,	   then	   it	   is	   reasonable	   to	   conclude	   that	   that	   the	  
barriers	  and	  threats	  to	  impact	  have	  been	  overcome,	  the	  environmental	  status	  has	  improved,	  and	  that	  
consequently	  impact	  has	  or	  will	  be	  achieved,	  with	  time.	  In	  the	  evaluation	  the	  focus	  is	  on	  performance	  
beyond	   the	   life	   of	   the	   project	   –	   therefore	   beyond	   outcomes	   to	   assess	   the	   progress	   made	   towards	  
achieving	  the	  intermediate	  states	  and	  the	  contribution	  towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  at	  the	  
time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                             132
Table	  1:	  Definitions	  of	  theory	  of	  change	  elements	  in	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways	  
TOC	  terms	                                                            Definition	  

Intermediate	                                                            These	   are	   the	   transitional	   conditions	   between	   the	   project’s	   outcomes	   and	   impacts	  
States	  (IS)	                                                          that	  must	  be	  achieved	  in	  order	  to	  deliver	  the	  intended	  impacts	  
Impact	  Drivers	                                                       These	   are	   the	   significant	   factors	   that,	   if	   present,	   are	   expected	   to	   contribute	   to	   the	  
(ID)	                                                                    ultimate	  realization	  of	  project	  impacts	  and	  that	  are	  within	  the	  ability	  of	  the	  project	  to	  
                                                                          influence	  
Assumptions	                                                             These	   are	   the	   significant	   factors	   that,	   if	   present,	   are	   expected	   to	   contribute	   to	   the	  
(A)	                                                                     ultimate	  realization	  of	  project	  impacts,	  but	  that	  are	  largely	  beyond	  the	  power	  of	  the	  
                                                                          project	  to	  influence	  or	  address	  

The	   development	   of	   the	   ESD	   and	   RERED	   outcomes-­‐impacts	   theory	   of	   change	   was	   based	   on	   document	  
review	  followed	  by	  validating	  it	  with	  the	  key	  informants	  and	  the	  beneficiaries	  of	  the	  solar	  home	  systems	  
and	  village	  micro-­‐hydro	  systems.	  

Table	  2:	  The	  ESD	  &	  RERED	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  theory	  of	  change	  
          Project	                                                                                                   Impact	  Drivers	  &	  
                                                                               Outcomes	                                                              Intermediate	  States	                       Impact	  
         Strategies	                                                                                                   Assumptions	  
                                                                Outcome	  1:	  	  
                                                                                                                  ID1:	  Allow	  for	  
Adoption	  and	  Promotion	  of	  Renewable	  Energy	  




                                                                Adoption	  of	  renewable	  
                                                                energy	  promoted,	  by	                       flexibility	  in	  project	  
                                                                removing	  market	  barriers	                  design	                           IS1:Electricity	  access	  
                                                                and	  reducing	                                                                    provided	  to	  
                                                                implementation	  costs.	                                                           households,	  rural	  SMEs	  
                                                                                                                  ID2:	  Private	  sector	        and	  public	  institutions	  
                     STRATEGY	  #1:	  




                                                                                                                  leadership	                       through	  off-­‐grid	  
                                                                                                                                                     systems	  
                                                                Outcome	  2:	  	  
                                                                Technical	  support	  for	                     ID3:Multi	  stakeholder	                                                MITIGATION	  OF	  
                                                                promoting	  renewable	                          implementation	                   IS2:Expanded	                         GREENHOUSE	  GAS	  
                                                                energy	  and	  energy	                         arrangement	                      renewable	  electricity	             EMISSIONS	  IN	  SRI	  
                                                                efficiency	  in	  public	  and	                                                  generating	  capacity	  and	        LANKA	  THROUGH	  
                                                                private	  sector	  established.	               A1:	  Enabling	  macro-­‐        production	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	     DISPLACEMENT	  OF	  
                                                                                                                  economic	                                                                FOSSIL	  FUEL	  USE	  
                                                                                                                  environment	  

                                                                Outcome	  3:	  	  
Piloting	  Wind	  Farm	  




                                                                Small-­‐scale	  wind	  power	  
   STRATEGY	  #2:	  




                                                                                                                  A2:	  Private	  sector	         IS3:	  Significant	  interest	  
                                                                generation	  projects	  piloted	  
                                                                                                                  initiatives	  and	  other	      in	  developing	  private	  
                                                                to	  establish	  feasibility	  in	  Sri	  
                                                                                                                  projects	  support	  and	       wind	  power	  projects	  
                                                                Lanka,	  from	  both	  technical	  
                                                                                                                  take	  up	  wind	  energy	     generated	  among	  
                                                                and	  commercial	  
                                                                                                                  projects	  	                     private	  developers.	  
                                                                standpoints.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                                                               133
4. Assessment	  of	  achievement	  of	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways

The	   assessment	   of	   achievement	   of	   the	   outcomes-­‐impact	   pathways	   was	   done	   through	   review	   of	  
documents,	  interviews	  with	  key	  persons,	  interviews	  with	  beneficiaries	  of	  solar	  home	  systems	  and	  focus	  
group	   discussions	   with	   village	   micro-­‐hydro	   beneficiary	   communities.	   The	   rating	   system	   used	   for	   the	  
assessment	  is	  given	  in	  Table	  3	  below	  as	  per	  the	  ROtI	  Handbook,	  and	  is	  applied	  at	  the	  different	  levels	  of	  
the	  Theory	  of	  Change;	  i.e.	  at	  the	  individual	  TOC	  element	  level	  (outcomes,	  impact	  drivers,	  assumptions	  
and	  intermediate	  states)	  and	  at	  the	  overall	  project	  level.	  

Table	  3:	  Field	  ROtI	  Rating	  System	  

                                                   Rating	            Description	  
                                                   0	                 Not	  achieved	  
                                                   1	                 Poorly	  achieved	  
                                                   2	                 Partially	  achieved	  
                                                   3	                 Well	  achieved	  

The	   reporting	   starts	   off	   by	   providing	   a	   justification	   for	   why	   the	   identified	   intermediate	   state	   for	   the	  
strategy	  is	  considered	  important	  in	  delivering	  the	  ultimate	  impact.	  The	  theory	  of	  change	  for	  the	  strategy	  
is	   then	   examined	   through	   its	   logical	   steps,	   firstly	   validating	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   the	   outcomes	   were	  
achieved	   at	   project	   closure,	   followed	   by	   an	   assessment	   of	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   the	   impact	   drivers	   and	  
assumptions	   were	   realized.	   The	   section	   concludes	   with	   an	   assessment	   of	   achievement	   of	   the	  
intermediate	  state	  itself.	  


4.1 Strategy	  #1:	  Adoption	  and	  Promotion	  of	  Renewable	  Energy	  

4.1.1 Theory	  of	  Change	  Overview	  

The	   adoption	   and	   promotion	   of	   renewable	   energy	   strategy	   focuses	   on	   delivering	   two	   intermediate	  
states,	   “Electricity	   access	   provided	   to	   households,	   rural	   SMEs	   and	   public	   institutions	   through	   off-­‐grid	  
systems”	   and	   “Expanded	   renewable	   electricity	   generating	   capacity	   and	   production	   in	   Sri	   Lanka”.The	   first	  
one	  was	  important	  to	  provide	  off-­‐grid	  electricity	  for	  rural	  households	  and	  the	  second	  for	  grid	  connected	  
renewable	  energy	  expansion.	  	  	  

At	   the	   onset	   it	   is	   important	   to	   provide	   some	   clarity	   on	   the	   types	   of	   renewable	   energy	   that	   will	   be	  
mentioned	  in	  this	  report.	  This	  project	  addressed	  several	  types	  of	  renewable	  energy	  sources:	   Mini-­‐hydro,	  
Micro-­‐hydro,	  and	  solar.	  The	  mini-­‐hydro	  is	  small	  scale	  hydro	  projects	  of	  a	  few	  100KWs	  to	  a	  maximum	  of	  
10MW.	  These	  systems	  were	  intended	  to	  be	  connected	  to	  the	  grid	  through	  the	  establishment	  of	  power	  
purchase	  agreements.	  The	  developers	  of	  these	  systems	  were	  private	  sector	  companies.	  The	  micro-­‐hydro	  
schemes	  are	  systems	  generate	  less	  than	  100	  KWs	  of	  power	  and	  were	  aimed	  at	  connecting	  villages	  with	  
no	  access	  to	  electricity.	  These	  units	  were	  developed	  and	  managed	  by	  electricity	  consumer	  societies	  set	  
up	  amongst	  the	  member	  of	  the	  participating	  households.	  These	  were	  not	  intended	  as	  off-­‐grid	  systems.	  
The	  solar	  systems	  were	  Solar	  Home	  systems	  (SHS)	  which	  were	  individual	  home	  units	  generally	  around	  
30-­‐50W	   that	   supplied	   the	   needs	   for	   lighting	   and	   other	   uses	   such	   as	   black	   and	   white	   TVs	   for	   households.	  
The	   schemes	   were	   set	   up	   and	   maintained	   by	   private	   companies	   registered	   with	   the	   project.	   These	   were	  
also	  intended	  as	  off-­‐grid	  projects	  and	  were	  specifically	  targeted	  to	  areas	  where	  the	  grid	  was	  not	  going	  to	  
be	  available	  for	  up	  to	  10	  years.	  

                                                                                                                                                                        134
Figure	  2:	  Theory	  of	  Change	  for	  Strategy	  #1	  



          Outcome	  1:	                                                                                                                              IS1:Electricity	  
    Adoption	  of	  renewable	                                                                                                                    access	  provided	  
     energy	  promoted,	  by	                                                                                                                      to	  households,	  
                                                                  A1:	  Enabling	                     ID1:	  flexibility	                         rural	  SMEs	  and	  
       removing	  market	  
                                                                  macro-­‐economic	                    in	  project	                                       public	  
     barriers	  and	  reducing	                                environment	                         design	                                        institutions	  
    implementation	  costs.
                                                                                                                                                     through	  off-­‐grid	  
                                                                                                                                                             systems	  
                                                                                                                                                                  	  


                                                                    ID2:	  Private	             ID3:	  Multi-­‐stakeholder	                        IS2:Expanded	  
     Outcome	  2:Technical	  
                                                                    sector	                         implementation	                                    renewable	  
    support	  for	  promoting	  
                                                                    leadership	                          arrangement	                                   electricity	  
    renewable	  energy	  and	  
      energy	  efficiency	  in	                                                                                                                       generating	  
       public	  and	  private	                                                                                                                       capacity	  and	  
       sector	  established	                                                                                                                         production	  in	  
                                                                                                                                                          Sri	  Lanka


The	  project	  outcomes	  that	  were	  identified	  as	  important	  for	  delivering	  these	  two	  intermediate	  states	  are	  
shown	  in	  Figure	  2	  above.	  



Outcomes	  

Outcome	   1:	   Adoption	   of	   renewable	   energy	   promoted,	   by	   removing	   market	   barriers	   and	  
reducing	  implementation	  costs.	  

  The	  ESD	  and	   RERED	   p rojects	  were	   intended	   to	   remove	  the	   following	   market	   barriers.	   (a)	  the	  reluctance	  
  of	   commercial	   banks	   to	   lend	   for	   grid-­‐connected	   renewable	   energy	   projects;	   (b)	   the	   ability	   to	   obtain	  
  lending	  (or	  lending	  with	  longer	  tenures)	  for	  these	  projects;	  (c)	  the	  lack	  of	  opportunities	  for	  un-­‐electrified	  
  households	   to	   access	   clean	   and	   affordable	   electricity	   services;	   (d)	   the	   investment	   risk	   of	   supporting	   a	  
  new/untested	   scheme;	   and	   (e)	   the	   reluctance	   of	   the	   CEB	   to	   purchase	   electricity	   from	   grid-­‐connected	  
  renewable	  energy	  plants.	  


Lack	   of	   access	   to	   long-­‐term	   financing	   was	   the	   key	   barrier	   for	   the	   private	   sector	   investors/commercial	  
banks	  to	  invest	  in	  the	  renewable	  energy	  sector.	  According	  to	  the	  implementation	  completion	  reports	  of	  
the	   two	   projects,	   as	   well	   as	   interviews	   with	   the	   project	   stakeholders,	   the	   projects	   brought	   in	   long	   term	  
financing	  through	  commercial	  banks	  that	  entailed	  a	  credit	  line	  for	  renewable	  energy	  along	  with	  a	  output	  
oriented	  co-­‐financing	  grant	  by	  the	  projects	  that	  covered	  some	  of	  the	  incremental	  costs	  (technical	  support,	  
information)	  that	  helped	  to	  encourage	  investment	  in	  renewable	  energy	  development.	  These	  grants	  were	  
disbursed	   once	   the	   pre-­‐defined	   results	   were	   achieved.	   With	   this	   set	   up	   the	   project	   demonstrated	   that	   the	  
risks	  are	  manageable	  and	  that	  lending	  would	  be	  profitable	  for	  the	  private	  sector.	  The	  private	  sector	  took	  
                                                                                                                                                                 135
the	   lead	   as	   renewable	   energy	   developers	   and	   built	   up	   all	   the	   projects	   using	   the	   lending	   provided	   by	  
commercial	   banks	   as	   Participating	   Credit	   Institutions	   (PCIs),	   with	   some	   risk	   absorption	   by	   the	   ESD	   and	  
RERED.	  Discussions	  with	  the	  DFCC	  stakeholders	  revealed	  that	  at	  the	  level	  of	  commercial	  banks	  long	  term	  
financing	   for	   renewable	   energies	   has	   not	   continued.	   	   Such	   a	   long	   term	   mechanism	   for	   grid	   connected	  
renewable	  energies	  was	  not	  planned	  for	  by	  the	  project.	  In	  terms	  of	  off-­‐grid	  energy	  by	  2011	  the	  reach	  of	  
the	   grid	   has	   expanded	   to	   cover	   more	   than	   90%	   of	   the	   households	   leaving	   some	   isolated	   pockets	  
amounting	   to	   1072	   villages	   (approximately	   40,0000	   households)	   identified	   by	   the	   CEB	   (as	   per	   Energy	  
Forum,	  2013),	  and	  also	  need	  some	  lending	  and	  possibly	  a	  grant	  mechanism	  as	  per	  the	  ESD/RERED	  model.	  

The	   project	   also	   addressed	   other	   gaps	   such	   as	   technical	                  Snap	  shot	  of	  projects	  supported	  by	  ESD	  and	  
competencies	  of	  developers	  and	  manufacturers	  that	  helped	                               RERED	  (as	  of	  June	  2012)	  	  	  
to	   improve	   the	   development	   of	   renewable	   energy	   service	  
suppliers	   within	   the	   country	   that	   can	   cater	   to	   the	   various	           On-­‐grid	  
needs.	  In	  terms	  of	  off-­‐grid	  facilities	  solar	  energy,	  the	  credit	             • 77	  mini-­‐hydro	  projects	  (total	  of	  181.6
facilities	  were	  made	  available	  mainly	  through	  Micro	  Finance	                         MW)	  have	  been	  commissioned	  and	  6	  mini-­‐
                                                                                                           hydro	  projects	  (total	  13.9	  MW)	  were	  under	  
Institutions	  (MFIs)	  who	  were	  more	  suited	  to	  access	  the	  rural	  
                                                                                                           construction	  	  
households.	  The	  implementation	  completion	  reports	  of	  the	  
                                                                                                           • 1	  private	  sector	  wind	  farm	  (10	  MW)	  was
two	   projects	   show	   that	   targets	   were	   exceeded	   in	   terms	   of	             commissioned	  and	  another	  10	  MW	  wind	  
SHSs.	   The	   ESD	   project	   provided	   20,953	   SHSs	   against	   the	                   farm	  is	  under	  construction	  
target	   of	   15,000,	   and	   the	   RERED	   project	   provided	   110,575	                 • 1	  bio-­‐mass	  project	  of	  1	  MW	  commissioned
SHSs	  against	  the	  target	  of	  85,000.	  	  
                                                                                                           Off-­‐grid	  
As	   stated	   in	   the	   ESD	   Project	   Completion	   Report,	   the	   •Solar	  Home	  Systems	  installed	  in	  131,528
assigned	  primary	  role	  for	  the	  Ceylon	  Electricity	  Board	  (CEB)	   households	  
was	   to	   create	   the	   enabling	   environment	   for	   facilitating	   •Village	  Hydro	  projects	  have	  supplied
private	   implementation	   of	   grid	   connected	   sub	   project	   electricity	  to	  7,913	  households	  
                                                                                                    •Biomass	  based	  projects	  have	  provided
through	   standard	   Small	   Power	   Purchase	   Agreement	  
                                                                                                    electricity	  to	  39	  households	  
(SPPA),agreed	   tariffs,	   and	   CEB	   grid-­‐interconnection	  
standards	   and	   certification	   procedures.	   The	   government	                                                    Source:	  DFCC,	  2012	  (online)	  
through	   the	   CEB,	   has	   established	   cost	   reflective	   feed-­‐in-­‐
tariffs	   for	   selling	   renewable	   electricity	   to	   the	   national	   grid.	  
This	   can	   be	   evidenced	   by	   the	   SPPA	   terms	   and	   conditions	   that	   are	   available	   with	   the	   CEB	   as	   well	   as	   Sri	  
Lanka	   sustainable	   energy	   authority.	   This	   SPPA	   is	   being	   used	   by	   the	   by	   mini	   hydro	   developers,	   while	   a	  
similar	  scheme	  was	  set	  up	  for	  wind	  and	  biomass	  post	  project.	  	  

Outcome	  2:	  Technical	  support	  for	  promoting	  renewable	  energy	  and	  energy	  efficiency	  in	  public	  
and	  private	  sector	  established.	  

  One	   of	   the	   main	   components	  of	   the	  ESD	   p roject	   was	   the	  Capacity	   Building	   Component,	   which	   expected	  
  to	  support	  commercial	  building	  sector	  energy	  efficiency	  initiatives,	  strengthen	  the	  capacity	  of	  the	  CEB	  to	  
  refine	   and	   implement	   a	   Demand	   Side	   Management	   (DSM)	   action	   plan,	   facilitate	   small	   private	   power	  
  investment	  and	  pre-­‐electrification,	  and	  provide	  institutional	  support	   and	   training,	  as	   well	  as	   equipment	  
  and	   materials,	   to	   the	   ESD	   Credit	   Line	   and	   participating	   banks.	   Also,	   the	   RERED	   project	   expected	   to	  
  strengthen	  energy	  service	  companies	  (ESCOs)	  and	  support	  to	  the	  electricity	  consumer	  societies.	  	  

Provision	   of	   training	   and	   technical	   support	   under	   the	   capacity	   building	   component	   of	   the	   ESD	   project	   was	  
carried	  out	  by	  consultants	  hired	  by	  the	  ESD	  project	  and	  delivered	  through	  the	  Demand	  Side	  Management	  
(DSM)	   branch	   and	   the	   Pre-­‐Electrification	   Unit	   (PEU)	   which	   were	   within	   the	   CEB	   institutional	   structure.	  
                                                                                                                                                                         136
Increasing	   awareness	   and	   building	   renewable	   energy	   project	   implementation	   capacity	   of	   CEB	   area	   offices,	  
private	  sector	  and	  NGOs	  was	  done	  by	  the	  pre-­‐electrification	  unit.	  The	  trainings	  provided	  through	  the	  ESD	  
project	   were	   different	   for	   each	   stakeholder:	   For	   the	   project	   developers,	   it	   was	   on	   the	   knowledge	   of	   a	  
technology	  and	  preparation	  of	  bankable	  project	  proposals;	  for	  financial	  institutions,	  it	  was	  on	  analysis	  of	  
risk;	  and	  for	  the	  electricity	  consumers,	  it	  was	  on	  the	  quality	  of	  the	  products	  offered.	  Twenty	  six	  training	  
programmes	   have	   been	   conducted	   for	   748	   officers	   from	   the	   CEB,	   provincial	   governments,	   the	   private	  
sector	  and	  NGOs	  (Energy	  Sector	  Unit,	  2003).	  

The	  capacity	  building	  component	  covered	  two	  aspects:	  

(i)         Implementation	  of	  load	  research	  programme	  and	  a	  DSM	  strategy	  

Under	  this,	  completion	  of	  first	  National	  load	  research	  programme	  and	  enhancing	  the	  quality	  of	  CEB	  DSM	  
were	  done.	  At	  the	  same	  time,	  development	  of	  energy	  audit	  skills	  and	  enhancement	  of	  DSM	  programme	  
monitoring	  and	  evaluation	  skills	  were	  carried	  out	  with	  respect	  to	  CEB	  DSM	  energy	  efficient	  programme.	  By	  
the	  time	  of	  project	  completion,	  2-­‐3	  new	  companies	  were	  also	  providing	  energy	  efficiency	  services.	  As	  the	  
DSM	  was	  discontinued	  within	  the	  CEB	  due	  to	  establishment	  of	  Sri	  Lanka	  Sustainable	  Energy	  Authority	  (in	  
2007)	  the	  built	  capacities	  are	  not	  utilized	  within	  the	  CEB	  as	  expected.	  	  

(ii)        Design	  and	  implementation	  of	  Code	  of	  Practice	  for	  Energy	  Efficient	  Commercial	  Building	  

With	  a	  consultation	  of	  stakeholders,	  development	  and	  implementation	  of	  energy	  efficient	  building	  codes	  
were	  carried	  out	  by	  the	  CEB.	  

The	   RERED	   project	   has	   supported	   the	   development	   of	   ESCOs	   through	   awareness	   creation	   and	   training,	  
where	   the	   support	   was	   provided	   for	   development	   of	   business	   plan	   and	   development	   of	   legal	   agreements.	  
The	   pilot	   grid-­‐connected	   wind	   farm	   intervention	   also	   built	   expertise	   within	   the	   CEB	   to	   implement	   wind	  
power	  projects.	  Apart	  from	  that,	  the	  ESD	  project	  has	  provided	  technical	  assistance	  to	  Sarvodaya	  Economic	  
and	  Enterprise	  Development	  Services	  (SEEDS),	  to	  increase	  the	  quality	  of	  their	  operations	  through	  better	  
business	  planning	  and	  the	  implementation	  of	  a	  portfolio	  management	  system.	  	  


Intermediate	  States	  


IS1:	  Electricity	  access	  provided	  to	  households,	  rural	  SMEs	  and	  public	  institutions	  through	  off-­‐grid	  
systems	  
At	  the	  time	  of	  the	  ESD	  project	  preparation	  (1996),	  about	  48%	  of	  the	  population	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  did	  not	  have	  
access	   to	   the	   grid.	   Lighting	   needs	   were	   met	   largely	   by	   kerosene	   lamps.	   Through	   the	   ESD	   and	   RERED	  
projects,	  it	  was	  expected	  to	  provide	  access	  to	  electricity	  for	  households,	  rural	  small/medium	  enterprises	  
and	   public	   institutions	   like	   schools,	   hospitals	   through	   solar	   home	   systems,	   micro	   hydro	   schemes,	   mini-­‐
hydro	  schemes	  and	  biomass.	  The	  main	  renewable	  sources	  utilized	  were	  solar	  and	  micro	  hydro.	  According	  
to	  the	  Implementation	  Completion	  Reports	  of	  ESD	  and	  RERED	  projects,	  the	  ESD	  project	  served,	  22,685	  off-­‐
grid	  customers	  (20,953	  solar	  and	  1,732	  hydro)	  while	  RERED	  provided	  116,795	  households	  (110,575	  solar	  
and	  6,220hydro)	  with	  electricity.	  	  

However,	  although	  the	  RERED	  programme	  envisioned	  that	  local	  level	  enterprises	  would	  also	  benefit	  from	  
these	  schemes,	  provision	  of	  electricity	  for	  small	  and	  medium	  enterprises	  was	  very	  limited,	  hence	  it	  did	  not	  
meet	  the	  livelihoods	  objectives	  as	  expected.	  The	  benefits	  have	  been	  well	  received	  in	  terms	  of	  education,	  
conveniences	  in	  households,	  and	  have	  improved	  the	  quality	  of	  life.	  
                                                                                                                                                              137
          “Available	   information	   indicates	   that	   only	   736	   enterprises	   [1000	   planned]benefited	   from	  
          receiving	   electricity	   from	   off-­‐grid	   sources	   but	   as	   nearly	   all	   of	   them	   employed	   only	   family	   labor	  
          who	   worked	   longer	  hours	  after	  receiving	  electricity,	  they	  did	  not	  generate	  opportunities	  for	  paid	  
          employment.	  Some	  enterprises	  reported	  higher	  profits	  due	  to	  improved	  productivity	  and	  longer	  
          working	  hours.”	  
                                                                     -­‐ Monitoring	  &	  Evaluation	  Report	  of	  the	  RERED	  project	  

Access	   to	   affordable	   financing	   was	   required	   for	   the	   individual	   households	   for	   SHS	   and	   village	   based	  
Electricity	   Consumer	   Societies	   (ECS)	   to	   get	   access	   to	   off-­‐grid	   electricity.	   The	   two	   projects	   addressed	   this	  
through	  a	  credit	  programme.	  The	  process	  also	  established	  the	  fact	  that	  larger	  commercial	  banks	  will	  not	  
be	  able	  to	  service	  the	  rural	  households	  and	  hence	  brought	  in	  micro	  finance	  institutions	  such	  as	  SEEDS	  to	  
link	  up	  with	  rural	  communities.	  They	  worked	  to	  strengthen	  the	  capacity	  and	  provided	  technical	  training	  for	  
both	   the	   micro-­‐hydro	   and	   solar	   developers.	   Technical	   expertise	   for	   manufacturing	   some	   of	   the	   hydro	  
components,	  installing	  the	  systems	  and	  maintaining	  the	  systems	  were	  covered	  in	  the	  training	  programme.	  	  

Towards	   the	   end	   of	   the	   project,	   with	   the	   expansion	   of	   grid	   (that	   now	   covers	   over	   90%	   of	   households)	  
there	   was	   a	   drop	   in	   the	   use	   of	   solar	   and	   micro	   hydro	   systems.	   In	   the	   case	   of	   micro	   hydro,	   the	   cost	   of	  
labour	   and	   of	   maintaining	   the	   systems	   (e.g.	   machinery	   breakdowns)	   and	   the	   limited	   power	   capacity	   per	  
household	  were	  some	  deterring	  facts	  that	  have	  reduced	  usage	  following	  the	  grid	  becoming	  available.	  

          “Now	  no	  one	  needs	  to	  dedicate	  their	  time	  to	  look	  after	  a	  powerhouse.	  	  If	  we	  face	  any	  problem	  
          with	   the	   grid	   connection	   it	   is	   solved	   by	   the	   electricity	   board.	   Earlier	   we	   had	   to	   clean	   the	  
          powerhouse	  twice	  a	  month".”	  

                                                                                                                                 -­‐    Village	  hydro	  society	  FGD	  

Problems	  with	  the	  solar	  systems	  were	  mentioned,	  such	  as	  maintaining	  batteries	  and	  the	  lack	  of	  technical	  
support	  available,	  which	  are	  preventing	  their	  use	  –	  even	  as	  a	  way	  to	   reduce	  energy	  consumption	  from	  the	  
grid.	  Before	  getting	  the	  grid	  connection,	  it	  was	  seen	  as	  a	  valuable	  resource.	  Some	  households	  are	  selling	  
the	   units	   second	   hand	   to	   households	   that	   are	   still	   not	   connected	   to	   the	   main	   grid.	   (Source:	   FGD,	  
Household	  interviews;	  energy	  forum,	  2013).	  

There	   was	   no	   mechanism	   in	   place	   in	   the	   project	   to	   address	   the	   issue	   of	   these	   systems	   once	   the	   grid	   is	  
extended.	  However,	  post-­‐project,	  a	  procedure	  has	  been	  put	  in	  place	  to	  allow	  power	  to	  be	  sold	  from	  the	  
micro	   hydro	   schemes	   to	   the	   grid	   through	   an	   interconnection35.	   This	   is	   being	   spearheaded	   by	   the	  
Federation	   of	   Electricity	   Consumers’	   Societies	   (FECS)36;	   a	   community	   umbrella	   organization	   set	   up	   and	  
strengthened	   under	   the	   RERED	   project.	   At	   the	   time	   of	   the	   review	   two	   of	   the	   micro	   hydro	   sites	   at	  
Athuraliya	  and	  Owala	  in	  Ratnapura	  District	  had	  been	  connected	  with	  the	  use	  of	  the	  SPPA	  (Energy	  Forum	  
(Guarantee)	   Limited,	   2013).	   This	   process	   is	   continuing	   after	   project	   completion	   due	   to	   the	   interest	   and	  
efforts	  of	  some	  of	  the	  stakeholders:	  




35
  The	  Power	  purchase	  agreements	  were	  being	  used	  by	  the	  commercial	  mini	  hydro	  plants	  but	  this	  was	  not	  being	  
used	  by	  the	  smaller	  community	  operated	  micro	  hydro	  units.	  	  
36
  The	  Federation	  of	  Electricity	  Consumers’	  Societies	  (FECS)	  is	  the	  umbrella	  organisation	  for	  the	  electricity	  consumer	  
societies	  set	  up	  to	  manage	  the	  micro	  hydro	  systems	  at	  village	  level.	  The	  federation	  brings	  together	  200	  of	  these	  
societies.	  
                                                                                                                                                                                 138
      “At	  present,	  as	  a	  pilot	  we	  have	  already	  connected	  2	  plants	  and	  one	  another	  one	  is	  getting	  ready	  to	  
      connect.	  At	  the	  moment	  it	  is	  successful.	  CEB	  will	  pay	  for	  the	  electricity	  provided	  by	  our	  plants.	  We	  
      expect	  to	  connect	  other	  plants	  also.”	  

                                                                          -­‐   Federation	  of	  Electricity	  Consumers’	  Societies	  (FECS)	  

IS2:	  Expanded	  renewable	  electricity	  generating	  capacity	  and	  production	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  
Through	  the	  ESD	  and	  RERED	  project	  activities,	  10	  NGOs	  were	  trained	  in	  areas	  of	  social	  mobilization	  and	  
village	   hydro	   development	   by	   the	   Intermediate	   Technology	   Development	   Group	   (currently	   named	   as	  
Practical	   Action)	   and	   Sri	   Lanka	   Business	   Development	   Center	   (SLBDC).	   Also,	   the	   projects	   have	   helped	   to	  
improve	   the	   capacity	   of	   renewable	   energy	   and	   energy	   efficiency	   consultants.	   The	   project	   looked	   to	  
generate	  grassroots	  feedback	  and	  under	  the	  guidance	  of	  the	  Energy	  Forum,	  the	  Federation	  of	  Electricity	  
Consumers’	   Societies	   (FECS)	   was	   formed	   as	   an	   umbrella	   organization	   with	   the	   representation	   of	   all	   the	  
village-­‐based	   electricity	   consumer	   societies.	   The	   FECS	   is	   considered	   a	   strong	   lobby	   group	   by	   the	   energy	  
stakeholders	  and	  they	  continue	  to	  work	  and	  lobby	  for	  renewable	  energy	  as	  a	  part	  of	  the	  energy	  mix.	  This	  
group	   is	   currently	   active	   in	   connecting	   the	   off-­‐grid	   micro-­‐hydro	   systems	   to	   the	   grid	   (explained	   above	   in	  
IS1).	  	  

As	  per	  the	  Implementation	  Completion	  Report	  of	  the	  ESD	  project,	  during	  the	  ESD	  project	  appraisal	  period,	  
there	  was	  only	  1	  mini-­‐hydro	  developer,	  1-­‐2	  village	  hydro	  developers	  and	  2-­‐3	  fledgling	  solar	  dealers	  in	  the	  
country.	   At	   the	   completion	   of	   the	   project,	   there	   were	   11	   mini-­‐hydro	   developers,	   12-­‐15	   village	   hydro	  
developers	   and	   4	   major	   solar	   companies	   showing	   a	   significant	   expansion	   of	   private	   renewable	   energy	  
developers	  and	  the	  RERED	  Project	  Implementation	  Completion	  Report	  says	  that	  this	  has	  further	  expanded	  
throughout	   the	   RERED	   project	   period.	   Beyond	   the	   life	   of	   the	   two	   projects,	   mini	   hydrodevelopers	   have	  
continued	  to	  invest	  in	  renewable	  energy	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  as	  well	  as	  in	  other	  countries	  in	  Asia	  and	  Africa.	  

The	   capacity	   building	   component	   carried	   out	   by	   the	   CEB	   DSM	   branch	   has	   helped	   to	   enhance	   the	  
institutional	  capacity	  of	  CEB	  to	  implement	  energy	  efficiency	  renewable	  projects	  but	  this	  capacity	  may	  not	  
be	  fully	  utilized	  due	  to	  the	  changes	  in	  place	  with	  the	  establishment	  of	  the	  Sri	  Lanka	  energy	  authority	  that	  
has	  now	  taken	  over	  these	  activities.	  The	  ESD	  project	  has	  generated	  private	  sector	  interest	  in	  the	  delivery	  
of	   energy	   efficiency	   services	   and	   established	   energy	   service	   companies-­‐	   14	   for	   Audit	   &	   Efficiency	   services;	  
6	  for	  Audits;	  and	  4	  for	  Efficiency	  (ESCOs).	  	  These	  companies	  are	  registered	  and	  listed	  under	  the	  SLSEA	  as	  
service	  providers	  (SLSEA	  website).	  	  


Impact	  Drivers	  

ID1:	  Allow	  for	  flexibility	  in	  project	  design	  
The	   ESD	   project	   design	   was	   flexible	   and	   has	   allowed	   different	   approaches	   and	   changes	   whenever	  
required.	   This	   flexibility	   has	   had	   an	   effect	   on	   project	   success.	   For	   example,	   to	   address	   the	   slower	  
development	   of	   the	   village	   hydro	   market,	   an	   open	   solicitation	   process	   was	   initiated	   where	   consultants	  
were	   used	   to	   address	   issues	   on	   policy,	   technology	   and	   sustainability.	   The	   flexibility	   of	   the	   implementing	  
organizations	  to	  handle	  and	  address	  issues	  as	  they	  arose	  is	  seen	  as	  a	  lesson	  learnt	  in	  the	  RERED	  project	  
completion	  report.	  	  

ID2:	  Private	  sector	  leadership	  promoted	  
Early	  ownership	  of	  the	  two	  projects	  was	  taken	  by	  the	  private	  sector	  from	  the	  project	  preparation	  time	  and	  
they	  performed	  as	  key	  stakeholders	  in	  the	  project	  implementation.	  The	  ESD	  and	  RERED	  projects	  created	  
an	   enabling	   environment	   for	   private	   sector	   participation	   with	   the	   specific	   view	   of	   getting	   their	   support	   for	  
                                                                                                                                                                 139
creating	  a	  market	  for	  renewable	  energy	  services.	  They	  provided	  42%	  of	  the	  project	  funding	  for	  ESD	  and	  
37%	   for	   RERED	   as	   PCIs	   and	   entrepreneurs	   of	   the	   funds.	   Hence	   their	   contribution	   was	   expected	   through	  
investment	  as	  well	  as	  through	  the	  development	  of	  renewable	  energy	  services.	  Both	  of	  which	  took	  place	  
with	   some	   additional	   risks	   of	   investment	   also	   being	   borne	   by	   the	   renewable	   energy	   developers	   (RERED	  
PCR,	  2012).	  Interviews	  with	  the	  stakeholders	  say	  that	  having	  a	  private	  sector	  banking	  institution	  (the	  DFCC	  
Bank)	  as	  the	  Project	  Administration	  Unit	  (AU)	  brought	  in	  banking	  expertise	  and	  the	  ability	  to	  get	  support	  
of	  other	  private	  sector	  companies,	  especially	  financial	  institutions.	  	  

The	   AU	   is	   also	   seen	   to	   have	   played	   a	   proactive	   role	   in	   facilitating	   and	   mediating	   amongst	   various	  
stakeholders	  such	  as	  beneficiary	  households,	  renewable	  energy	  developers,	  various	  government	  entities	  
including	   CEB,	   as	   well	   as	   the	   World	   Bank,	   etc.	   and	   maintaining	   a	   good	   consultation	   process	   with	   all	   of	  
them	   throughout	   the	   project	   period.	   The	   same	   unit	   also	   continued	   throughout	   ESD	   and	   RERED	   projects	  
allowing	  it	  to	  build	  on	  its	  experience	  and	  improve	  the	  efficiency	  of	  the	  project.	  This	  was	  an	  arrangement	  
with	   which	   other	   stakeholders	   were	   also	   comfortable	   with	   and	   is	   rated	   highly	   satisfactory	   and	   has	  
contributed	   to	   the	   success	   of	   these	   two	   projects,	   with	   the	   caveat	   being	   that	   sustainability	   of	   long	   term	  
funding	  was	  not	  properly	  addressed	  as	  an	  exit	  strategy	  (RERED	  PCR	  2012;	  discussions	  with	  stakeholders).	  	  	  

ID3:	  Multi	  stakeholder	  implementation	  arrangement	  
The	   public-­‐private-­‐civil	   society	   partnership	   and	   the	   collaborative	   approach	   used	   throughout	   the	   project	  
was	  a	  key	  factor	  behind	  the	  project	  success.	  There	  were	  specific	  roles	  that	  were	  carried	  out	  based	  on	  the	  
stakeholder	   expertise.	   Financial	   issues	   were	   handled	   by	   the	   Participatory	   Credit	   Institutions	   (PCIs)	   and	   the	  
Micro	   Finance	   Institutions	   (MFIs).	   While	   the	   MFIs	   were	   also	   central	   in	   reaching	   the	   communities,	  
Government	   agencies	   such	   as	   the	   CEB	   were	   involved	   as	   executing	   agencies	   with	   a	   key	   responsibility	   for	  
implementing	  components	  of	  the	  project,	  while	  the	  Ministry	  of	  Planning	  and	  Provincial	  Councils	  provided	  
backing	   for	   smooth	   implementation	   for	   approvals	   and	   necessary	   government	   support.	   	   The	   energy	  
developers	   provided	   the	   technical	   support	   to	   develop	   the	   products	   and	   also	   manage	   the	   maintenance.	  
The	   village	   consumer	   societies	   were	   also	   part	   of	   this	   collaboration,	   where	   they	   were	   involved	   in	   the	  
project	  planning	  and	  monitoring	  and	  could	  provide	  direct	  feedback,	  while	  civil	  society	  organizations	  were	  
involved	  for	  capacity	  building	  and	  mobilization	  purposes.	  The	  ability	  to	  gain	  the	  collaboration	  of	  a	  range	  of	  
stakeholders	  was	  a	  noteworthy	  driver	  of	  this	  project.	  	  



Assumptions	  

A1:	  Enabling	  macro-­‐economic	  environment	  
A	   favorable	   macro-­‐economic	   environment	   is	   crucial	   factor	   for	   the	   smooth	   functioning	   of	   re-­‐financing	   of	  
loans	   for	   renewable	   energy	   projects.	   The	   government	   supported	   the	   creation	   of	   a	   market	   enabling	  
environment	   which	   was	   required	   for	   achieving	   private	   sector	   engagement	   in	   developing	   the	   renewable	  
energy	  sector.	  	  That	  was	  very	  important	  for	  the	  success	  of	  both	  ESD	  and	  RERED	  projects.	  As	  stated	  in	  the	  
Implementation	  Completion	  Report	  of	  the	  RERED	  Project,	  at	  the	  time	  RERED	  was	  implemented,	  interest	  
rates	   were	   reasonable;	   the	   exchange	   rate	   has	   fluctuated	   somewhat	   modestly	   while	   the	   absence	   of	  
restrictions	   on	   lending	   for	   renewable	   energy	   investments	   was	   supportive.	   Developers	   were	   willing	   to	  
develop	   and	   implement	   renewable	   energy	   projects,	   through	   the	   tariffs	   and	   SPPA	   offered	   by	   the	   CEB.	  
Additionally	  the	  promotion	  of	  the	  renewables	  was	  timely	  due	  to	  the	  need	  to	  reduce	  the	  cost	  of	  exporting	  
fossil	  fuels	  and	  the	  objectives	  of	  the	  government	  to	  increase	  electricity	  coverage.	  Through	  the	  later	  part	  of	  
the	  project	  the	  energy	  policy	  included	  non-­‐conventional	  renewables	  into	  the	  energy	  mix	  and	  showed	  the	  
government’s	  commitment	  to	  renewables.	  Consequently,	  the	  Sri	  Lanka	  Sustainable	  Energy	  Authority	  was	  
also	   set	   up	   to	   further	   build	   attention	   to	   renewables,	   which	   includes	   assisting	   and	   liaising	   with	   private	  
sector	  renewable	  energy	  development.	  

                                                                                                                                                                   140
Table	  4:	  Outcomes-­‐impacts	  assessment	  findings	  for	  Strategy	  #1:	  Adoption	  and	  Promotion	  of	  
Renewable	  Energy	  
 Theory	  of	  Change	                                                                                                                                                Rati
                                                                               Qualitative	  Assessment	  
   Component	                                                                                                                                                            ng	  
                                 u   Almost	  all	  the	  market	  barriers	  which	  were	  targeted	  by	  this	  project	  were	  removed	  
                                      and	  the	  targets	  set	  were	  achieved	  in	  terms	  of	  coverage	  (as	  of	  June	  2012):	  
                                             o 77	  Grid	  connected	  mini	  hydro	  systems	  connected	  with	  13.9	  MW
                                                     capacity	  
                                             o Off-­‐grid	  community	  based	  micro	  hydro	  systems	  connecting	  7,913	  non
Outcome	  1:	  	  
                                                     electrified	  households.	  
Adoption	  of	  
                                             o 131,528households	  with	  solar	  home	  systems
renewable	  energy	  
                                 u   Once	  the	  households	  are	  connected	  to	  the	  main	  grid,	  there	  is	  a	  noticeable	  
promoted,	  by	  
                                      reduction	  in	  the	  use	  of	  solar	  and	  off-­‐grid	  micro	  hydro	  systems.	  This	  was	  
removing	  market	  
                                      envisioned	  by	  the	  project	  as	  the	  home	  systems	  were	  expected	  to	  be	  a	  pre-­‐grid-­‐            2	  
barriers	  and	  
                                      electrification	  solution.	  However	  it	  was	  also	  felt	  that	  the	  exit	  strategy	  could	  have	  
reducing	  
                                      planned	  for	  the	  continued	  use	  of	  these	  systems.	  Post	  project	  stakeholders	  have	  
implementation	  
                                      managed	  to	  get	  agreement	  to	  connect	  the	  micro	  hydro	  systems	  (less	  than	  
costs.	  
                                      100kw)	  to	  the	  grid,	  so	  that	  the	  energy	  can	  be	  sold	  to	  the	  CEB	  using	  the	  same	  
                                      process	  that	  was	  put	  in	  place	  by	  this	  project	  for	  the	  mini	  hydro	  (>100KW	  and<	  
                                      10MW).	  	  Already	  two	  micro	  hydro	  schemes	  are	  selling	  to	  the	  grid.	  	  
                                 u   Post	  project,	  there	  is	  no	  continuation	  of	  the	  long	  term	  financing	  scheme	  for	  
                                      renewable,	  especially	  for	  off-­‐	  grid	  projects.	  	  
                                 u   26	  training	  programmes	  have	  been	  conducted	  for	  748	  officers	  from	  CEB,	  
                                      provincial	  government,	  private	  sector	  and	  NGOs	  under	  the	  ESD	  project	  and	  this	  
                                      expertise	  is	  available	  inside	  the	  country	  renewable	  energy	  promotion.	  
Outcome	  2:	  	              u   Training	  and	  networking	  for	  leaders	  of	  the	  electricity	  consumer	  societies	  
Technical	  support	                (beneficiaries)	  for	  sustainability	  of	  off-­‐grid	  schemes	  was	  carried	  out.	  These	  
for	  promoting	                    groups	  are	  still	  active	  and	  lobby	  for	  changes	  (i.e	  mini	  hydro	  connections	  to	  the	  
renewable	  energy	                 grid)	  
and	  energy	                  u   Number	  of	  ESCOs	  has	  increased	  and	  continued	  to	  engage	  in	  renewable	  energy	                        3	  
efficiency	  in	  public	          service	  provision	  even	  after	  completion	  of	  the	  projects	  and	  are	  registered	  as	  
and	  private	  sector	            service	  suppliers	  with	  the	  Sri	  Lanka	  Sustainable	  Energy	  Authority	  –	  there	  are	  14	  
established.	                        for	  Audit	  &	  Efficiency	  services;	  	  6	  for	  Audits;	  and	  4	  for	  Efficiency.	  
                                 u   Some	  of	  the	  trained	  personnel	  have	  worked	  in	  Africa	  and	  other	  countries	  of	  Asia.	  
                                 u   Many	  of	  the	  components	  of	  the	  hydro	  plants	  are	  produced	  in	  country	  by	  trained	  
                                      persons	  
                                 u   The	  government	  support	  to	  create	  a	  market	  enabling	  environment	  through	  the	  
                                      Feed-­‐in-­‐tariff	  and	  establishing	  the	  Sri	  Lanka	  Sustainable	  Energy	  Authority	  to	  
                                      facilitate	  the	  process	  for	  getting	  private	  sector	  engagement.	  
A1:	  Enabling	  
                                      Reasonable	  interest	  rates,	  modestly	  fluctuating	  exchange	  rates	  and	  absence	  of	  
                                                                                                                                                                          3	  
                                 u
macro-­‐economic	  
                                      restrictions	  on	  lending	  for	  renewable	  energy	  investments	  were	  beneficial	  to	  the	  
environment	  
                                      project	  implementation.	  
                                 u   Further	  government	  support	  to	  promote	  renewables	  as	  a	  part	  of	  the	  energy	  mix,	  
                                      as	  a	  way	  of	  reducing	  expenses	  on	  oil	  gave	  priority	  to	  this	  project.	  	  
ID1:	  Allow	  for	  
                                      The	  ESD	  project	  design	  was	  flexible	  and	  has	  allowed	  different	  approaches	  and	  
                                                                                                                                                                          3	  
                                 u
flexibility	  in	  
                                      changes	  whenever	  required.	  	  
project	  design	  
                                 u   Early	  ownership	  of	  the	  two	  projects	  was	  taken	  by	  the	  private	  sector	  from	  the	  
                                      project	  preparation	  time	  and	  they	  performed	  as	  key	  stakeholders	  in	  the	  project	  
ID2:	  Private	  sector	  
leadership	  
                                      implementation	  also.	                                                                                                           3	  
                                 u   Administrative	  unit	  was	  recognized	  for	  its	  financial	  expertise	  and	  was	  able	  to	  
                                      bring	  in	  private	  sector	  especially	  for	  financing	  

                                                                                                                                                                         141
Theory	  of	  Change	                                                                                                                                              Rati
                                                                             Qualitative	  Assessment	  
  Component	                                                                                                                                                          ng	  
                               u   Private	  sector	  provided	  investment	  and	  implementation	  of	  renewable	  energy	  
                                    projects	  
                               u   There	  was	  an	  effective	  public-­‐private-­‐civil	  society	  partnership	  during	  the	  project	  
                                    implementation.	  	  
                               u   Many	  of	  the	  professionals	  who	  were	  in	  the	  ESD	  AU	  were	  involved	  in	  the	  RERED	  
ID3:Multi	                         AU	  also.	  This	  helped	  to	  transfer	  the	  experiences	  gained	  from	  the	  ESD	  project	  to	  
stakeholder	                       the	  RERED	  project	  implementation.	  	  
implementation	               u   The	  AU	  has	  facilitated	  different	  stakeholders	  such	  as	  beneficiary	  households,	                         3	  
arrangement	                       renewable	  energy	  developers,	  various	  government	  entities	  including	  CEB,	  and	  
                                    the	  World	  Bank,	  etc.	  They	  maintained	  a	  good	  consultation	  process	  with	  all	  of	  
                                    them	  throughout	  the	  project	  period	  that	  enabled	  cooperation	  and	  delivery	  of	  
                                    outputs.	  
                               u   Both	  projects	  were	  able	  to	  exceed	  the	  number	  of	  rural	  households	  targeted	  (ESD	  
                                    targeted	  17,000	  and	  reached	  22,685	  hhs	  while	  RERED	  targeted	  113,500	  and	  
                                    covered	  116,795)	  with	  off-­‐grid	  electricity.	  	  
                               u   However	  use	  of	  these	  systems	  once	  grid	  connection	  was	  received	  was	  not	  clearly	  
                                    envisioned	  in	  the	  project	  and	  is	  seen	  as	  weakness	  in	  the	  exit	  strategy.	  However	  
                                    as	  stated	  in	  the	  qualitative	  assessment	  of	  the	  achievements	  under	  outcome	  1	  
IS1:Electricity	                   above	  post	  project	  measures	  are	  being	  taken	  to	  address	  this	  at	  least	  in	  terms	  of	  
access	  provided	  to	          micro	  hydro	  through	  the	  group	  (FECS)	  set	  up	  under	  this	  project.	  Solar	  systems	  
households,	  rural	              are	  not	  being	  used	  (once	  the	  grid	  is	  available)	  due	  to	  problems	  with	  maintaining	  
SMEs	  and	  public	             batteries	  and	  lack	  of	  after	  sales	  technical	  support	  from	  the	  solar	  companies.	                   2	  
institutions	                      There	  are	  1,072	  households	  identified	  by	  the	  CEB	  as	  still	  needing	  off	  grid	  energy	  
through	  off-­‐grid	             (most	  likely	  solar	  energy)	  in	  the	  future	  but	  at	  present	  no	  long	  term	  financing	  is	  
systems	                           available	  for	  them.	  
                               u   While	  providing	  electricity	  for	  improved	  living	  conditions	  was	  the	  primary	  
                                    objective	  the	  RERED	  project	  also	  tried	  to	  stimulate	  economic	  opportunities	  by	  
                                    providing	  electricity	  for	  SMEs	  as	  a	  secondary	  objective.	  This	  target	  was	  not	  
                                    achieved.	  Some	  increased	  work	  hours	  was	  possible	  to	  already-­‐established	  SMEs	  
                                    but	  it	  did	  not	  create	  new	  jobs	  and	  benefits	  as	  expected.	  The	  electricity	  was	  used	  
                                    mainly	  for	  improved	  wellbeing,	  education	  purposes.	  
IS2:Expanded	  
renewable	                    u   Renewable	  energy	  developers	  and	  financial	  institutions	  were	  strengthened	  and	  
electricity	                       expanded	  the	  number	  of	  developers	  through	  the	  two	  projects	  and	  this	  capacity	  
generating	                        has	  been	  used	  in	  Sri	  Lanka	  as	  well	  as	  other	  countries.	  Trained	  staffs	  on	  energy	        3	  
capacity	  and	                   efficiency/energy	  audits	  are	  still	  available	  (ESCOs)	  and	  continue	  to	  provide	  these	  
production	  in	  Sri	           services.	  	  
Lanka	  
NOTE:	   The	   ratings	   are	   given	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   achieving	   the	   intermediate	   states	   and	   the	   contribution	  
towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  	  




                                                                                                                                                                      142
4.2 Strategy:	  Piloting	  Wind	  Farm	  

4.2.1 Theory	  of	  Change	  Overview	  

The	  piloting	  wind	  farm	  strategy	  focuses	  on	  delivering	  the	  third	  intermediate	  state	  “Significant	  interest	  in	  
developing	   private	   wind	   power	   projects	   generated	   among	   private	   developers.”.	   In	   this	   strategy,	   it	   was	  
intended	   to	   pilot	   the	   technical	   and	   commercial	   feasibility	   of	   small-­‐scale	   wind	   power	   generation	   projects	  
in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  

Figure	  3:	  Theory	  of	  Change	  for	  Strategy	  #2	  


                                                                 A2:Private	  sector	  initiatives	  
                                                                 and	  other	  projects	  support	  
                                                                        and	  take	  up	  wind	  
                                                                         energyprojects	  
             Outcome	  3:	  
     Small-­‐scale	  wind	  power	                                                                                               IS3:Significant	  interest	  
       generation	  projects	                                                                                                      in	  developing	  private	  
        piloted	  to	  establish	                                                                                                  wind	  power	  projects	  
      feasibility	  in	  Sri	  Lanka,	                                                                                             generated	  among	  
    from	  both	  technical	  and	                                                                                                private	  developers.	  
    commercial	  standpoints.	  



Outcome	  

Outcome	  3:	  Small-­‐scale	  wind	  power	  generation	  projects	  piloted	  to	  establish	  feasibility	  in	  Sri	  
Lanka,	  from	  both	  technical	  and	  commercial	  standpoints.	  
  One	  of	  the	  objectives	  of	  the	  project	  was	  to	  pilot	  a	  grid-­‐connected	  wind	  farm	  project	  to	  demonstrate	  
  the	  technical	  potential	  and	  the	  long-­‐run	  economic	  potential	  for	  wind	  p ower	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  	  

Initially	   there	   was	   resistance	   to	   wind	   energy	   from	   within	   the	   CEB	   but	   a	   3MW	   grid	   connected	  pilot	   wind	  
farm	   project	   was	   implemented	   and	   operated	   by	   the	   CEB.	   The	   sighting	   of	   the	   wind	   farm	   isseen	   as	   the	  
negative	   factor	   in	   terms	   of	   the	   amount	   of	   wind	   power	   it	   can	   generate.	   However	   the	   project	   is	   operational	  
and	   has	   created	   awareness	   on	   the	   potential	   for	   wind	   power.	   Some	   stakeholders	   do	   not	   consider	   this	   pilot	  
as	  a	  driver	  for	  demonstrating	  the	  commercial	  viability	  of	  the	  wind	  as	  based	  on	  its	  performance	  the	  viability	  
could	   not	   be	   established	   and	   funding	   could	   not	   be	   sourced	   on	   this	   case	   alone.	   The	   benchmark	   for	   a	  
suitable	  pricing	  was	  not	  possible	  through	  this	  project.	  However	  the	  CEB	  developed	  experience	  with	  wind	  
power	  through	  this	  project.	  

         “Sri	   Lanka’s	   only	   utility-­‐scale	   wind	   power	   project,	   a	   3-­‐MW	   pilot	   project,	   is	   located	   near	  
         Hambantota	   although	   several	   kilometers	   inland	   from	   the	   southeast	   coast.	   The	   site	   chosen	   is	  
         different	   from	   the	   sites	   analyzed	   in	   CEB	   feasibility	   study	   in	   order	   to	   distance	   the	   project	   from	  
         national	   park	   and	   reserve	   land.	   The	   current	   site	   has	   a	   lower	   wind	   resource	   than	   the	   sites	  
         recommended	   in	   CEB	   study	   and	   lower	   than	   coastal	   sites.	   In	   2000,	   the	   capacity	   factor	   for	   the	  
         pilot	  wind	  project	  was	  12.8%,	  which	  reflects	  the	  relatively	  low	  wind	  resource	  at	  the	  project	  site”.	  	  
                                                                                                  Source:	  M.	  Young	  and	  R.	  Vilhauer,	  2003	  


                                                                                                                                                                     143
Intermediate	  State	  

IS3:	   Significant	   interest	   in	   developing	   private	   wind	   power	   projects	   generated	   among	   private	  
developers.	  
The	  ESD	  project	  completion	  report	  states	  that	  as	  it	  was	  the	  first	  one	  to	  be	  installed	  in	  Sri	  Lanka,	  the	  pilot	  
wind	  farm	  did	  create	  private	  sector	  interest	  to	  develop	  private	  wind	  power	  projects.	  The	  CEB	  also	  invited	  
expressions	  of	  interest	  for	  wind	  power	  development	  in	  2002	  and	  some	  projects	  were	  submitted	  but	  a	  final	  
selection	   was	   not	   done	   at	   the	   time.	   However	   there	   was	   interest	   amongst	   private	   developers	   and	   7-­‐8	  
private	  companies	  had	  presented	  unsolicited	  proposals	  to	  the	  CEB.	  However	  it	  was	  not	  until	  2010	  that	  the	  
first	  private	  wind	  power	  plants	  were	  commissioned	  with	  REREDsupport.	  This	  took	  place	  after	  the	  Energy	  
Policy	  in	  2006	  mandated	  that	  10%	  of	  energy	  must	  be	  from	  non-­‐conventional	  renewable	  sources	  and	  due	  
to	   the	   technology	   based	   tariff	   that	   was	   established	   for	   wind	   in	   2008.	   Earlier	   it	   was	   the	   same	   tariff	   and	  
conditions	   given	   for	   mini	   hydro	   that	   were	   available.	   These	   changes	   have	   enabled	   better	   conditions	   for	  
private	  sector	  wind	  projects.	  Since	  this	  project	  several	  privately	  owned	  and	  operated	  wind	  farms	  are	  now	  
in	   operation	   and	   the	   Sri	   Lanka	   Sustainable	   Energy	   Authority	   website	   lists	   11	   licenses	   issues	   to	   private	  
sector.	  	  


Assumption	  

A2:	  Private	  sector	  initiatives	  and	  other	  projects	  support	  and	  take	  up	  wind	  energy	  projects	  
The	   ESD	   and	   RERED	   projects	   largely	   concentrated	   on	   solar	   and	   hydro	   projects	   and	   the	   attention	   to	   wind	  
power	  was	  mainly	  through	  the	  pilot	  wind	  farm	  and	  the	  credit	  line	  for	  wind.	  However	  alongside	  thisother	  
projects	  and	  support	  was	  available	  to	  promote	  wind	  power	  in	  Sri	  Lanka.	  	  The	  GEF	  supported	  project	  (GEF	  
ID	  425	  –	  Renewable	  Energy	  and	  Capacity	  Building)	  and	  USAID’s	  South	  Asia	  Regional	  Initiative	  for	  Energy	  
(SARI/Energy)	  provided	  training	  and	  exposure	  visits	  for	  private	  and	  state	  sector	  professionals.	  One	  of	  the	  
key	   inputs	   isseen	   to	   be	   the	   wind	   resources	   and	   assessment	   maps	   and	   technical	   support	   provided	   by	   the	  
National	   Renewable	   Energy	   Laboratory	   (NREL)	   through	   a	   USAID	   grant.	   	   There	   were	   also	   private	   sector	  
groups	   who	   through	   their	   own	   efforts	   were	   interested	   in	   installing	   wind	   power	   and	   did	   their	   own	  
assessments	   and	   studies.	   	   The	   tariff	   structure	   for	   wind	   also	   contributed	   to	   encouraging	   private	   sector	  
involvement.	  




                                                                                                                                                                        144
Table	  5:	  Outcomes-­‐impacts	  assessment	  findings	  for	  Strategy	  #2:Piloting	  Wind	  Farm	  
        Theory	  of	  Change	                                                         Qualitative	  Assessment	  
                                                                                                                                                                               Rating	  
          Component	  
Outcome	  3:Small-­‐scale	                     u     A	   3	   MW	   wind	   farm	   was	   established	   and	   is	   functioning	   but	   due	   to	  
wind	  power	  generation	                           being	  placed	  in	  an	  area	  with	  low	  wind	  it	  was	  not	  able	  promote	  the	  
projects	  piloted	  to	  establish	                viability	  of	  investing	  in	  wind	  power.	  	  
feasibility	  in	  Sri	  Lanka,	  from	     u     However	   some	   awareness	   for	   wind	   power	   was	   raised	   amongst	   the	                        2	  
both	  technical	  and	                              CEB	  and	  private	  developers	  on	  wind	  power	  
commercial	  standpoints.	  	                 u     The	   experience	   has	   helped	   CEB	   to	   build	   in	   house	   capacity	   to	  
                                                        implement	  wind	  farm	  projects.	  
IS3:Significant	   interest	   in	            u     While	   the	   CEB	   did	   call	   for	   expression	   of	   interest	   for	   private	   wind	  
developing	   private	   wind	                       power	   in	   2002,	   and	   subsequently	   also	   received	   7	   –	   8	   unsolicited	  
power	   projects	   generated	                      wind	  power	  proposals	  from	  the	  private	  sector	  these	  did	  not	  result	  in	  
among	  private	  developers.	                       any	   projects.	   It	   was	   not	   until2010	   that	   a	   private	   sector	   company	   put	  
                                                        forth	  a	  project	  after	  positive	  tariff	  structure	  was	  put	  in	  place	  in	  2008	            3	  
                                                        (unrelated	  to	  this	  project).	  
                                                 u     Now	   Sri	   Lanka	   Sustainable	   Energy	   Authority	   website	   lists	   11	   licenses	  
                                                        issues	   to	   private	   sector.	   	   The	   CEB	   extends	   the	   support	   to	   connect	  
                                                        and	  buy	  the	  electricity.	  These	  were	  achieved	  beyond	  the	  project.	  
A2:	         Private	      sector	            u     The	  promotion	  of	  wind	  power	  was	  due	  to	  support	  and	  further	  work	  
initiatives	      and	      other	                   done	   by	   other	   projects	   that	   addressed	   capacity	   building,	   exposure	  
projects	   support	   and	   take	                 visits,	  wind	  assessment	  maps	  and	  development	  of	  technical	  aspects	                               2	  
up	  wind	  energy	  projects	                      of	  wind	  generation.	  	  
NOTE:	   The	   ratings	   are	   given	   on	   the	   basis	   of	   achieving	   the	   intermediate	   states	   and	   the	   contribution	  
towards	  achieving	  final	  or	  lasting	  impact	  at	  the	  time	  of	  the	  evaluation.	  	  

5. Overall	  Conclusions

Overall,	   the	   project	   has	   succeeded	   in	   moving	   towards	   the	   desired	   impact	   of	   increasing	   the	   use	   of	  
renewable	  energy	  that	  has	  contributed	  to	  reduction	  in	  CO2	  emissions	  in	  the	  electricity	  sector.	  This	  ROtI	  
assessment	   is	   based	   purely	   on	   the	   validation	   and	   assessment	   of	   the	   delivery	   of	   the	   theory	   of	   change	  
modeled	  above,	  which	  has	  been	  developed	  through	  consultation	  with	  the	  project	  stakeholders	  including	  
communities.	  

A	  final	  consolidated	  rating	  of	  the	  project’s	  progress	  towards	  impact	  is	  given	  in	  Table	  6	  below	  (using	  the	  
scoring	   system	   given	   in	   Table	   4	   and	   5	   above).	   It	   provides	   an	   assessment	   of	   the	   extent	   to	   which	   the	  
project’s	   theoretical	   design	   is	   in	   line	   with	   the	   validated	   theory	   of	   change	   deemed	   necessary	   for	  
delivering	  impact	  and	  the	  progress	  towards	  delivering	  the	  outcomes-­‐impacts	  pathways.	  


                                                      Table	  6:	  Overall	  rating	  of	  project	  impact	  
                                    Outcomes	  –	  Impact	  Assessment	  

                                    Strategy	  1:Adoption	  and	  Promotion	  of	  Renewable	  Energy	                                       3	  

                                    Strategy	  2:Piloting	  Wind	  Farm	                                                                        2	  

                                    Overall	  project	                                                                                            3	  




                                                                                                                                                                                   145
The	  ESD	  and	  RERED	  projects	  were	  able	  to	  address	  financial	  and	  technical	  barriers	  and	  tariff	  structures	  that	  
were	   preventing	   involvement	   of	   the	   private	   sector	   as	   renewable	   energy	   developers.	   The	   projects	   have	  
succeeded	   in	   putting	   in	   place	   both	   on	   grid	   and	   off	   renewable	   systems	   using	   mainly	   hydro	   and	   solar	   power	  
through	   a	   long	   term	   lending	   mechanism,	   from	   commercial	   banks.	   However	   post	   project	   a	   similar	   long	  
term	   lending	   mechanism	   has	   not	   continued.	   However	   the	   renewable	   energy	   sector	   has	   benefitted	   from	  
the	  capacity	  building	  of	  developers,	  manufacturers	  and	  financiers,	  the	  cost	  reflective	  tariff	  structures	  and	  
small	  scale	  power	  purchasing	  agreements	  put	  in	  place	  by	  the	  project.	  	  The	  commercial	  use	  of	  mini-­‐hydro	  
had	   also	   had	   a	   positive	   impact	   on	   Green	   House	   Gas	   Emission	   reductions	   in	   Sri	   Lanka.	   While	   on	   a	   time	  
bound	  scale	  the	  off	  grid	  Solar	  and	  Micro	  hydro	  projects	  have	  also	  contributed	  to	  the	  reduction	  in	  use	  of	  
kerosene	   (a	   fossil	   fuel)	   for	   lighting.	   There	   is	   a	   tendency	   to	   stop	   using	   these	   units	   once	   the	   grid	   is	   available.	  
The	  fact	  that	  the	  ESD	  and	  RERED	  projects	  did	  not	  have	  an	  exit	  strategy	  for	  these	  off	  grid	  systems	  is	  seen	  as	  
a	  weakness.	  However	  post	  project	  interested	  parties	  are	  working	  to	  connect	  micro	  hydro	  to	  the	  grid.	  The	  
capacity	  built	  for	  energy	  service	  companies	  (ESCOs)	  also	  continues	  to	  be	  used	  showing	  long	  term	  use	  of	  
these	   built	   capacities.	   The	   private	   sector	   also	   continues	   to	   invest	   in	   mini	   hydro	   and	   wind	   power,	   driven	   by	  
the	  Tariff	  structures	  and	  Power	  Purchasing	  Agreement.	  Further	  barriers	  to	  sell	  the	  grid,	  for	  biomass	  etc.,	  
have	  emerged	  and	  there	  are	  new	  GEF	  projects	  coming	  on	  board,	  albeit	   with	  a	  delayed	  start.	  Strong	  lobby	  
groups	  continue	  to	  work	  with	  the	  authorities	  to	  improve	  the	  uptake	  of	  renewables	  in	  the	  country.	  




                                                                                                                                                                                    146
Annex	  1:	  References	  


    1. DFCC,	  2012.Changing	  the	  sustainable	  energy	  landscape	  of	  Sri	  Lanka.
    2. Posted	   by	   DFCC	   on	   Friday,	   17	   August	   2012.Accessed	   in	   September	                                         2013.
       http://www.dfcc.lk/news/dfcc-­‐changing-­‐the-­‐sustainable-­‐energy-­‐landscape-­‐in-­‐sri-­‐lanka

    3. Energy	  and	  Project	  Finance	  Division,	  GEF	  Project	  Document,	  Energy	  Services	  Delivery	  Project	  Sri
       Lanka,	  1996.	  Energy	  and	  Project	  Finance	  Division,	  The	  World	  Bank.	  	  (Draft)

    4. Energy	   Forum	   (Guarantee)	   Limited,	   2013.	   Grid	   Interconnection	   Mechanisms	   for	   Off-­‐Grid
       Electricity	   Schemes	   in	   Sri	   Lanka.	   Energy	   Forum	  (Guarantee)	  Limited,	  Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka.	  (Final
       Report-­‐	  Draft)

    5. Energy	  Sector	  Unit,	  Implementation	  Completion	  Report,	  2003.	  Energy	  Services	  Delivery	  Project
       Sri	  Lanka.	  Energy	  Sector	  Unit,	  World	  Bank.

    6. Ministry	   of	   Environment	   (MOE)	   2011,	   Democratic	   Socialist	   Republic	   of	   Sri	   Lanka	   –Second
       National	   Communication	   on	   Climate	   Change,	   2011.Submission	   to	   UNFCC	   Secretariat	   by	   the
       Ministry	  of	  Environment.

    7. Project	   Appraisal	   Document	   (n.d.),	   Renewable	   Energy	   for	   Rural	   Economic	   Development	   Sri
       Lanka.
    8. Resources	   Development	   Consultants	   (Pvt.)	   Ltd	   (n.d.),	   Monitoring	   and	   Evaluation	   of	   the
       Renewable	   Energy	   for	   Rural	   Development	   Project	   (September	   2004	   –	   September	   2008).
       Resources	  Development	  Consultants	  (Pvt)	  Ltd,	  Colombo,	  Sri	  Lanka.

    9. Renewable	   Energy	   for	   Rural	   Economic	   Development	   Project	   website.	   Accessed	   03	   October
       2013.<www.energyservices.lk/>

    10. Resources	   Development	   Consultants	   (Pvt.)	   Ltd	   (n.d.),	   Monitoring	   and	   Evaluation	   of	   the
          Renewable	  Energy	  for	  Rural	  Development	  Project

    11. The	   World	   Bank,	   Implementation	   Completion	   and	   Results	   Report,	   2012.Renewable	   Energy	   for
        Rural	  Economic	  Development	  Project.	  World	  Bank.

    12. Young,	   M.	   and	   Vilhauer,	   R.,	   2003.	   Sri	   Lanka	   Wind	   Farm	   Analysis	   and	   Site	   Selection	   Assistance.
        National	  Renewable	  Energy	  Laboratory.




                                                                                                                                                      147
Annex	  2:	  Sites	  Visited	  


March	  21,	  2013	  
Hapugasthanna	  village	  (Weligepola	  Divisional	  Secretariat,	  Ratnapura	  District)	  
   -­‐ FGD	  with	  village	  hydro	  society	  

Name	                                              Gender	               Position	  in	  the	  CBO	  
Malani	  L.	  Jinasena	                          Female	               Secretary	  
G.	  M.	  EmalinLatha	                           Female	               Member	  
W.A.	  Dayarathna	                                Male	                 Committee	  Member	  
      -­‐

March	  22,	  2013	  
Maduwanwela	  village	  (KolonnaDivisionalSecretariat,	  Ratnapura	  District)	  
   -­‐ FGD	  with	  village	  hydro	  society	  

Name	                                              Gender	              Position	  in	  the	  CBO	  
K.M.	  Munipema	                                  Male	                President	  
P.	  Sarath	                                      Male	                Secretary	  
K.D.	  Karunawathi	                               Female	              Treasurer	  
A.K.	  Jinadasa	                                  Male	                Advisor	  
A.	  Somawathi	                                   Female	              Member	  
ChandrikaUdayakumari	                              Female	              Member	  
G.	  Jayawardana	                                 Male	                Member	  
A.Dayananda	                                       Male	                Member	  

March	  23,	  2013	  
Welewatta	  village	  (Kolonna	  Divisional	  Secretariat,	  Ratnapura	  District)	  
   -­‐ FGD	  with	  village	  hydro	  society	  

Name	                                              Gender	              Position	  in	  the	  CBO	  
Y.	  K.	  Mudiyanse	                             Male	                Secretary	  
Y.	  NilanthaSanjeewa	                            Male	                Member	  
Samantha	  Rathnayaka	                            Male	                Vice	  President	  
K.	  K.	  Wijesundara	                           Male	                Member	  
R.	  ShyamaleeWijithalatha	                       Male	                Member	  
Y.	  SumithManjula	                               Male	                Vice	  Secretary	  
W.	  L.	  MenakaSajith	                          Male	                Son	  of	  a	  member	  




                                                                                                              148
Interviewed	  solar	  home	  system	  beneficiaries	  

 Respondent’s	  Name	             Gender	                  	  Village	          2.5_GN_Div	  
 D.K.	  Sumanawathi	              Female	                  Ranwala	  Kanda	     Madaganoya	  
 KanchanaLakmali	                  Female	                  Kalotuwawa	           Welewaththa	  
 N.M.	  Anulawathi	               Female	                  Dikwelagoda	          Maduwanwela	  
 ThamaraKumari	                    Female	                  Matihakkagama	        Maduwanwela	  
 K.	  Mala	  Malkanthi	          Female	                  Matihakkagama	        Maduwanwela	  
 G.	  Babynona	                   Female	                  Kalotuwawa	           Welewathugoda	  
 W.	  Sumanawathi	                Female	                  Kella	                Hakbeliara	  
 W.	  Yasawathi	                  Female	                  Hakbeliara	           Kella	  
 DinushaPriyangani	                Female	                  Kolanna	              kolanna	  
 Kusumalatha	                      Female	                  Habbeliyara	          Jadura	  
 Mrs.G.Somawathie	                 Female	                  Hambiliara	           Hambiliara	  
 Mrs.	  M.A.Malkanthi	            Female	                  Hambiliara	           Hambiliara	  
 Mrs.	  RohiniPushpalatha	        Female	                  Dikwelagoda	          Maduwanwela	  
 Mrs.	  DeepaNilanthi	            Female	                  Elukurayaya	          Maduwanwela	  
 Mrs.	  Ramyakumari	              Female	                  Kalawatuwawa	         Welewathugoda	  




                                                                                                         149
Annex	  3:	  People	  Met	  


Date	               Name	                      Position	                                            Organization	  
2013/02/07	         Noel	  Priyantha	         Chief	  Engineer	  –	  Renewable	  Energy	       Ceylon	  Electricity	  Board	  
                                                 Projects	  
2013/02/07	         P.L.G.	  Kariyawasam	     Deputy	   General	   Manager	   –	   Energy	     Ceylon	  Electricity	  Board	  
                                                 Marketing	  
2013/02/07	         KapilaSubasisnghe	         Vice	  President	  –	  Corporate	  Banking	      DFCC	  Bank	  

2013/02/07	         NalinKarunatilake	         Assistant	   Vice	   President	   –	   Project	   DFCC	  Bank	  
                                                 Management	  
2013/02/22	         Y.P.	  Dassanayake	       Coordinating	  Officer	                              Federation	   of	   Electricity	  
                                                                                                        Consumer	  Societies	  
2013/07/10	         SumithPilapitiya	          Lead	  Environmental	  Specialist	                  World	  Bank,	  Sri	  Lanka	  

2013/10/04	         Sunith	  Fernando	        Director	                                            Resource	           Management	  
                     (phone	  interview)	                                                            Associates	  (	  Pvt)	  	  Ltd	  




                                                                                                                                       150
Annex	  4:	  Schematic	  of	  ESD&RERED	  Theory	  of	  Change	  

  Outcome	  1:	  
  Promoted	  adoption	                                      IS1:	  Electricity	  access	  
  of	  renewable	                                           provided	  to	  households,	  
  energy	  by	  removing	                                  rural	  SMEs	  and	  public	  
  market	  barriers	  and	                                 institutions	  through	  off-­‐grid	  
  reducing	  
                                                              systems	  
  implementation	  
  costs.	  
  implementation

  Outcome	  2:	  
  Technical	  support	  
  for	  p romoting	                                        IS2:	  Expanded	  renewable	  
  renewable	  energy	                                      electricity	  generating	                        MITIGATION	  
  and	  energy	                                            capacity	  and	  production	  in	                     OF	  
  efficiency	  in	  public	                                                                                 GREENHOUSE	  
                                                             Sri	  Lanka	  
  and	  p rivate	  sector	                                                                                       GAS	  
  established.	                                                                                               EMISSIONS	  IN	  
                                                                                                                SRI	  LANKA	  
                                                                                                                 THROUGH	  
                                                                                                              DISPLACEMENT	  
                                                                                                                 OF	  FOSSIL	  
  ID1:	                    ID2:	  Private	          ID2:	  Multi	                 A1:	  Enabling	           FUELS	  
  Flexibility	  in	       sector	                   stakeholder	                   macro-­‐economic	  
  project	                 leadership	               implementationa                 environment	  
  design	                                             rrangement	  
  sector	                                             	  


  Outcome	  3:	  	  
  Small-­‐scale	  wind	  
                                                             IS3:	  Significant	  interest	  in	  
  power	  generation	  
  projects	  piloted	  to	                                developing	  private	  wind	  
  establish	  feasibility	                                 power	  projects	  generated	  
  in	  Sri	  Lanka,	  from	                              among	  private	  developers.	  
  both	  technical	  and	  
  commercial	  
  standpoints.	  	  


                                    A2:	  Private	  sector	  
                                    initiatives	  and	  other	  
                                    projects	  support	  take	  up	  
                                    of	  wind	  energy	  projects	  




                                                                                                                             151
Global Environment Facility
Independent Evaluation Office
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
USA
www.gefeo.org
