                              99357




GEF Country Portfolio Evaluation:
ERITREA (1992–2012)
December 2014
Final Evaluation Report
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




TABLE OF CONTENTS
Foreword and Acknowledgements ................................................................................................. 4
1. Main Conclusions and Recommendations.................................................................................. 6
 1.1 Background                                                                                                                       6
 1.2 Objectives, Scope and Methodology                                                                                                7
 1.3 Limitations                                                                                                                     11
 1.4 Conclusions                                                                                                                     12
 1.5 Recommendations                                                                                                                 23
2. Evaluation Framework .............................................................................................................. 25
 2.1 The Global Environment Facility                                                                                                 25
 2.2 Background                                                                                                                      25
 2.3 Objectives                                                                                                                      26
 2.4 Scope                                                                                                                           27
 2.5 Methodology and Approach                                                                                                        27
 2.6 Limitations                                                                                                                     29
3. Context of the Evaluation ......................................................................................................... 30
 3.1 Eritrea: Country Context                                                                                                        30
 3.2 Environmental Resources in Key GEF Support Areas                                                                                32
 3.3 The Environmental Institutional, Policy and Legal Framework in Eritrea                                                          40
4. The GEF Portfolio in Eritrea .................................................................................................... 52
 4.1   Defining the GEF Portfolio                                                                                                    52
 4.2   Activities in the GEF Portfolio                                                                                               53
 4.3   GEF Support by Implementing Agency                                                                                            55
 4.4   GEF Support by Focal Area                                                                                                     56
 4.5   Small Grants Programme (SGP)                                                                                                  59
 4.6   Regional and Global Projects                                                                                                  60
 4.7   Roles and Responsibilities Among Different Stakeholders in Project Implementation                                             62
 4.8   The GEF Focal Point Mechanism in Eritrea                                                                                      62
5. Results, Effectiveness and Sustainability of GEF Support to Eritrea ...................................... 65
 5.1   Global Environmental Benefits (GEBs)                                                                                          65
 5.3   Catalytic Effects and Replication                                                                                             79
 5.4   Institutional Sustainability and Capacity Building                                                                            81
 5.5   Knowledge Generation and Learning                                                                                             81
6. Relevance of GEF Support to Eritrea ........................................................................................ 83
 6.1 Relevance of GEF Support to the Country’s Sustainable Development Agenda and Environmental
     Priorities                                                                             83
 6.2 Relevance of GEF Support to Eritrea’s Development Priorities and Challenges            85
 6.3 Relevance of GEF Support to National Action Plans within GEF Focal Areas               86

                                                                                                                                       2
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 6.4 Relevance of GEF Support to the Achievement of Global Environmental Benefits                                                        88
 6.5 Relevance of the GEF Portfolio to Other Global and National Institutions                                                            89
7. Efficiency of GEF Support to Eritrea ....................................................................................... 91
 7.1 Time, Effort and Financial Resources for Project Processing                                                                         91
 7.2 Coordination and Synergies                                                                                                          98
 7.3 Monitoring and Evaluation for Project Adaptive Management                                                                           98
Annex A: Country Response........................................................................................................ 101
Annex B: Quality Assurance Statement ...................................................................................... 102
Annex C: Country-Specific Terms of Reference .......................................................................... 104
Annex D: Evaluation Matrix ........................................................................................................ 116
Annex E: Interviewees and Focus Group Discussants ................................................................ 124
Annex F: Sites Visited .................................................................................................................. 126
Annex G: Final Workshop Participants ....................................................................................... 127
Annex H: GEF Portfolio in Eritrea ................................................................................................ 129
Annex I: References .................................................................................................................... 132
Annex J: Acronyms ...................................................................................................................... 135




                                                                                                                                           3
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



Foreword
The Eritrea Country Portfolio Evaluation (CPE) is one of three country-level evaluations that examines
    Global Environment Facility (GEF) support in sub-Saharan Africa during the fifth replenishment
    period. GEF has been active in Eritrea almost since its inception although programming has not been
    continuous.

Eritrea was selected primarily on the basis of its having a comparatively diverse portfolio for a Least
     Developing Country emerging from a post-conflict state. The Eritrea portfolio covers all the GEF
     focal areas with a pronounced focus on biodiversity. The portfolio also includes several completed
     and on-going projects as well as those that are on the verge of implementation.

Eritrean stakeholders specifically asked the evaluation to investigate whether GEF support had contributed
     not only to environmental benefits but also sustainable livelihoods. The evaluation found strong links,
     particularly for reducing adverse impacts of land degradation and contribution to community benefits
     throughout the GEF portfolio, including projects classified as biodiversity and particularly through the
     fairly recent, but very popular Small Grants Programme. The degree of country ownership regarding the
     GEF portfolio demonstrated a higher than usually seen level of nationally driven projects, as the
     large majority of GEF projects developed in Eritrea originated from ideas of existing initiatives or
     Eritrean institutions.

The GEF Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) and the GEF Eritrean Operational Focal Point invited
    representatives from various stakeholder groups and institutions involved in GEF projects in the
    country to discuss the findings of the evaluation in September 2013, in Asmara. During the
    workshop, the context and methodology were presented, as well as the preliminary findings and
    emerging recommendations. A very fruitful open forum discussion followed.

The preliminary findings of the Eritrea CPE were presented to the GEF Council in June 2014. These were
    included in the Annual Country Portfolio Evaluation Report 2014, a report that synthesizes the main
    conclusions and recommendations from the country-level evaluation work conducted by the IEO in
    Sub Saharan Africa. Based on that ACPER report’s recommendations, the GEF Council requested the
    GEF Secretariat to explore and pursue, where appropriate the use of established SGP country
    programmes as service providers to implement community level activities for larger GEF full size
    and medium size projects. The Eritrean government response to the evaluation is included as
    Annex A and the statement from the national independent peer review panel is included in Annex B
    of this report.

I would like to thank everyone who actively supported this evaluation. Through this report, the GEF
    Independent Evaluation Office intends to share the lessons from the evaluation with a wider
    audience. The evaluation was conducted and completed when Rob D. van den Berg was Director of
    the GEF Independent Evaluation Office. Final responsibility for this report remains firmly with the
    Office.




    Juha I. Uitto
    Director, GEF Independent Evaluation Office

                                                                                                                4
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



Acknowledgements
This report is the result of a collective effort. Ms. Baljit Wadhwa, Senior Evaluation Officer at the
    Independent Evaluation Office of the Global Environment Facility and Task Manager for the Eritrea
    Country Portfolio Evaluations (GEF), provided overall leadership to the study.

The Office was supported by a team of national evaluators from the Economic and Social Consultancy
   (ECOSOC) led by Tesfamariam Tekie and composed of Weldesellasie Okubazghi, Weldeselassie
   Tewelde and Mulubrham Yohannes Mehreteab. Simon Blower and Sara El Choufi served as research
   assistants.

The evaluation was supported by a peer review panel of two reputable national independent panel
   experts: Ms. Astier Redaezghi, Director of Environmental Management and Regulation and Ms. Bissrat
   Ghebru, Director of Bureau of Standards and Evaluation, National Board for Higher Education.

The GEF operational focal point in Eritrea, Mogos Woldeyohannes and his staff at the Ministry of Land,
   Water and the Environment, particularly Aman Saleh, provided full cooperation and ensured a smooth
   evaluation process.

The Office is also thankful to staff of UNDP country office, particularly Ms. Christine Umutoni, Resident
   Representative, Mr. Yoseph Admekom, Solomon Gebreyohannes and Tedros Demoz for lending office
   support to the evaluation team at times of electricity weaknesses.




                                                                                                       5
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



1. Main Conclusions and Recommendations

1.1 Background
    1.   Country Portfolio Evaluations (CPEs) are one of the main evaluation streams of work of the GEF
           Independent Evaluation Office 1. By capturing aggregate portfolio results and performance of
           the GEF at the country level they provide useful information for both the GEF Council and the
           beneficiary countries.
    2.   The overall purpose of CPEs is to provide the GEF Council and the concerned national
           governments with an assessment of the results and performance of GEF-supported activities at
           the country level, and of how these activities fit into national strategies and priorities as well as
           within the global environmental mandate of the GEF.
    3.   GEF eligible countries are chosen for portfolio evaluations, based on a selection process and a set
           of criteria including the size, diversity and maturity of their portfolio of projects2. Among
           several considerations, Eritrea was selected as it is a part of Sub-Saharan Africa and also a
           Least Developed Country emerging recently from a fragile and conflict situation. It has a
           comparatively large, diverse and mature portfolio with a “flexible” 3 allocation with
           emphasis on climate change and biodiversity and high levels of co-financing. Furthermore,
           Eritrea includes several completed and on-going projects as well as those that are on the verge
           of implementation.
    4.   Eritrea is situated in an arid and semi-arid region of Sub-Saharan Africa. After a war lasting
            approximately 30 years, it gained independence in 1991. It has a landmass area of about
            125,700 km2 (45,406 sq mi), inclusive of approximately 390 islands; the prominent being
            the Dahlak Archipelago and several of the Hanish Islands. The northeastern and eastern parts
            have an extensive coastline spanning some 1,900 kilometers along the Red Sea directly across
            Saudi Arabia and Yemen. It shares borders with Sudan in the north and west, Ethiopia in the
            south, Djibouti in the southeast and the Red Sea in the East. Asmara is the capital of the
            country.
    5.   Despite its small land area, Eritrea has diverse climate zones, mainly due to its high topographic
           variations. Geographically the country is divided into the Central Highlands (above 2000 m from
           sea level), the Midlands (1500-2000 mm above sea level) and the Lowlands (below 1500 m
           from sea). The rainfall pattern is affected by this topographic variation in the country; annual
           rainfall varying from about 100mm in the lowlands to about 700mm in the central highlands.
           Further, Eritrea is divided in six agro-ecological zones, namely, the Moist Highland, Arid

1
A complete list of countries having undergone CPEs can be found on Office’s website (www.gefeo.org).
2http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/CPE_final_country_selection_note-0910_0.pdf,           Website access:
1st May 2013
3Sixty three countries with allocations of up to $7million have been granted flexibility in the use of their GEF-5 STAR allocations.

This flexibility allows countries to combine allocations across focal areas – up to $7 million - as appropriate for achieving focal
area objectives.


                                                                                                                                  6
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


              Highland, Sub-Humid, Moist Lowland and the Semi-Desert. The variations in mean annual
              temperature range from 15°C in the moist and arid highlands to 32°C in the semi-desert 4.
    6.     Because Eritrea is situated at arid and semiarid areas, the advancement of the Saharan desert is
             affecting the country. There are several causes of desertification: low precipitation, high
             evaporation and transpiration, deforestation, mismanagement of natural resources,
             overgrazing, climate change etc. The low level of public knowledge concerning environmental
             management of the people is another factor. Still, the country is making great efforts to
             combat desertification as a major environmental problem.

1.2          Objectives, Scope and Methodology
    7.     The Eritrea CPE was conducted between February and September 2013 by an evaluation team
             comprised of staff from the GEF Independent Evaluation Office and a national team of
             consultants, led by Economic and Social Consultancy (ECOSOC). A peer review panel provided
             feedback to the team on quality aspects related to evaluation products.
    8.     The aim of the Eritrea CPE is to provide the GEF Council and the Government of Eritrea (GOE) with
             an assessment of results and performance of the GEF supported activities at country level, and
             how these activities fit with national strategies and priorities as well as within the mandate of
             the GEF.
    9.     The CPE will have the objectives to:

         • Assess the effectiveness and results 5 of GEF support in a country, with focus on the sustainability
             of achievements at the project level and progress toward impact on global environmental
             benefits;
         • Independently evaluate the relevance and efficiency of the GEF support in the country from the
             points of view of national environmental frameworks and decision-making processes, the GEF
             mandate and the achievement of global environmental benefits and GEF policies and
             procedures; and
         • Provide feedback and knowledge sharing to: (a) the GEF Council in its decision making process,
             (b) Government of Eritrea on its collaboration/participation in the GEF, and (c) GEF partners
             (Agencies, civil society organizations) involved in the preparation and implementation of GEF
             support.
    10. The focus of the CPE is the 12 national projects implemented in Eritrea since 1992 with $22.7
          million in GEF grants. The evaluation team used GEF’s standardized tools and project review


4
 http://www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/Counprof/eritrea/Eritrea.htm#3. CLIMATE AND AGRO ECOLOGICAL, Website access 2nd
May 2013
5The following definitions are applied in the GEF Monitoring and Evaluation Policy, 2010: Effectiveness: the extent to which the

GEF activity’s objectives were achieved, or are expected to be achieved, taking into account their relative importance; Results:
in GEF terms, results include direct project outputs, short- to medium-term outcomes, and progress toward longer term impact
including global environmental benefits, replication effects, and other local effects; Sustainability: the likely ability of an
intervention to continue to deliver benefits for an extended period of time after completion; projects need to be environmentally
as well as financially and socially sustainable.


                                                                                                                               7
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


            protocols for the CPEs and adapted these to the Eritrean context. Projects for field visits were
            selected based on whether they had been completed or were near completion. Annex J lists
            the field sites visited during the evaluation.
 11. Triangulation was a key element of the evaluation during the analysis whereby the findings from
        the literature review, the Country Environmental Legal Framework (CELF) developed for Eritrea
        and the Global Environment Benefits Assessment (GEBA), Project review protocols and
        stakeholder consultations and interviews were assessed using the main evaluation indicators of
        effectiveness, results, sustainability, relevance and efficiency.
 12. Two reviews of outcomes to impact (ROtI) 6 assessments were also conducted on: 1) the
       completed wind energy project located in the port city of Assab (GEF ID 1136) and 2) the
       Conservation Management of Eritrea's Coastal, Marine and Island Biodiversity project (GEF ID
       411). This was preceded by constructing a model ‘Theory of Change’ for each project.
 13. Several sources of information from different levels, both inside and outside of Eritrea, were used.
        A total of 25 stakeholders and officials were interviewed and consulted during the evaluation
        (Annex E). These included the officials of the MOLWE, the MOA, MOMR, regional and sub-
        regional authorities and officials, the UNDP and FAO and the GEF OFP. Three focused group
        discussions (FGDs) were held with Small Grant Program (SGP) beneficiaries and local
        communities

National Projects supported by the GEF in the period 1992-2012
 14. Since 1992, the GEF has provided support for about $22.7 million in Eritrea and has mobilized
        about $41.6 million in co-financing. GEF supported 12 national projects – 4 in biodiversity (BD),
        3 in climate change (CC), 2 in land degradation (LD), 2 in persistent organic pollutants (POPs),
        and 1 multifocal (MFA) Enabling Activity. The BD and LD focal areas account for the largest
        funding shares and account for about 50% and 27% of total GEF support, respectively.

Table 1: GEF support to National projects in Eritrea by Focal Area
                                                                            Co-
                                  No.     of             GEF Grant                             %    GEF       %         Co-
    Focal area                                                                financing
                                    Projects              (USD)                                    Grant          financing
                                                                              (USD)

    Biodiversity                  4                      11,309,000         11,410,400         50.0           27.5

    Climate Change                3                      2,454,411          2,953,136          10.8           7.1

    Land Degradation              2                      6,170,000          23,928,000         27.3           57.6

    Multifocal Area               1                      198,000            20,000             0.9            0.0

    POP                           2                      2,496,500          3,244,153          11.0           7.8

    Total                         12                     22,627,911         41,555,689         100            100




6http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/CPE-ROtI_Practitioners_Handbook_4August2009.pdf




                                                                                                                              8
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


Figure 1: GEF support to National projects in Eritrea by Focal Area




Figure 2: GEF support to National projects in Eritrea by Project Status



                  1.2


                   1


                  0.8
   US$ Millions




                  0.6


                  0.4


                  0.2


                   0
                                       Project Status


 15. Of the total 12 national projects under evaluation for Eretria, 6 are enabling activities (EAs) all of
        which are completed, and 6 are full sized projects (FSPs). For the FSPs, 2 are completed, 3 are
        under implementation and 1 is in the pipeline. Half of Eritrea’s portfolio (6 projects) is
        implemented by UNDP, accounting for 49.3% of total financing (co-financing and grant
        contributions), while IFAD holds 40.5% of total financing with 1 project.




                                                                                                              9
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


Table 2: GEF support to National Projects by Implementing Agency
            Completed               Under Implementation       Pipeline                   Total


   Agency
            No. rant      Cofinance No. Grant     Cofinance    No. Grant      Cofinance   No. Grant          Cofinance



   UNDP     4   440,411   3,793,136 1   1,820,000 2,250,000    1   5,878,000 10,555,400   6   15,138,411      16,598,536

   UNEP     1   98,000    20,000    -   -         -            -   -          -           1   198,000         20,000

   UNIDO 1      46,500    35,000    -   -         -            -   -          -           1   346,500         35,000

   FAO      -             -         1   2,150,000 3,209,153    -   -          -           1   2,150,000       3,209,153

   WB       2   45,000    15,000    -   -         -            -   -          -           2   445,000         15,000

   IFAD     -             -         1   4,350,000 21,678,000 -     -          -           1   4,350,000       21,678,000

   Total    8   429,911 3,863,136 3     8,320,000 27,137,153 1     6,028,000 10,555,400 12    22,777,911      41,555,689




Table 3: GEF Support to National Projects by Modality (in USD)
  Project Modality            No.   GEF Grant         Cofinancing % of      % of co-fin.              Co-fin.
                                    (USD)             (USD)       GEF Grant                           ratio
  Enabling      Activities    6     1,493,350         87,600           6.6        0.2                 0.03
  (EA)
  Full Size      Projects     6     21,134,561        41,468,089       93.4       99.8                1.96
  (FSP)
  Total                       12    22,777,911        41,555,689 100              100


 16. Since 2010 the GEF Small Grants Programme (SGP) in Eritrea has received financial support
        totaling US$ 1,034,998, covering the focal areas of Land Degradation, Climate Change
        Mitigation, and Biodiversity. It leveraged an intended US$ 433,883in cash co-financing and US$
        1,522,323in in-kind resources for a total of 22 projects executed by civil society and
        community-based organizations. The SGP program in Eritrea has predominantly supported
        Land Degradation projects, with US$607,316 amounting to 59% of the portfolio.




                                                                                                                           10
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




            Figure 3: SGP Country Portfolio by Focal Area
                                                Biodiversity,
        Multifocal Area,                        59,479 , 6%     Climate Change
        171,186 , 16%
                                                                   Mitigation,
                                                                197,017 , 19%




                                      Land
                                   Degradation,
                                  607,316 , 59%




1.3 Limitations
 17. The evaluation experienced a number of limitations, some of which are generic to CPEs, while
       others were country-specific. Evaluation of overall GEF results has been primarily undertaken
       on the basis of project-specific evidence, triangulated with an assessment of aggregate
       achievements based on stakeholder inputs, new field data, and the evaluation team’s
       judgement.
 18. While there are not many national and international stakeholders active in environmental
       management in Eritrea, caution must still be exercised in attributing any systemic changes to
       the interventions by the GEF; and assessments of contribution need to take realistic account of
       the number and scale of other synergistic national and international inputs. This is particularly
       the case for land degradation improvements.
 19. GEF projects in Eritrea have been implemented over a twenty-year period, and the evaluation
       team experienced difficulty in obtaining readily available and accurate qualitative and
       quantitative data on some of GEF’s earlier support. Furthermore, the quality of evaluative
       evidence, particularly quantitative trends data, such as changes in forest cover, coastal lines,
       etc. over time, relevant to completed projects is variable. In all cases there is also a long time
       gap between information collected prior to 1960 and that collected since 1991. This created a
       major problem distinguishing between what has been recorded as historically present and
       what may actually be present today. This posed a significant challenge to building a
       comprehensive overview of results and contribution.
 20. To address these limitations, several of the specific CPE methods and approaches are specific to
        the GEF Independent Evaluation Office, such as the Review of Outcomes to Impacts (ROtI),
        systematic triangulation and country environmental legal framework and global environmental
        benefit analysis. These methods were used by the national evaluation team to arrive at findings




                                                                                                        11
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         and conclusions based on a systematic review of changes in environmental stratus and stresses
         over the course of GEF activities and often in the absence of baseline data.
 21. The small size of the portfolio in Eritrea, while mature and diversified, does mean for some
       limitations in the aggregate results possible in the portfolio. To date, half of the portfolio has
       been Enabling Activities, with different intended result and impact than FSP and MSP projects.

1.4     Conclusions

EFFECTIVENESS, RESULTS AND SUSTAINABILITY OF GEF SUPPORT

Conclusion 1: Overall, GEF supported projects have been effective in producing
satisfactory results at the project and national levels.
 22. Half of the GEF portfolio under review in Eritrea has been Enabling Activities (EAs). These activities
        across all focal areas have enabled for priorities to be defined and set to focus on
        commitments to the various Conventions. For example within the National Biodiversity
        Strategy and Action Plan – NBSAP (GEF ID137) for BD activities, with NAPA (GEF ID 1959) for CC
        adaptation activities and the NAP (GEF ID 1584) for land degradation activities. The EAs have
        also enhanced environmental knowledge, understanding and capabilities of personnel of all
        ranks of the executing ministries and communities.
 23. At the project level, there are two completed projects within the Eritrea portfolio. The
        Conservation Management of Eritrean Coastal, Marine and Island Biodiversity Project (GEF ID
        411) has a terminal evaluation report with a rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory. At the time of
        completion, the project was found to most likely have outcomes that would be sustainable;
        however, the project outcomes themselves and the quality of execution were found to be
        Moderately Unsatisfactory. The completed Wind Energy Applications project (GEF ID 1136)
        received an outcome rating of Satisfactory.
 24. Two supervision missions have been conducted for the ongoing Catchments and Landscape
       Management Project (GEF ID 3362) and the SIP: Sustainable Land Management Pilot Project
       (GEF ID 3364). Both projects were rated recently as satisfactory and found to be achieving their
       global environmental objectives and developmental objectives.

Conclusion 2: Eritrea has used integrated approaches to tackling global environmental
issues, although they have not been classified as such.
 25. Eritrea has had a very limited number of overt multi-focal projects, only two EAs: The National
        Capacity Self-Assessment exercise and a global project to facilitate national reporting to the Rio
        Convention (GEF ID 3707). The GEF portfolio, however, by its nature has inherently and
        consistently addressed more than one focal area. The Sustainable Land Management projects
        have an element of agro bio-diversity conservation as well as climate change mitigation,
        similarly the Coastal Marine and Island Biodiversity project had elements of preventing coastal
        land degradation.




                                                                                                        12
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 26. While at the single project level results have been evidenced, the portfolio has been less effective
       at instigating systemic level and regional level environmental changes. The issue of land
       degradation is of particular importance and priority in Eritrea. The current allocation system
       does not allow for more resources dedicated specifically for LD. Hence, an integrated multi-
       focal approach to tackling land degradation and other global environmental issues could
       generate more overt synergies between the institutions that execute the projects, contributing
       to more focal area synergy and enhanced environmental status.

Conclusion 3: GEF Projects have enhanced institutional and individual capacity at
national and local levels.

 27. A central part of GEF’s approach in any country is to enhance human and institutional capacities
        through its various projects and programs, which operate in synergy with government
        institutions.
 28. GEF support has been effective in building capacity of individuals and institutions at national,
       regional and community levels in Eritrea. The EA activities and capacity building components of
       the FSPs had significant capacity building elements ranging from the training of stakeholders
       (extension workers to local administrators to policy makers), subject-matter workshops and
       seminars as well as environmental training of beneficiaries (farmers and pastoralists).
 29. The National Capacity Self-Assessment (NCSA) of 2002 for Eritrea (GEF ID 1584) highlighted the
       capacity gaps that remained to be filled in the four focus areas of BD, CC and LD and POPs, as
       well in regards to overall national environmental management including preparation,
       implementation and M&E of GEF programs and projects.
 30. Against those capacity constraints, and over a decade later, this CPE did find evidence for
       institutional and individual capacity development tangible for each of the focal areas. These
       capacities are highlighted further in Chapter 5 under the results and effectiveness discussion
       for each focal area. Institutional and capacity enhancements include the knowledge gained
       through the Conservation Management of Eritrean Coastal, Marine and Island Biodiversity
       Project (GEF ID 411) being applied by the MOMR’s staff to monitor changes in the marine and
       coastal biota, particularly training given on diving has enabled the local staff to see deep water
       biota and track changes recently more threatened by the rapid, and largely uncontrolled,
       development of fisheries and tourism infrastructure. The Department of Energy has personnel
       and systems ready to review renewable energy entrants for provision of on-grid or off-grid
       electricity. Finally, the ability of local administrators, farmers and women headed house-holds
       to implement natural resource management methods has been encouraged after training
       delivered by the Sustainable Land Management projects. The POPs project (GEF ID 1331), too
       has been quoted by key informants, as vital to the national knowledge base of harmful
       substance storage and disposal.


Conclusion 4: Several GEF-supported activities have contributed towards environmental
benefits by fostering sustainable livelihood and community based approaches.


                                                                                                        13
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


    31. The Eritrea CPE finds tangible local and national environmental benefits from GEF supported
          projects such as the maintenance of endemic to the Red Sea species of coral, turtles, sea
          grasses, protection of unique marine and terrestrial ecosystems and restoring degraded lands
          while preventing further land degradation. These benefits are specific to focal areas and multi-
          focal in nature and would potentially lead to sustained improvements and replenishment of
          global environmental benefits.
    32. The GEF supported projects in Eritrea have also been designed in a way that ensures the needs of
          communities through addressing the promotion of sustainable livelihoods. The primary target
          groups are communities who depend on natural resources for survival, and yet have limited
          access to such resources. Such groups are primarily affected from the adverse impacts of land
          degradation as they derive their livelihoods mainly from public forests and communal
          rangelands, and operate on lands which are prone to erosion.

Biodiversity
    33. The biodiversity resources of Eritrea are not yet exhaustively studied and documented. The
          conservation status of most species at the genetic, species, and ecosystem is not known in
          detail. After independence, the Department of Environment of the Ministry of Land, Water and
          Environment and other line ministries have taken considerable effort on the conservation of
          biological diversity resources, despite the existing large shortfall in the number of personnel,
          institutions and financial resources, which would be required to fill this information gap.
          Although there is incomplete national reporting of improvements on biodiversity, the evidence
          reviewed and gathered in this evaluation indicates that overall, these projects are likely to
          impact the sustainable use of biodiversity resources and hence improved livelihood systems for
          the local population.
    34. The four GEF-supported projects (including EAs) in Eritrea have extended support to the country’s
          approach to mainstream biodiversity into productive landscapes, particularly important in
          Eritrea where food security remains a national priority. Despite the constraints in national
          reporting, there are examples of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity resources in
          several parts of the country. Biodiversity considerations are also integrated into agricultural
          and forest initiatives and these integrations extend into the GEF LD portfolio.
    35. For example through the country’s SLM project (GEF ID 3364) and the SGP projects, area
           enclosures implemented by communities 7 have resulted in the natural regeneration of
           indigenous threatened species of fauna and flora, for example Olea africana (Awlei), Dodonea
           ungustifolia (Tahses), Juniperus procera (tshdi) and Rhus natalensis (tetale). Eritrea is also
           recognized as a centre of origin and centre of diversity for a number of crops, notably the
           cereals: sorghum, wheat and barley. There is a rich diversity of crop landraces still available in
           Eritrea.
    36. From the research unit in the MOMR, established by the CMIB (GEF ID 411) project, research
           gathered is now exchanged with other institutions, including Universities abroad, providing

7
    As observed in Serejeca, Mekereka, Una Lalia, Tearishe and Dara village areas


                                                                                                            14
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


            valuable information on among other things, sea and coastal migratory birds, several species of
            turtle nesting grounds, species of coral reefs, sea grass, and dugongs. The Red Sea, an almost
            enclosed, hot, saline body of water has over 1,100 fish species and 44 genera of hard corals
            being recorded” 8 rendering it with one of the highest levels of endemism and species diversity
            for a water body Around 18% of fish species and 20% of coral species are reported to be
            endemic to these waters 9.
    37. Local communities are also well aware about the potential social and economic benefits that are
           generated from the various conservation activities. However, projects outcomes related to
           poverty reduction and improved livelihood are issues that were not monitored and would be
           realized only over a stretch of years to come.

Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation
    38. Eritrea has filed a 1st and 2nd National Communication to the UNFCCC. GEF support was provided
           for the preparation of the First Communication (GEF ID 278). From a review of these
           documents, it is seen that Eritrea heavily depends on biomass sources for energy.
    39. The Eritrean population is an agrarian society where the large majority directly depends on land
          resources for their livelihoods. Greenhouse gas emissions are largely from agricultural
          activities, deforestation activities and methane emissions from livestock. Stakeholder
          consultations reported back on ecosystem that once consisted of thickly vegetated diversified
          species of trees. Heavy dependence on biomass to meet household energy requirements as
          well as removal for agriculture has had an adverse effect on the forest cover of the parts of the
          country under review. Moreover, due to drought conditions that have prevailed in the country
          over decades, the vegetation cover has dwindled drastically. In turn, this has resulted in climate
          change impacts but also desertification, land degradation, diminishing biodiversity, reduction in
          grain yields, and a reduction in livestock production.
    40. The wind energy application project (GEF ID 1136) is the only full size CC project implemented in
          the country. The project served as a pilot to demonstrate the potential for wind-energy
          generation in Eritrea as a replacement of wood and biomass consumption. Although the
          project received a rating of Satisfactory at completion, the off-grid component was not
          successful in its operations. Concerning the on-grid component, of the three initially installed
          turbines generating power to 20% of the households in Assab; during the ROtI exercise, it was
          determined that only one was operational. Difficulties in transporting fuel from the capital,
          Asmara, to Assab were hampering the full operations of the turbines. Thus, there is obviously
          potential for scale-up, particularly in under-served rural areas of Eritrea that are still off the grid
          and have high energy access needs.
    41. Vulnerability to climate change is addressed in Eritrea’s National Adaptation Plan for Action
           (NAPA) document (GEF ID: 1959), prepared with support from the GEF LDCF trust fund. The
           NAPA serves as a reference for those who are directly concerned with the planning and

8http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/document/11-25-13%20COUNICL%20DOCUMENT.pdf

9
http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/document/11-25-13%20COUNICL%20DOCUMENT.pdf


                                                                                                              15
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         implementation of all environmental programs and projects for adaptation to climate change.
         It is available in many libraries as a reference for climate change and adaptation and serving to,
         and facilitating the transfer of knowledge and understanding for climate change adaptation.
 42. An integrated approach to adaptation is taken also through the SLM and SGP portfolio with
        activities directed at rehabilitation of degraded lands and enhancing land productivity also
        having GHG mitigation and adaptation benefits.
 43. These benefits are expected to be enhanced through a recent project financed with support from
       the Adaptation Fund and to be implemented by UNDP, the “Climate Change Adaptation
       Programme in Water and Agriculture” will be focused in the Anseba region of Eritrea with the
       aim to increase availability of water through floodwater harvesting and groundwater recharge.

Land Degradation
 44. In Eritrea, land degradation is one of the overriding factors affecting biodiversity and climate
        change. GEF support has been effective in preparing draft, national action plans and legal
        frameworks relevant to land degradation (e.g., NAP, NAPA and the draft national land use plan
        to arrest land degradation and increase land use capabilities). Reduced stress and improved
        soil/land/water conditions are long-term impacts of arresting land degradation.
 45. As observed and reported through stakeholders, as well as by communities engaged in the SLM
        subprojects, besides land degradation measures, the capacity of communities to use drip-
        irrigation in small farms, building bench terraces and managing nurseries has also been
        enhanced. GEF’s land degradation portfolio has also included a community component
        dedicated to improved energy saving stoves. These have been constructed by and largely
        benefited women and achieved significant scale up to amongst Eritrean households in village
        communities through the SGP program.Overall, the GEF supported projects to combat land
        degradation have demonstrated solid results through activities such as reforestation and
        enhancing farm productivity.

Persistent Organic Pollutants
 46. GEF support in cooperation with the Ministry of Agriculture and FAO has enabled Eritrea to
       undertake a national inventory and identify its stores of POPs and initiate plans for priority
       safeguarding, including disposal. There were 21 contaminated sites identified, with a total area
       of 1,400 m2. Resultant actions have contributed to environmental protection and making the
       surrounding areas safer for human habitation and well-being.




Small Grants Programme
 47. The SGP was operationally introduced into Eritrea in 2010 to facilitate innovative approaches in
       community based environmental programs (SGP Supervision Report to UNDP, 2011).
       Interestingly, the programme has become a mechanism to scale up tested and known
       approaches to community environmental improvements, particularly those witnessed through


                                                                                                         16
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         the Sustainable Land Management project portfolio. It is thus considered one of the most
         highly relevant initiatives within the country, due to its ability to enhance the technical capacity
         of local communities and to enable them to continue similar activities in adjacent areas of the
         Full Size projects.
 48. The SGP portfolio has contributed to communities possessing a better understanding about
       climate change issues and the importance of sustainable management of natural resources for
       improvements in their livelihood and health status. As discussed earlier, among the results
       seen, women in beneficiary communities have been trained on how to construct energy saving
       stoves and as a result, it was common to observe nearby households making their own stoves
       without any outside support. The improved traditional stove projects also enabled local
       communities to integrate traditional knowledge in the construction of well-designed and
       appropriate technologies. These approaches are also a part of the community components of
       the GEF full size LD projects. According to the SGP annual report (2012), many completed
       projects have been handed over to the local communities.

Conclusion 5: GEF completed projects have inadequately addressed post-completion
sustainability strategies.
 49. A challenge for the Government of Eritrea has been to continue supporting and scaling up GEF
        projects once GEF support has ended. Despite the government’s efforts to sustain the
        outcomes of full size completed projects, often much remains to be done to maintain these
        outcomes with time. For example, upkeep to the biodiversity stocktaking assessment,
        introduced through the NCSA (GEF ID: 1584), requires periodic field monitoring and research in
        terrestrial, marine and agro-biodiversity, which the Government can barely afford.
 50. Overall, GEF exit strategies put in place have not adequately addressed the financial, technical and
       managerial sustainability of projects outcomes so that impact might later be achieved.
       Nonetheless, there has been a readiness on the part of all relevant Ministries to integrate
       responsibilities and necessary engagements into their work program, including engagement
       with communities, maintenance of equipment, capacity improvements, etc. to ensure results
       of the completed GEF project have longevity.

RELEVANCE
Conclusion 6: GEF supported projects were relevant to the Eritrea sustainable national
development needs, environmental priorities and national focal area strategies and
action plans.
 51. GEF supported projects have contributed to the preparation of national plans in the environmental
       sector and overall, were relevant to the national environmental legal framework and
       sustainable development agenda of Eritrea.
 52. At present, there is no formal environmental legislation for Eritrea. However, an Environment
        Proclamation is being prepared by the Department of Environment. The absence of formal
        environmental legislation also does not mean that the environment has no legal status. The
        National Environmental Management Plan (NEMP 1995) has served as a blue print for

                                                                                                          17
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         subsequent action in the environmental sector and lays out a strategy of action for
         conservation activities. Its guiding principles include recognition of the strategic importance of
         conserving natural resources and maintaining environmental quality as a part of national
         economic growth and development processes, to develop integrated and multiple uses of
         natural resource use strategies at the same time ensuring local involvement and equity in
         environmental resources. It also set the course for subsequent GEF-supported projects to have
         the same overarching goal of safeguarding the environment and aimed at enabling Eritrea to
         meet its national and global environmental obligations through the implementation of the
         various conventions, particularly the CBD, CCD, UNFCCC, and Stockholm Convention.
 53. Projects in the CC focal area were relevant, first with the preparation of Eritrea’s National
        Communications to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (GEF ID
        278), which included the development of a national GHG emissions inventory and the
        identification of national programs and projects for climate change mitigation and adaptation.
        The First and Second National Communications are also the basis for the calculation of the
        country’s GHG emissions targets.
 54. While the Wind Energy Applications (GEF ID 1136) project did not result in the expected GHG
       reduction outcomes, the project was relevant for the country’s piloting of renewable energy
       sources. Alternate source of energy contribute to improved health by lowering indoor and
       outdoor air pollution; reduces the burden on women and young children many of whom spend
       hours collecting and carrying firewood; and frees up time for income generation. Energy is also
       a critical input for providing a host of social services, from education and health care to
       communications. The wind energy project also helped to put in place the policy framework that
       will allow a renewable energy market to develop. The promotion of the development of
       alternative and renewable energy production to reduce use of biomass as an energy source,
       particularly in areas with no access to pre-existing grids, both for the household and industrial
       unit level, still remains relevant.
 55. The two full size Sustainable Land Management (SLM) projects in the LD focal area (GEF 3362 and
       GEF 2009) were developed in 2002 when Eritrea launched its National Action Program (NAP) to
       Combat Desertification and Mitigate the Effects of Drought. These projects address the
       interlinked problems of poverty, food insecurity, land degradation and BD losses through the
       development and promotion of innovative SLM technologies and land use planning
       approaches. The small number of projects in this focal area does not reflect the relevant
       contributions made in the national land degradation agenda by these two GEF support
       initiatives, along with other projects classified under SGP or biodiversity. While these activities
       have been relevant, promulgation of the Land Law No.58 of 1994, empowering communities in
       land use and land management aspects, has yet to be approved.
 56. As discussed earlier, Eritrea has received GEF funds to put in place its National Biodiversity
        Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP–GEF ID 137), which was adopted in July 2000. The goals of the
        NBSAP are to restore, conserve and manage the overall Eritrean BD so that it contributes to
        sustainable national economic development (MOLWE-DOE, NBSAP, 2000). This plan enlists a
        comprehensive set of actions to be undertaken in the area of biodiversity. It recognizes three-

                                                                                                         18
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


          core areas: Terrestrial, Marine and Agricultural Biodiversity. It was formulated through the
          active participation of stakeholders, and it covered four major components:
         •   Eritrea Biodiversity Stocktaking Assessment Report;

         •   Eritrea BD Economic Assessment;
         •   Assessment of the National Policies, Legislative and Institutional Frameworks; and

         •   Preparation of the First National Report to the CBD.
 57. Examples of activities in the Stocktaking Assessment Framework included: plans for expansion of
        improved biomass saving stoves, initiating the establishment of the baseline data of the CMIB
        and developing ICAMP, and an Assessment of Capacity Building Needs for Biodiversity.
 58. Eritrea is particularly vulnerable to climate change and while adaptation and climate resilience
        have been integrated in GEF projects focusing on land rehabilitation to reverse the adverse
        impacts of land degradation, particularly in the Catchment and Landscape Management and
        the SLM pilot projects discussed earlier, the country has not developed an LDCF portfolio, save
        for one project, the development of the NAPA (GEF ID 1959), and only recently was a project
        funded through the Adaptation Fund to be implemented by UNDP 10.
 59. Going forward, several changes in the portfolio mix could be envisioned. For example, through the
       national communications to the UNFCCC in 2001 and 2012, The Government of Eritrea had
       identified a number of renewable energy sources. The prospect of wind and solar energy has
       been initiated and should be continued and expanded to cover other areas of Eritrea that have
       already been mapped out for potential wind power. Eritrea’s position along the rift valley also
       makes it an excellent candidate for geothermal energy exploration as has been explored
       recently by the Ministry of Energy and Mines 11. Even though land degradation pressures are still
       intense, fuel costs are rising and there is generally a lack of access to energy, both in urban and
       rural areas, the government has yet to substantially develop those alternate energy sources.

Conclusion 7: The Government of Eritrea exhibits a high level of country ownership and
commitment to GEF supported projects; however, governance aspects need to be
considered when aiming at improving implementation of environmental legislation.
 60. GEF interventions have been strategically prioritized by the OFP taking into account the existing
       opportunities and constraints, relevance to national agenda and a projects’ objective. National
       institutions design projects that are consistent with country objectives as well as the
       operational strategies of focal areas and efforts are made to avoid unnecessary duplication of
       efforts between focal areas.




10
 The “Climate Change Adaptation Programme in Water and Agriculture” will be focused in the Anseba region of Eritrea
11
  Geothermal Exploration in Eritrea – Status Report. Presented at Short Course on Exploration for Geothermal Resources
organized by UNU-GTP, KenGen and GDC, at Lake Naivasha, Kenya, November 1-22, 2009. Ermias Yohannes. Ministry of Energy
and Mines.


                                                                                                                    19
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 61. As an indicator of ownership, co-financing can signal the strength of the commitment of
        beneficiaries, implementing agencies and executing agencies to projects. Furthermore, it helps
        to ensure the success and local acceptance of projects by linking them to sustainable
        development. This CPE observed that Eritrea has been successful in mobilizing its own
        resources as well as co-financing from other organizations. Furthermore GEF Projects in Eritrea
        originate within national agencies, such as the Department of Environment, Ministry of
        Agriculture, Ministry of Energy and Mines and other national agencies
 62. The amount of co-financing for GEF projects can also be considered satisfactory, although it is
       expectedly lower when compared to larger recipient countries. For example, GEF projects in
       Eritrea have leveraged 64.9% in co-financing, while co-financing has averaged 85% in South
       Africa, and 84% in India (CPE National Reports). The LD focal area showed the greatest capacity
       to leverage funding, followed by POPs. As the largest Agency, It should also be no surprise that
       the GEF supported projects in Eritrea received the major share of their Agency co-financing
       through the UNDP.
 63. Country ownership for SGP-Supported projects is also strong for the explicit effectiveness they
       have demonstrated in a short time in enhancing interest in environmental issues among rural
       communities. As a result, community groups tend to show their readiness to make a
       worthwhile contribution in the future. This confidence has paved the way for many of the
       groups that have received funding from the SGP to submit proposals for larger funds to other
       funding agencies. Of the total investment of USD 652,940 that was expended, 46% was co-
       financed by the UNDP, followed by the contribution from communities at approximately
       36%. In terms of interventions, the improved traditional stove and solar powered IT system for
       schools accounted for one third of the total funds expended (33%). The current level of
       contribution from local community beneficiaries is a clear indication of increasing local and
       national interest and ownership in GEF SGP projects.
 64. At present, several key environmental related items of legislation remain in “draft” form and have
       not been promulgated into legally binding acts. While environmental protection has not been
       majorly hampered by the lack of a full policy framework, the evaluation notes that key
       enforcement tools are not in place to abate environmental degradation or allow for further
       evolutions in sustainable land management, which would result from, for example, secure land
       tenure laws.
 65.   There is also growing consensus emphasizing that governance aspects have a strong effect on environmental actions and outcomes.
           Measures that strengthen the rule of law, transparency and public participation may be equally or more important than specific
                                                                                official endorsement of
           environmental policies or projects to improve environmental outcomes. Thus in addition to the
           all elements of an environmental legal framework and developing capacities of environmental
           authorities and sector ministries, good governance is acknowledged as an important factor to
           assist with better environmental management in the country leading to conservation of
           globally significant flora and fauna.

EFFICIENCY



                                                                                                                                            20
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


Conclusion 8: Project design factors, particularly over-ambitious objectives, have often
caused implementation over-runs.
 66. In Eritrea, all 6 FSPs have taken more than 18 months from work-program entry stage to CEO
        approval. For FSPs, a 22 months standard has been proclaimed for time elapsed between work
        program approval in the Council and CEO endorsement for GEF-4 projects and an 18 months
        standard for GEF-5. The Conservation management of Eritrea's Coastal, Marine, and Island
        Biodiversity (GEF ID 411) was supposed to close in 2003, but it closed 5 years later, in 2008. The
        Wind Energy Applications Project (GEF ID 1136) was supposed to close in 2007, but it closed
        two years later, in 2009. The Enabling Activities have also been running over their allocated
        times: 3 out of the 5 projects we delayed, the first by 1 years, and the other two by 2 years.
 67. One factor that may influence sustainability is a project’s initial design, which in the case of Eritrea
       was often over-ambitious. For example, the Coastal and Marine Island Biodiversity project
       (GEF ID 411) originally attempted to cover the whole of the Red Sea coast of Eritrea and its
       islands. While the scope was later revised to focus on more limited coverage, precious time and
       resources were initially exhausted. According to stakeholder, the revised project could have
       given more consideration to post-completion action plans, however the inclusion of a strong
       community-based component within the project has been a positive factor in maintenance of
       project outcomes.
 68. The concept and definition of co-financing as difficult to understand was cited by stakeholders as a
       barrier that cannot be met by some institutions and which contributes to delays. Project
       formulation processes for preparation of GEF projects were also perceived as complex and time
       consuming.

Conclusion 9: Synergies and coordination in programming and implementation among
GEF Agencies and Eritrean institutions, as well as among Eritrean institutions
themselves are limited.
 69. The Eritrean Focal Point Office has on several occasions chaired a Steering Committee to guide
       discussions on GEF portfolio formulation, SGP initiatives, etc. All GEF supported projects have
       had national steering committees that were formed to guide the project management units
       (PMUs) as well as to set priorities for project activities.
 70. While mechanisms for networking among GEF Agencies, national institutions, GEF projects and
       other donor-supported projects and activities exist, they have not been fully effective for
       better synergies in GEF project programming and implementation. The potential for increased
       synergy and collaborative efforts among the agencies and national institutions involved in
       programming and implementation could be further realized.
 71. Roles and areas of cooperation between the Government and the UNDP, the most predominant
        Agency in the portfolio, are clearly specified for interactions even beyond the GEF portfolio. In
        practice, the mechanisms are functioning adequately however Eritrean national institutions
        could be better informed of one another’s related activities and there are few forums to



                                                                                                          21
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         discuss the challenges of sustainable livelihoods, land degradation and biodiversity loss
         amongst all interested parties.
 72. For example, the coordination to steer the implementation of the country’s two SLM projects
        appears to have weaknesses at the national level. More synergies were visible at the regional
        level (i.e. between the line ministries and local administrations), but it appears to be less
        transparent when it comes to coordination between the various executing agencies and the
        Operational Focal Point (OFP) at the national level. There is a tendency for institutions to move
        forward with their own agendas with no definite schedule for meetings and contacts between
        themselves. Improvements were noted with coordination moving steadily in the right direction
        with greater awareness and willingness among all those concerned, although cases of
        ambiguity still remain.
 73. Efforts have been underway to achieve a more synergistic approach across the various national
        executing institutions for GEF supported activities.

Conclusion 10: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) systems of a number of projects are
weak and thus M&E is not significantly contributing to the efficiency and effectiveness
of GEF support in Eritrea.
 74. The evaluation exercise showed that most GEF projects have monitoring and evaluation protocols
       in the form of Project Implementation Reports (PIRs) and Terminal Evaluations (TEs). However,
       these were not always available within the GEF PMIS system. Once they were compiled, a
       review concluded that monitoring information was not adequately employed to make on the
       timely corrections of problematic issues especially those related to outcome sustainability. A
       case in point would be the CMIB (GEF ID 411), where its supervision (or lack thereof) allowed
       the over-ambitious project to carry on until close to original project completion date before its
       parameters were redefined. For the wind energy project, supervision reports simply did not
       record the inappropriate procurement of technical services and equipment and supplies, not
       only causing delays but ultimately affecting the establishment of the off-grid wind energy
       component of the project. All supervision reports and even the terminal evaluation conclude
       satisfactory results, even for M&E.
 75. The executing institutions for GEF-supported programs have made progress by way of establishing
       mechanisms for M&E; unfortunately, these institutions infrequently come together internally
       and discuss procedural as well as operational matters related to GEF projects. Within the
       context of the above, more remains to be desired in terms of putting things into practice as the
       record of results are not adequately shared and reported on regular basis. Furthermore,
       interviews with concerned government officials reveal that a lack of sufficient funds, shortage
       in transport facilities, and limited human capacity have been reported as formidable
       constraints to put M&E into practice.




                                                                                                       22
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


1.5 Recommendations


Recommendations to the GEF


Recommendation 1: The GEF should encourage efforts to build the GEF Operational
Focal Point (OFP) and National Executing Agency capacity in Monitoring and Evaluation
(M&E) related activities.
 76. Capacity building is a continuous process and, as such, GEF should continue to support capacity
       building through training, institutional strengthening, awareness raising and particularly
       knowledge sharing mechanisms, management and sharing of experiences across the different
       ecological regions of Eritrea.
 77. In particular, M&E of the GEF portfolio in Eritrea is largely fragmented among a few Agencies and
        project management offices in the national institutions. The disparate data and systems do not
        allow for a holistic perspective of the overall status and results of the GEF portfolio in Eritrea.
        Combined with an overall dearth of quantitative environmental data, accurate monitoring and
        evaluation of global environmental benefits is difficult.
 78. Greater knowledge of M&E activities in the national portfolio would ensure timely quality
       assurance of technical assistance and the timely release of funds to the executing agency to
       increase implementation success and likelihood of sustainability of the project benefits where
       difficulties are reported regarding baseline information and the wording of indicators and
       outcomes; and where often, adaptive decisions are not made until the midterm review is
       carried out, resulting in unjustifiable delays and faulty procurement. Support and
       institutionalization of M&E system to correct faulty implementation procedure or practices in a
       timely manner would enable the Eritrean government to more effectively mainstream results
       into national strategy and decision making with other government offices (Energy, Finance,
       Agriculture, etc.) for planning and managing global environmental resources.
 79. Concomitantly, the mandates and responsibilities of GEF implementing along with the executing
       agencies and the OFP as a project draws closer to close, need to be reviewed in order to ensure
       the smooth transition of the end of GEF support and sustainability of project outcomes.
 80. Future updates to the GEF Monitoring and Evaluation Policy should consider GEF-5 experiences, as
        gathered in this Eritrea and other Country Portfolio Evaluations, in the application of Minimum
        Requirement 4, concerning the engagement of the Operational Focal Point in M&E-related
        activities.

Recommendation 2: The GEF should continue to support the SGP in Eritrea and explore
the systemic use of the national SGP programme to function as a service provider to
deliver community level support activities for future FSPs and MSPs.
 81. Even though its duration has not been long, the SGP has a high profile in Eritrea for its successful
        work in linking communities to environmental management and sustainable livelihoods,


                                                                                                         23
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         particularly through Income Generating Activities. Partly, the program has been so effective
         because many SGP projects are replicating the community based component of the SLM FSP
         projects. The systemic use of the SGP as an institutionalized delivery mechanism for community
         based component of larger GEF projects, would enable use of accumulated SGP expertise and
         experience to effectively deliver local level activities for GEF projects/programs while
         optimizing the use of GEF resources (cost saving due to the pre-existence of SGP structures,
         staffs and work procedures.



Recommendations to the Government of Eritrea


Recommendation 3: The OFP should re-instigate regular meetings of the national steering
committee and undertake a National Portfolio Formulation Exercise (NPFE) for GEF-6.
 82. The Eritrean National GEF Coordinating/Steering Committee should meet regularly with the aim of
       reviewing results from the existing portfolio and begin planning for the GEF-6 portfolio. Such
       interactions would also serve to enhance synergies amongst all stakeholders including, national
       institutions and development partners. This would be a big step forward for achieving the
       desired results and enhancing efficiency, effectiveness and sustainability.
 83. Development of future GEF portfolios in Eritrea should also give due consideration to involvement
       from the public including women and youth in the design and execution of national projects,
       including small grants. Intended and unintended impacts on the public, including women,
       youth, and other civil society actors, should also be overtly discussed during the NPFE




                                                                                                    24
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




2. Evaluation Framework
 84. This chapter presents the background information, objectives, scope and methodology
        relevant to and used in the GEF Eritrea Country Portfolio Evaluation (CPE) process.

2.1 The Global Environment Facility
 85. The GEF provides funding to achieve global environmental benefits. GEF support
       modalities include the following:
         Full-Size Projects (FSP), which have funding of more than $1 million
         Medium-size projects (MSP), which have funding of$1 million or less
         Enabling activities (EA), which are intended to help countries meet their reporting
          obligations under the various conventions for which the GEF serves as a financial
          mechanism.
         Project preparation grants (PPGs), formerly known as project development facility
          (PDF) grants, which provide funding for the preparation and development of projects
         Small Grants Programme (SGP), which provides funding of less than $50,000, directed
          at NGOs and local organizations; small GEF grants are structured into the SGP which is
          administered by UNDP
 86. The GEF officially began with a two-year pilot phase from 1992 to 1994. This was followed
       by four regular four-year replenishment periods: GEF-1 (1995–98), GEF-2 (1999–2002),
       and GEF-3 (2003–06), GEF-4 (2007-10). GEF-5 was initiated in 2011 and continues
       through 2014. Until and including GEF‑3, there were no country allocations and eligible
       GEF member countries submitted their requests through the different GEF Agencies on
       a demand basis. An allocation system was introduced for GEF-4 and revised for GEF-5.
       As of this writing, negotiations have concluded for the GEF-6 replenishment.

2.2 Background
 87. The Eritrea CPE aims to provide the GEF Council and the Government of Eritrea (GOE) with
       an assessment of results and performance of GEF supported activities in the country,
       and to examine how GEF supported activities fit into the national strategies and
       priorities as well as within the global environmental mandate of the GEF.
 88. From among 163 GEF-eligible countries, countries are grouped into four (4) categories
        based on their STAR allocation. A country is proposed for portfolio evaluation based on
        criteria that include size, maturity, diversity and coverage through past work of the GEF
        Evaluation Office Eritrea was thus selected on the basis of its comparatively large and
        diverse portfolio (completed, on-going and in-pipeline projects) in STAR group C
        (medium/low STAR allocation), ranking 2nd out of 10 countries in the SSA region. Its
        status as a least developing country and a fragile one emerging from recent conflict are


                                                                                                25
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



           also contributing factors for evaluation coverage. Finally, Eritrea had not been
           adequately covered by the Evaluation Office through its past work.
 89. The GEF Evaluation Office proposed the Country Portfolio Evaluation for Eritrea to the
       Government of Eritrea. The GEF Operational Focal Point, on behalf of the Government
       of Eritrea, accepted this proposal. A team from the GEF Evaluation Office visited Eritrea
       on a pre-evaluation mission in February 2013 to discuss the modalities for the
       evaluation and meet with other national stakeholders. Based on these discussions, the
       Evaluation Office determined the general structure of the evaluation team.
 90. Thereafter, based on an open and transparent multi-stage selection process, the group,
       Economic and Social Consultancy (ECOSOC) was selected as the national institution for
       execution of the evaluation. Considering the suggestions received from the national
       stakeholders, the Evaluation Office also appointed two experts as members of a peer
       review panel.
 91. In April 2013, the first consultation meetings with the stakeholders were organized in
        Asmara to scope the evaluation. Based on the inputs received during this consultation,
        the standard terms of reference for CPE was revised to make them specific to Eritrea
        (see Annex C). Thereafter, the evaluative phase of the Eritrea CPE ran from May-
        September 2013 and finished in October 2013.
 92. The preliminary emerging findings of the evaluation were shared with the national
       stakeholders in a workshop held in Asmara in September 2013. This draft report
       incorporates the feedback received during the workshop and also inputs from the Peer
       Review Panel.

2.3 Objectives
 93. The purpose of the Eritrea CPE is to provide the GEF Council and the GOE with an
       assessment of results and performance of the GEF supported activities at country level,
       and how the GEF supported activities fit into the national strategies and priorities as
       well as within the global environmental mandate of the GEF. Based on this overall
       purpose, the Eritrea CPE will have the following specific objectives:
            Evaluate the effectiveness and results of GEF support in the country, with attention
             to the sustainability of achievements at the project level and progress toward impact
             on global environmental benefits.
            Evaluate the relevance and efficiency of GEF support in Eritrea from several points of
             view: national environmental frameworks and decision-making processes, the GEF
             mandate of achieving of global environmental benefits, and GEF policies and
             procedures.
            Provide feedback and knowledge sharing to (1) the GEF Council in its decision
             making process, (2) Eritrea on its collaboration/participation in the GEF, and (3) the


                                                                                                  26
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



           different agencies and organizations involved in the preparation and
           implementation of GEF support.
 94. The Eritrea CPE aims to bring to the attention of Council different experiences and lessons
       on how the GEF support is implemented in Eritrea. It seeks to analyse the performance
       of individual projects as part of the overall GEF portfolio. The CPE is not aimed at
       evaluating or rating the performance of GEF Agencies, Eritrean entities (national
       agencies or civil society organizations that are involved), or individual projects,
       including the SGP portfolio.

2.4 Scope
 95. The Eritrea CPE is aimed at covering all types of GEF-supported activities in the country at
       different stages of the project cycle (completed, under implementation and pre-
       implementation) and implemented by all the GEF Agencies in all the focal areas. The
       GEF portfolio assessed in this evaluation is focused on national projects and the SGP
       but also considers a portfolio review of the global and regional projects. Project
       proposals under consideration were not explicitly part of the evaluation, although
       those that have gained the GEF Council approval are listed and discussed, as
       appropriate. The cut-off date for analysis was June 30, 2012.

2.5 Methodology and Approach
 96. The Eritrea CPE was conducted between March 2013 and October 2013 by an evaluation
       team comprised of staff from the GEF Evaluation Office and the national consultants,
       ECOSOC. The key evaluation questions are contained in the terms of reference (Annex
       C) and the associated evaluation matrix (Annex D).
 97. In the evaluation matrix, each of these key questions is complemented with a list of
         relevant indicators, potential sources of data and the methodology – tools and
         methods – used to answer the key questions. The key questions of the evaluation were
         to be answered based on the analysis of the data collected during the evaluative phase
         of evaluation.
 98. The Eritrea CPE has been able to answer the key questions, with some reservations
       concerning information available on: 1) progress to impact, given that impact level
       information is not routinely collected as part of the M&E systems of GEF Agencies and
       requires the use of specific impact evaluation methods. In-country M&E systems for
       environmental data are also undeveloped, yielding less than desired amounts of data
       on global environmental trends. With half of the portfolio dedicated to initial Enabling
       Activities, and only two full size completed projects, there were limitations of data on
       portfolio and information available for analysis; and difficulties regarding baseline
       information and the wording of indicators and outcomes.
 99. The evaluation team used GEF’s standardized tools and project review protocols for the
       CPEs and adapted these to the Eritrean context. Several sources of information from

                                                                                               27
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



             different levels, both in and outside Eritrea, were used. Stakeholders and officials were
             interviewed and consulted during the evaluation. These included officials of the
             Ministry Of Land Water and Environment (MOLWE), the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA),
             Ministry of Marine Resources (MOMR), regional and sub-regional authorities and
             officials, the UNDP, UNEP, FAO and the GEF OFP, i.e. MOLWE. Focus group discussions
             (FGDs) were held with Small Grant Programme (SGP) beneficiaries, civil society
             organizations such as the National Union of Eritrean Women (NUEW), the National
             Union of Eritrean Youth and Students (NUEYS) and local communities (see Annex E).
 100. During the research phase of the evaluation, the team conducted a literature review to
        extract existing reliable evaluative evidence, and produce the GEF portfolio database,
        the Country Environmental Legal Framework (CELF), the Global Environment Benefits
        Assessment (GEBA) and the analysis of project protocols.
 101. Projects for field visits were selected based on several criteria, including: i) whether they
         had been completed and had a technical evaluation or were nearing completion; ii)
         representation within the portfolio by focal area, agency, modality and status; iii)
         accessibility to project activities and sites; and iv) resources and time to conduct the
         evaluation.

 102. Two review of outcomes to impact (ROtI) 12 assessment were conducted 13; one in the
        biodiversity focal area for the Conservation Management of the Coastal, Marine and
        Island Biodiversity project (GEF ID 411) and one in climate change on the completed
        Wind Energy Applications project (GEF ID 1136). In addition, two GEF Small Grants
        Projects (SGPs) were visited (Annex E).
 103. The ROtI work was preceded by constructing a model ‘Theory of Change’ for each project.
        The ROtI exercise assisted the consultants to overcome the challenges of measuring
        impacts of the projects, by identifying the sequence of conditions and factors deemed
        necessary to convert project outcomes into the ultimate intended impacts. The
        assumption underlying the ‘ROtI Theory of Change’ is that ‘an assessment of the logical
        process linking outcomes to impact is realistic to achieve during relatively short
        evaluation missions, and provides a potentially robust indirect measure of the ultimate
        impact’.
 104. Triangulation of the results was conducted during an internal workshop between the team
         on July 23, 24, 2013 Triangulation refers to the review, in parallel, of the combination of
         several research methodologies and/or data sources in the study of the same
         phenomenon. The purpose of triangulation in this evaluation was to increase the
         credibility and validity of the results. Results reported below come from triangulation of
         various sources drawn from: the literature review, Country Environmental Legal
         Framework (CELF), Global Environmental Benefits Assessment (GEBA), Project review

12   http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/CPE-ROtI_Practitioners_Handbook_4August2009.pdf
13   Projects included in field visits are described in Annex F.

                                                                                                             28
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



         protocols (PRPs), ROtI exercise, field visits and stakeholder consultations and interviews
         were assessed using the main evaluation indicators of effectiveness, results,
         sustainability, relevance and efficiency.

2.6 Limitations
 105. The section outlines some of the limitations that were taken into account and addressed
        wherever possible while conducting the evaluation. First, attribution is an area of
        complexity and a limitation for all CPEs. This evaluation does not attempt to provide a
        direct attribution of development and environmental results to the GEF activities. The
        Evaluation Office recognizes there are other development actors and national
        institutions contributing to overall results. For example, Eritrea has been conducting
        nationwide land degradation prevention projects (terracing, check-dams, forestation,
        etc.) well before the GEF’s support began. Indeed, land degradation programs and
        projects in Eritrea are set in a multi-actor and multi-factor context. Nonetheless, an
        assessment of the GEF contribution towards overall achievements is attempted in this
        report.
 106. Evaluating the impacts of GEF-funded full size projects was also not a straightforward task
         due to a lack of reliable monitoring information of key indicators on, for example, flora
         and fauna diversity, GHG emissions, and climate change outcomes and impacts. The
         CPE tried to overcome these difficulties by undertaking two field ROtIs. While, some
         projects have an in-built M&E mechanism, much more remains for them to become
         functional. As such, these “left-over” mechanisms are rarely used to inform decision
         making or to review project performance and outcomes, either in mid-term reports or
         after project completion. Therefore, there was not much M&E data available and that
         which was, has not provided the evaluation with a useful source of information.




                                                                                                  29
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




3. Context of the Evaluation
3.1 Eritrea: Country Context
 107. Eritrea is located in the Horn of Africa, serving as a bridge between the rest of Africa and
         the Middle East and the Gulf States. It is bordered by Sudan in the West, Ethiopia in the
         South, Djibouti in the Southeast and by the Red Sea in the East. Eritrea has a total land
         area of 124,300 km2 with mainland coastline of around 1,900 km, which runs along the
         important Red Sea oil and shipping route, connecting the Mediterranean Sea with the
         Arabian Gulf and the Indian Ocean. In the Eritrean territorial waters, there are 390
         islands the largest one being the Dahlak Archipelago.

Table 4: General Profile of Eritrea
             Indicator                                         Value          Year

             Total Population                                  6.131
                                                                              2012
                                                                   million
             GDP (current US$)                                 $3.092
                                                                              2012
                                                                   billion
             GNI per capita, Atlas method (current US$)        $450           2012
             Income Level                                      Low Income
             School enrollment, primary (% gross)              47%            2011
             Poverty headcount ratio at national poverty
                                                         69.0                 1993
                line (% of population)
             Life expectancy at birth, total (years)           62             2011
             CO2 emissions (metric tons per capita)            0.1            2010
             % of rural population with access to water        57%            2008
Source: WorldBank.org, Accessed        13th   Dec 2013
Socio-economic status and development context
 108. Eritrea declared its independence and gained international recognition in 1993. The
         predominant languages are Tigrinya and Arabic, while English is used in the
         government's international communication and is the language of instruction in all
         formal education beyond the fifth grade.
 109. The country’s total population is estimated to be just over 6 million, which would put the
        population density at 45 persons per km2 (Population Reference Bureau, 2012). The
        population is young, with the larger proportion living in the countryside. The country
        comprises of nine ethnic groups, of which the Tigrigna and Tigre are the largest,
        constituting 50 and 31% of the total population, respectively (UNICEF, 1994). The rest
        of the population is made of up Afar, Bilen, Kunama, Saho, Naro, and Rashaida, found

                                                                                               30
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


             scattered in the eastern and western lowland regions. These ethnic groups differ in
             language, customs, and dress.
 110. Women in Eritrea consist of about 50% of the estimated one million person potential
        labor force. In addition to their primary responsibly for family care, food processing
        and preparation, and community activities, they contribute significantly to crop
        production and subsistence farming. Understanding the fact that gender equity and
        equality are closely linked to socio-economic development of the country, the GOE has
        formulated a policy to improve the status of women. Over the past years, significant
        achievements have been recorded with regards to, among other things, women’s
        health, education and participation in civil, cultural, economic, political and social life.
        However, many women related development programs are hampered due to economic
        constraints facing the country. As a consequence, women still constitute the majority
        of the poor 14.
 111. The predominant economic activity for more than two thirds of the population is rain-fed
        agriculture. Considering the recurrent drought conditions, it is a risky enterprise, and
        food security remains one of the government’s main concerns. Favorable rains and
        rehabilitation of rural infrastructure have led to improved agricultural performance and
        food security in the last three years. However, almost two thirds of all households are
        reported to face shortages. In years with adequate rainfall, approximately half of the
        food that the country requires has to be imported. According to the IFAD’s Rural
        Poverty Profile (2010), rural households are the most severely affected by poverty
        because of the low productivity of their crops and livestock.
 112. As a consequence, the level of malnutrition is high and 40% of children under five are
         underweight for their age. Life expectancy at birth is 59.2 years, and 40% of the
         population did not have access to an improved water source. Nevertheless, Eritrea is
         on track with regards to MDG targets of 2015 for gender parity in primary education,
         child health, maternal mortality, HIV/AIDS, malaria and other major diseases, albeit
         that the goals of eradication of extreme poverty and achievement of universal primary
         education remain a national challenge (IFAD, April 2006).
 113. Large fiscal and trade deficits are managed through price, exchange rate and interest rate
         controls, which have led to a shortage of foreign exchange and a fall in private sector
         activity. The size of the public debt in proportion to GDP is a concern. The official
         annual inflation rate rose to 13.3% in 2011, from 11.6% in 2010, which has much
         improved compared to 29.5% in 2009.In the longer term, sustained real economic
         growth of 7% or more will be required for Eritrea to reach the Millennium
         Development Goal (MDG) of halving the proportion of people living in extreme poverty
         by 2015 (WB, 2013).


14
     National Union of Eritrean Women, 2004.

                                                                                                   31
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


Climate and Topography
 114. Eritrea is located in the arid and semi-arid regions of the African Sahel. It occupies a
         geopolitically significant location because of its coastline along the strategic Red Sea.
         However, because of its location, the country is continuously faced with challenges of
         recurrent droughts and environmental degradation. Eritrea is divided into six
         administrative regions (zobas). Altitudes range from Amba-Soira in the central
         highlands (3,018m above sea level) to the lowest depression in Danakil (120m below
         sea level). Characterized by black lava formations, smoking volcanic cones, and hot
         springs, Danakil is one of the hottest places on earth, with temperatures typically
         reaching 50oC.
 115. The climate ranges from hot and arid adjacent to the Red Sea, to temperate in the
        highlands and sub-humid in isolated micro-catchment areas of the eastern escarpment.
        About 70% of the country is classified as hot to very hot with mean annual temperature
        of more than 27oC; about 25% as warm to mild with a mean temperature of about 22o
        C, and the remaining parts 5% as cool with a mean annual temperature of less than 19o
        C (FAO, 1994).
 116. The total annual rainfall increases from the north to south and varies from less than 200
        mm in the north-western lowlands to more than 700 mm in the south-western
        lowlands. Besides, the amount of rainfall also increases with altitude. While the coastal
        lowlands are very dry, some areas on the eastern escarpment get more than 1000 mm
        of rain. About 50% of the country receives less than 300 mm, 40% between 300 and
        600 mm and about 10% more than 600 mm of rain per annum (FAO 1994, Haile et al.
        1998).
 117. Eritrea is divided into six agro-ecological zones: (i) the Moist Highlands, (ii) Arid Highlands,
         (iii) Sub-Humid Highlands, (vi) Moist Lowlands, (v) Arid Lowlands and (vi) and the Semi-
         Desert. The ecological diversities if managed well offer several opportunities for
         agricultural and livestock development. Owing to its long coastal area, Eritrea is
         endowed with huge marine resources.

3.2 Environmental Resources in Key GEF Support Areas
Environmental Threats and Challenges
 118. By virtue of its geographical location and because of its low adaptive capacities, Eritrea is
         one of the most vulnerable countries in the world to the vagaries of weather and
         climate. The main hazards are increased climatic variability, recurring drought, flash
         flooding, and sea level rise. Rainfall is also expected to be seriously affected by climate
         change, varying by a ratio ranging from 0.1 to 0.15 mm. Such long term changes in
         climate will have serious adverse impacts on agriculture, water resources, forestry,
         coastal environments, and human health at the national level affecting regional and


                                                                                                    32
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


           global conditions. In fact, impacts are already being observed in each of these sectors,
           as briefly outlined below:
     Agriculture: Rains in the usual April/May are fast disappearing, the main rainy season starts
     later and finishes earlier, some crops and native cultivars are disappearing from production,
     common failure of rain-fed crops, appearance of new crops pests, depletion and drying of
     water wells for irrigation, unusually heavy flooding. These circumstances are taking a heavy
     toll on subsistence farmers.
     Forestry: Reduced soil moisture adversely affects the growth of shrubs and trees, shortages of
     biomass for energy and house construction, declines in other biomass products (e.g.
     frankincense, fodder).
     Water Resources: Water is a scarce commodity in Eritrea, with no perennial water source; all
     rivers and their tributaries are mostly seasonal and intermittent except the Setit. Ground water
     is the major source of water, and drinking water standards have yet to be formulated.
     Recurrent drought, warmer temperatures and high evaporation rates are resulting in smaller
     stream flows, lower groundwater levels, deterioration in water quality, and disappearance of
     base flows, which are the source of water supply for urban, rural, livestock and industry.
     Coastal villages’ water supplies are very sensitive to salt-water intrusion and flooding.
     Coastal and Marine Environment: Sea temperature rise has already had a negative effect on
     coral reefs and on the fisheries that they support. Temperature changes impact on food and
     nutrients supply, growth, survival, reproduction, prey-predator dynamics and habitat. There
     are increased instances of toxic algal blooms (e.g. red tide) and mangroves and sea grasses are
     being impacted through altered sediment budgets.
     Public Health: Malaria has now been observed at altitudes close to 2,000 meters in Eritrea;
     food insecurity has increased along with malnutrition, diarrhea is becoming more common as
     a result of contamination caused by flooding, droughts are creating difficulties for maintaining
     hygiene. Sanitation and solid waste management are other environmentally issues with public
     health related consequences that need to be addressed.

Biodiversity
 119. Eritrea is part of the Eastern African Highlands and Horn of Africa global biodiversity
         hotspot 15. In the Highlands, the foothills support woodland vegetation, while forests at
         slightly higher elevations are dominated by conifers. Above 3,000 meters, the Afro-
         alpine ecosystem consists of grassland and moorland, with an abundant herb layer,
         while the heath land scrub above this is dominated by heathers 16.The nation benefits
         from a highly diverse range of globally unique and significant terrestrial ecosystems.
         These include: East Sudanian savannah, Ethiopian/Eritrean highland forests,
         Ethiopian/Eritrean highland grasslands and woodlands, Ethiopian/Eritrean xeric

15
 http://www.conservation.org/where/priority_areas/hotspots/africa/Pages/africa.aspx
16http://www.conservation.org/where/priority_areas/hotspots/africa/Eastern-Afromontane/Pages/default.aspx

                                                                                                            33
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


             grasslands and shrub, Somali Acacia-Commiphora bush and thickets, and Sahelian
             Acacia savannah.
 120. Eritrea is also endowed with vast marine biodiversity resources with many considering the
         region one of the earth’s most important repositories of marine life. The country has
         nearly 2,000 km of relatively pristine Red Sea coastline (1,000 km mainland and 1,000
         km of island) The warm temperatures of the Red Sea give it perhaps the world’s
         highest-level of endemism and the highest species diversity of any oceanic water body
         west of Indonesia. There are over 1,100 fish species and 44 genera of hard corals being
         recorded” 17. Around 18% of fish species and 20% of coral species are reported to be
         endemic to these waters 18. Eritrea’s thousands of kilometers of undeveloped and
         under-exploited coastal areas are defined by diverse mangrove, coral reef, sea grass
         and inter-tidal habitats.
 121. It has been recognized that there are a total of 126 mammal species found in Eritrea. Of
          the 577 species of birds, around 320 are resident, where about 50% have historical
          breeding records, 195 are migrants and around 50 are recorded as breeding in Eritrea.
          Eritrea shares up to 13 species of endemic bird species with Ethiopia alone. There are a
          total of 90 reptiles and 19 amphibian species recorded, of which there are two possible
          endemic reptiles and one possible endemic amphibian. However, there is no
          comprehensive national checklist of species 19. Estimates suggest that there are threats
          to number of species: 19 fish, 10 mammal, 14 birds and 4 higher plant species 20.
 122. Genetic erosion of potentially global significant agro-biodiversity is also occurring, as the
        species such as sorghum, barley and teff, which are most genetically diverse in the
        Eritrean and Ethiopian highlands (DOE, NBSAP 2000), are being replaced by High
        Yielding Varieties as farmers attempt to compensate for the diminished productivity of
        an unhealthy ecosystem.
 123. Many crops domesticated elsewhere have been introduced to Eritrea and now constitute
        staple food of the population. This means that Eritrea has given and received genetic
        materials. This calls for the orderly genetic materials sharing by following the legal
        national laws and policies, and international conventions and protocols. As millions of
        farmers in dry areas around the world depend on sorghum, barley and teff, the
        importance of maintaining the genetic bank of these crops for potentially useful
        characteristics should be very clear.

Climate Change



17http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/document/11-25-13%20COUNICL%20DOCUMENT.pdf

18
 http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/document/11-25-13%20COUNICL%20DOCUMENT.pdf
19http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/erinc2.pdf

20
     NBSAP

                                                                                                    34
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 124. The Eritrean population is an agrarian society where the large majority directly depends
        on land resources for their livelihoods. Climate change and their vulnerability to it,
        present challenges to crop and vegetable farming and cultivation, livestock rearing,
        forestry conservation, water resource management, coastal and marine environmental
        protection and the safeguarding of public health.
 125. Anthropogenic factors, both occurring at local and global levels are the main driving forces
        of the climate change in Eritrea. At the national level, greenhouse gas emissions from
        agricultural activities, forest activities, manure management, and methane emissions
        from livestock are contributory factors to climate change. Heavy dependence on
        biomass to meet household energy requirements has had an adverse effect on the
        forest cover of the country. In turn, this has resulted in desertification, degradation,
        diminishing biodiversity, reduction in grain yields, and a reduction in livestock
        production.
 126. Eritrea's inventory of greenhouse gases (GHG), takes 1994 as the base year, and addresses
         emissions of Carbon Dioxide, Methane, Nitrous Oxide, Carbon Monoxide, Nitrogen
         Oxides and Non-Methane Volatile Compounds, across six sectors: energy, transport,
         industry, agriculture, land use change and forestry, and municipal solid waste with the
         remainder coming from imported oil products (MOEM, 2012). The Second National
         Communication to the UNFCCC only reports emissions figures from the year 2000 and
         so figures from the World Resource Institute’s (WRI) ‘climate data explorer’ website
         have also been used (see Table 5 and Table 6). From the Second National
         Communication we know the dominant mode of transport in Eritrea is by road and in
         terms of energy consumption; road transport is the highest consumer of fossil fuel
         products. Of the total 1994 GHG emissions from fossil fuel combustion, the transport
         sector accounted for 41%, energy sector 35 %, public and commercial sector 10 %;
         manufacturing and the residential sectors each accounted for 7% 21.
 127. The 2nd National Communication also gives the values of CO2 emissions by sectors, with
        land use cover and forestry (LUCF) activities contributing highest to emissions. Eritrea
        heavily depends on biomass sources of energy and this has created a number of
        problems, including the following:

                    •   Fuel wood collection and illegal charcoal making which in turn aggravates
                        deforestation and associated problems like soil erosion and land
                        degradation;

                    •   Diversion of animal and crop residues for energy use deprive the soil of its
                        organic nutrients sources and, hence reduces its productivity;




21
     First National Communication to UNFCCC, 2001
                                                                                                    35
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


                   •    Greenhouse gas emission from smoke and other toxic materials from
                        biomass burning in poorly ventilated houses which causes health hazards to
                        women and children; and

                   •    Much time and effort is spent on collection of dwindling fuel wood.
 128. There are approximately 1500 solar PV systems in the country, installed mainly for water
        pumping, power health centers, schools, communications, but this remains a minor
        factor in the larger energy balance. The total energy demand in 2000 was 628.6 ktoe,
        of which nearly 73.2% was consumed by the household sector, 11.7% by the public and
        commercial sectors, 12.1% for transportation and 2.8% by industry. Overall, 32% of the
        Eritrean population has access to electricity; 78% in urban areas compared to 3% in
        rural areas) (EDHS, 2004) 22. Rural households continue to get 95% of their energy from
        biomass sources, contributing to deforestation and desertification 23.

Table 5: Emissions in Aggregated Values in CO2 Equivalent in Gt, 2000
     GHG Source                              CO2 Equivalent Emissions                            %

                             CO2                CH4                 N2O             Aggregated

     Fuel                    586                168                  0                 754       6.2
     Combustion

     Industrial               35                  0                  0                 35        0.3
     Processes

     Agriculture               -                2793                310               3103       25.4

     LUCF                   8205                 84                  0                8289       67.8

     Waste                    0                  42                  0                 42        0.3

     TOTAL                  8826                3087                310               12223      100

     %                       72.2               25.3                2.5                100

Source: Second National Communication to the UNFCCC, Note: units are million tons



Table 6: Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions in Eritrea by Sector
Year Energy            Industria     Agriculture        Waste      Land Use & Total      Total GHG
                       l                                           Forestry   GHG        Emissions
                       Processes                                   (LUCF)     Emission Exc. LUCF
                                                                              s     Inc.
                                                                              LUCF



22
 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/erinc2.pdf, p57
23
 http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/erinc2.pdf, p66
                                                                                                     36
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


1990 -                0.00            2.81                0.35           -       5.15           5.15

1992 2.50             0.00            2.64                0.37           -       5.53           5.53
1994 2.83             0.02            2.48                0.39           0.97    6.68           5.71
1996 2.88             0.02            2.64                0.42           0.97    6.94           5.97
1998 2.34             0.02            3.13                0.47           0.97    6.95           5.97
2000 2.11             0.02            3.62                0.53           0.97    7.24           6.27
2002 2.13             0.02            3.48                0.57           0.95    7.06           6.11
2004 2.07             0.02            3.33                0.60           0.95    7.07           6.12
2006 1.84             0.02            3.28                0.64           0.95    6.76           5.81
2008 1.66             0.02            3.33                0.67           0.95    6.59           5.64
2009 1.63             0.02            3.35                0.69           0.95    6.67           5.72
2010 -                -               -                   -              -       6.65           5.70
Source: CAIT 2.0, WRI’s climate data explorer (accessed Dec 15th 2013)
Note: Units are in MtCO2e – Megatons of CO2 equivalent



Figure 3: GHG Emissions by Sector (MtCO2e)

 8                                                                              Energy
 7
                                                                                Industrial Processes
 6
 5                                                                              Agriculture

 4                                                                              Waste
 3
                                                                                Land Use and Forestry
 2
                                                                                (LUCF)
 1                                                                              Total GHG Emissions
 0                                                                              Including LUCF
                                                                                Total GHG Emissions
     1990
     1991
     1992
     1993
     1994
     1995
     1996
     1997
     1998
     1999
     2000
     2001
     2002
     2003
     2004
     2005
     2006
     2007
     2008
     2009
     2010
     2011




                                                                                Excluding LUCF

Source: CAIT 2.0, WRI’s climate data explorer (accessed Dec 15th 2013)
Note: MtCO2e – Megatons of CO2 equivalent

Land Degradation
 129. It is estimated that over 80% of the country’s rural population depends on land resources
          for its livelihood. Land degradation, however, has become a severe problem. At
          present, the degraded area covers 2.4 million hectares, constituting 19% of the total
          area of the country. Soil loss in the Central Highland Agricultural Ecological Zone is
          between 2 and 2.5 tons of soil per hectare annually. Productivity levels are declining


                                                                                                        37
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


          drastically, including crop and livestock yields, and water is becoming increasingly
          scarce (UNDP, 2009).
 130. The root causes of land degradation in Eritrea are related to, among others: (i)
        unsustainable agriculture, overgrazing and unsustainable use of forest resources; (ii)
        inappropriate resource management practices; (iii) inherently poor and infertile soils
        coupled with relatively limited rainfall and limited productivity; (iv) poor knowledge of
        alternative farming practices and over utilization of essential natural resources; (v)
        poorly established incentive measures for SLM that prohibits improved and sustainable
        use of land; (vi) A Land Proclamation and related regulations that are not fully and
        readily enforceable; (vi) land use planning that is not complete and uncoordinated; and
        (vii) inadequate information and knowledge management that acts as a barrier for a
        successful implementation of SLM programs in Eritrea.
 131. According to the FAO, less than 2.1 million hectares (17%) in Eritrea has been assessed as
         having potential for rain fed and irrigated crop production (FAO, 1997). Much of the
         land surface of the country is better suited for pasture than farming. Next to the
         pastureland is land covered by woody vegetation which accounts for about 60.0% of
         the total landmass. The advent of Italian Colonialism resulted in significant
          deforestation. More recent significant effects of land use include urban spread,
          construction of roads and highways that result in accelerated soil erosion, soil
          degradation, salinity of soil – all contributing to the rapid spread of
          desertification.
Table 7: Land Use in Eritrea
                    Land Use                             Area (1,000 ha)

                    Arable Cropland – Irrigated          22

                    Arable Cropland – Rain fed           417
                    Pasture                              7,000
                    Forest and Woodland                  737
                    Other (urban & barren land)          4,256
Source: Third National Report to UNCCD

 132. Deforestation is another cause of concern, with forest cover falling to less than 1% as
        compared to 30% a century ago. Factors like agricultural expansion, increased firewood
        consumption, heavy livestock grazing, war and conflict and construction of traditional
        houses known as ‘Hidmo’ in rural areas are all associated with the loss of forest cover.
 133. The major constraint facing soil conservation and water management have been the
        traditional land tenure system known as ‘Dessa’ System (village ownership). The Dessa
        system, while ensuring fair allocation of farm land to all members of the community,
        discourages longer term investment (either in farm structure or planting long-term

                                                                                                 38
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


            crops) because usufruct right is not more for seven years. The loss of productive land,
            in particular, is exacerbated by recurrent drought which has lasted for more than half
            century. Nonetheless, significant strides towards sustainability and environmental
            recovery have been made by the GOE, with support from the GEF, including
            reforestation programs and discouraging wood from being used as a fuel source.

Persistent Organic Pollutants
 134. POPs are chemical substances that are toxic, persist in the environment for long periods,
        and bio-accumulate as they move up the food chain. POPs pose risks to both human
        health and the environment. Evidence of long-range transportation of these substances
        to regions where they have never been used or produced, as well as the threats they
        pose to the environment of the Earth as a whole, have spurred the international
        community to call for urgent global actions to reduce and eliminate releases of these
        chemicals. FAO with funding from the Government of Japan and Netherlands as well as
        in kind contributions from FAO and the Government of Eritrea prepared a national
        inventory of POPs in Eritrea which was undertaken by the Ministry of Agriculture. The
        registration status of the POPs was established in 2007 24 and is summarized in Table 8.

Table 8: Summary of Pesticide Inventory in Eritrea
                       Pesticides                                           Tons

                       Obsolete                                             335.4

                       Usable                                               56.0
                       Requires Testing                                     163.4
                       Total                                                554.8
                       Contaminated sites                                   21
                       Area of contaminated soil                            1,400 m2
                       Contaminated materials                               16 tons
                       Sprayers                                             5,411
                       Empty containers                                     12,251
Source: National Implementation Plan (NIP) and Country Environnent and Social Assessment

 135. The study showed that the major users of pesticides tend to be the parastatal farms,
        vector control authorities and migratory pest control operations. There is a general lack
        of awareness about pesticides and subsistence farmers will use any pesticide
        (frequently the wrong types) to tackle pest problems, and store empty containers
        inappropriately. The GEF supported inventory project gathered data on pesticides,
        veterinary pesticides, empty pesticide containers, contaminated materials (e.g. seeds
        and fertilizers), contaminated equipment (e.g. sprayers) and contaminated soils. The


24
     POPs Inventory and CESA, 2007 and NIP, 2012

                                                                                                  39
           Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


                         comparative risk analysis has identified 27 stores in total and 10 that should be
                         prioritized for safeguarding. There are 21 contaminated locations, with a total area of
                         1,400 m2. The majority of the 5,411 sprayers recorded were in poor condition; less than
                         30% are usable. There are over 10,000 containers, which are also in generally poor
                         condition. The condition and suitability of storage buildings are generally poor; 96% are
                         located near to human settlement and 51% close to water sources.

           Table 9: Status of POPs in Eritrea, 2012
               Status            Inventory Results        Main Source             Trends                  Recommendations
                                 335.4 T (obsolète)
                                                          Contaminated soil       Promotion of            POPs management
POP            Not produced
                                 56.0 T (usable)          and materials;          substitutes and         guidelines; awareness
Pesticides     or used
                                                          sprayers; containers    alternatives (IPM)      programs
                                 163.4 T (for testing)

                                 376 electrical
               Not               transformers;            Transformers and        Poor storage;           Environmental
               produced;
                                                          capacitors prior to                             legislation; PCB
PCBs
                                 240 capacitors;          1998 electricity        Potential for soil      management plan for
               No law or                                  system upgrade                                  EEC
                                                                                  contamination
               regulation
                                 45+ tons of oil

                                                                                                          Composting;
PCD                              121 potential sources;   Uncontrolled            Knowledge gap on
                                                                                                          recycling; sanitary
Dioxins&       Illegal           352gmTEQ/annum           domestic waste          industrial processes;
                                                                                                          landfill; alternative
Furans                           released                 burning (99%)           low public awareness
                                                                                                          energy promotion

                                 15 T/annum;
               Restricted                                 Control of mosquitos,   No risk assessment;     Alternatives;
DDT            use; Imported     13,321 Kg (Active);      bedbugs and head        Reduced efficacy on     improved monitoring
               since 1970                                 lice by MOH             malaria; poor storage   and storage
                                 38,801 Kg (Obsolete)

           Source: National Implementation Plan (NIP), Eritrea, 2012

           3.3 The Environmental Institutional, Policy and Legal Framework in Eritrea
             136. The principles underlying the environmental legal and policy framework in Eritrea stem
                    from the National Charter of the Popular Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ) and
                    subsequently promulgated laws, proclamations, directives and legal notices, as well as
                    international conventions and protocols that the country has acceded to. Following the
                    attainment of its independence in 1993, Eritrea has been actively engaged in preparing
                    and establishing environmental laws and regulations and promoting policies and
                    strategies.
             137. Eritrea is a signatory to a number of international conventions and protocols, including the
                     Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), the United Nations Framework Convention on
                     Climate Change (UNFCCC), and the United Nations Convention for Combating
                     Desertification (UNCCD). The participation of Eritrea in the implementation of national
                     and regional environmental programs and projects reflects the extent to which the
                     country views itself vulnerable to the vagaries of climate change and biodiversity
                                                                                                            40
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         depletion, and other environmental hazards. The international conventions and
         protocols provide the forum for the country to express issues and grievances, as well as
         access to technical and financial resources to support the implementation of programs
         and projects.
 138. Table 10 lays out the country’s major environmental frameworks and policy documents.
         At this juncture, it is important to note that several Eritrean environmental laws and
         by-laws are still in their draft form, albeit that they still serve as the basic framework
         from which action plans and strategies for environmental programs emanate.

Table 10: Selected National Laws and Regulations on the Environment
 Law, Regulation or Policy                                                      Date of enactment/
                                                                                amendment
 National Policy Documents

 Macro Policy, GOE                                                              1994
 National Constitution, GOE                                                     1997
 National Economic Policy Framework and Program (NEPFP), GOE                    1998-2000
 Interim-Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP), GOE                         2003
 The Five Year Indicative Development Plan (FYIDP), GOE                         2009
 Ten Year Long-Term Indicative Perspective Development Plan (TYIPDP), GOE       2009
 Multi Focal Area / Cross-cutting

 National Environnemental Management Plan (NEMP), MOLWE                         1995
 National Environmental Assessment Procedures & Guidelines (NEAPG), MOLWE       1999
 Environmental Law (Draft), MOLWE                                               2002
 National Agricultural Development Strategy and Policy, MOA                     1994/2005(draft)
 Forest and Wildlife Policy (Draft), MOA                                        2005
 Agriculture Sector Policy (Draft), MOA                                         2006
 Land Use Policy (Draft), MOLWE                                                 2007
 Water Policy, MOLWE                                                            2010
 Biodiversity

 National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) (CBD), MOLWE            1996
 Proclamation on Conservation of Biodiversity (draft)                           1998
 Forest and Wildlife Conservation and Development Proclamation No. 155, MOA     2006
 Biosafety Policy Framework, MOLWE                                              2007
 Climate Change and Energy

 Renewable Energy Sub-Sector Policy, MOME                                       1997
 National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA), MOLWE (DOE)                      2007
 Land Degradation

 Land and Forest Tenure Proclamation No.58, MOLWE                               1994
                                                                                                      41
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 Law, Regulation or Policy                                                           Date of enactment/
                                                                                     amendment
 Legal Notice No. 31, MOLWE                                                          1997
 Land Use Planning Regulatory Framework, MOLWE                                       1999
 National Action Program (NAP) (UNCCD), MOA                                          2002
 Integrated Water Resource Management, MOLWE (WRD)                                   2003
 Water Law, Proclamation No. 162, MOLWE                                              2010
 Five Year Action Plan for The Great Green Wall Initiative (Draft), MLWE             2011-2015
 Ozone Depleting Substances

 ODS Terminal Phase-out Management Plan                                              2008
 Regulation on Ozone Depleting Substances, MOLWE (DOE)                               2010


 Persistent Organic Pollutants

 Regs. for Importation, Handling, Use, Storage and Handling of Pesticides, MOA       2006
 Draft Pesticides Proclamation                                                       2008
 National Implementation Plan on POPs (NIP)                                          2012
 International Waters

 National Coastal Policy (draft), MOMR                                               2006
Note: MOMR - Ministry of Marine Resource, MOA – Ministry of Agriculture, MOLWE – Ministry of Land, Water and
    Environment, DOE – Department of Environment (MOLWE), WRD – Water Resources Department, GOE –
    Government of Eritrea
Source: Eritrea CPE Country Environmental Legal Framework (CELF), Technical Document, Volume 2


The Institutional Framework:
 139. The Ministry of Land, Water and Environment (MOLWE), established in 1992 is the
        primary GOE custodian of the country‘s natural resources entrusted with the
        developing the institutional framework for sustainable use of natural resources. Within
        the ministry, the Department of Environment (DOE), which shifted from the Ministry of
        Agriculture to MOLEW in 1997, is responsible for coordinating environmental actions in
        Eritrea. This is stated, in the concise mission statement of the NEMP, as “The Eritrean
        agency for the Environment is responsible for coordinating the protection and
        enhancement of Eritrea’s environment so that rapid social and economic development
        can be achieved in consonance with the rational and sustainable use of resources for
        current as well as future generations.” However the DOE has limited institutional, legal
        and technical capacity to tackle the huge task of dealing with the nation’s complex
        environmental problems and its management.
 140. The Department of Environment has evolved over the past 15 years. It was once called the
        Eritrean Environment Agency. It had considerable statutory authority but virtually no
        enforcement power to influence other actors due in part to its newness and also to its
                                                                                                         42
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         initial placement under the Ministry of Local Government. However the DOE’s new
         placement within the Ministry of Land, Water and Environment gives it a relatively
         better position from competing priorities. Because the MOLWE itself requires much
         needed institutional strengthening and capacity building, its full potential has also yet
         to be realized.

The Policy Framework
 141. The Government of Eritrea has developed several policy documents aimed at stimulating
        economic growth and the conservation of environment and natural resources having
        regional, national and global significance. Institutional structures are also changing
        constantly to cope with new challenges and demands.
 142. The Macro-Policy Document (GOE, 1994) outlines the background for Eritrea's national
        economic growth strategy and pursues the guiding principles of human-centered,
        efficient, sustainable and equitable development. In apparent recognition of the
        importance of environment in national development, it has devoted a separate chapter
        on minimizing the potential environmental consequences of development decisions.
        Further, in 1997, the Eritrean Constitution (Article8, Sub-Article3) affirmed the need to
        pursue a sustainable use of natural resources.
 143. The National Environmental Management Plan (NEMP) for Eritrea (DOE, 1995) provides
        the basic policy document for action in the environmental sector and lays out a
        strategy for action for conservation activities. The plan comprises four parts:
        environmental and developmental prospects for Eritrea, the major environmental and
        development issues confronting Eritrea, the major steps and responses involved in an
        integrated environmental and development planning process, requirements for
        implementation of the plan and its associated project activities, institutional
        prerequisites, and financial/human resources.
 144. The Ministry of Land, Water and Environment in collaboration with other relevant
        government agencies has put considerable effort in developing a system of National
        Environmental Impact Assessment Procedures and Guidelines (NEAPG) (DOE, 1999)
        suitable to the Eritrean conditions. However complete enforcement of EIA is
        outstanding, since the Environmental Law has not yet been promulgated, except in the
        mining and petroleum sectors.
 145. The GOE has developed an Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) (GOE,
        2003) which lays out a macroeconomic framework and steps to create the conditions
        for resuming rapid economic growth, and policies and programs for poverty reduction.
        Among others, this document recognizes the negative impact of forest/habitat
        destruction. In order to prevent further deforestation, the paper identifies improved
        forest and wildlife legal and policy frameworks, enhancing conservation measures,
        undertaking a forest resources inventory, accelerating participatory afforestation
        programs.
                                                                                                 43
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 146. The Ministry of National Development of the GOE produced the National Development
        Planning Framework in February 2009. In reference to environmental policy, it clearly
        stipulates that environmental issues should be mainstreamed in all development
        policies, plans, programs and projects and ensure adherence to strict environmental
        standards protecting, restoring and enhancing the country‘s environment (land, water
        and air).
 147. The Five Year Indicative Development Plan (FYIDP) (2009-2013), which was prepared
        immediately after the Planning Framework, has devoted an entire chapter for
        environmental issues and management. It states that “economic development, should
        be environmentally sustainable, and that economic growth and development must be
        achieved without damaging the overall ecosystem on which posterity depends”.
 148. During the five year period (2009-2013) of the FYIDP, it is stipulated that concerted
        national efforts shall be made to protect, restore and enhance Eritrea‘s environmental,
        natural and cultural assets in all sectors, including: (i) prevention of further land
        degradation through erosion and to maintain the fertility and productive capacity of
        land resources, such as afforestation, terracing, and land retirement, avoidance of
        overgrazing, adoption of improved agricultural practices, etc.; (ii) adapting and
        implementing the draft MCP and ICAM in order to protect marine and coastal
        resources; (iii) protecting, properly managing and further enhancing the flora and
        fauna of the Gash-Barka grasslands and the Semenawi Bahri National Park; and, last
        but not least (iv) protecting and restoring Eritrea’s historical, religious and art-deco
        heritage.
 149. Toward achieving Eritrea‘s environmental goals, the FYIDP stipulates the following
        measures to undertaken during the plan period and beyond: (i) comprehensive
        national baseline data on the environment shall be prepared; (ii) legal provisions
        reviewed to determine their adequacy and supplemented if needed; (iii) land use
        classification and land use maps developed to promote sound land use management;
        (iv) alternative renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar, shall be harnessed
        and developed; (v) non-wood construction materials developed to prevent further
        depletion of forest resources; (vi) establishment of appropriate vehicle emission
        standards, inspection procedures, and enforcement capacities; and (vii) environmental
        protection, restoration and enhancement measures shall be mainstreamed in all
        investments and development programs by requiring appropriate environmental
        impact assessments, provision of mitigation measures and effective enforcement
        mechanisms for compliance with established national standards.

The Legal Framework
 150. The legal framework for environmental management has yet to be formalized meaning an
        overall environmental law has not yet been promulgated. This has been identified
        repeatedly over the years as a serious impediment to the effective functioning of the

                                                                                              44
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         DOE, yet the process of drafting and redrafting the environmental legal framework
         continues. While the immediate causes for the delay may not be apparent, it is clear
         that the lack of consensus on what should be included and the level of detail regarding
         regulatory procedures have hindered finalization. Inconsistency with existing legislation
         may also pose problems, particularly with regards to the roles and responsibilities of
         different ministries and departments. The lack of approved national and sectoral
         environmental laws and the slow implementation of the Land Proclamation of 1994 are
         still regarded as serious constraints to the implementation of environmental policies
         and reinforcement of regulations. This sub-section outlines some of the focal area
         policies, plans, strategies and regulations.
 151. Biodiversity: The overall goal of the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
         (NBSAP) (1996, MOLWE) is to “restore, conserve and manage Eritrea’s bio-diversity so
         that it provides environmental services and natural resources that contribute to
         sustainable and socially fair national economic development”. It lists a comprehensive
         set of actions to be taken in the area of biodiversity. The Wildlife Conservation and
         Development Proclamation (2006, MOA), stipulates the establishment of a system of
         Protected Areas to protect and conserve wildlife and forest cover through a program of
         reforestation and the identification of endangered and indigenous trees and wildlife.
         The Biosafety Policy Framework (2007, MOLWE) aims to promote biotechnology
         research and development for the conservation and sustainable use of biotechnology,
         and the fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization of
         biological diversity.
 152. Climate Change: The objectives of the Renewable Energy Sub-Sector Policy (1997, MOME)
         include the promotion of sustainable biomass fuels and appropriate alternatives, and
         to exploit renewable energy potential. Eritrea’s National Adaptation Program of Action
         (NAPA) (2007) identified 102 climate change adaptation projects to be prioritized.
 153. Land Degradation: The GOE began developing a system of legislation addressing land
         degradation in 1994 with the Land and Forrest Tenure Proclamation, which established
         the land tenures system in Eritrea. Legal Notice no. 31 of 1997 followed by providing
         the legal basis for methods of land allocation and administration. It is particular
         pertinent for areas which are to be set aside as protected areas, national parks, or for
         forestation programs. The Land Use Planning Regulatory Framework, in 1999,
         prescribed land-use planning on the basis on the 8 classifications of land-use laid out
         within it. The Integrated Water Resources Management (2003) and Water Law
         Proclamation (2010) aimed to lay the foundations for the sustainable use of water
         resources through conservation, studies and documentation, and sensitization. Finally,
         Eritrea’s Five Year Action Plan (2011-2015) for the multinational Great Green Wall
         Initiative (Draft) is aimed at fighting the advancement of the Sahara Desert through
         mitigation and desertification of land degradation and desertification.


                                                                                               45
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 154. Other: In 2006, considering the significant environmental, natural and cultural assets
        contained along the coastal areas, the Government completed the preparation of a
        draft National Coastal Policy (NCP). The primary purpose of the NCP is to protect the
        environment and to promote sound use of these assets.
 155. The Pesticide Regulations (2006) attempts to reduce the negative environmental and
        human health impact of pesticides by putting in place measures, such as a pesticide
        registration system and regulations for packaging, labeling, advertising, transport, use
        and disposal.
 156. Regarding ODS, Eritrea is supported by the Multilateral Fund for the implementation of
        the Montreal Protocol, which is outside the GEF trust fund. The National Ozone Unit
        (NOU) under the Division of Environmental Resource Assessment and Information
        coordinates the enforcement of the ozone depleting substances (ODS) regulation and is
        responsible for the implementation of projects to phase out the use of ODS in Eritrea,
        as well as for raising awareness to general public on ozone and climate change issues.


 157. The ODS licensing system for Eritrea was agreed in August 2010 after the Regulation for
        the issuance of quotas for importation/exportation of ODS as well as products
        containing ODS was published in the national gazette. Regulations on Ozone Depleting
        Substances (2010) made provisions for the tracking and limiting of imports and exports,
        a permit system, promotion of ozone friendly products, and the phase-out of ODSs.
 158. In 2012, on behalf of the Government of Eritrea UNEP, as the lead implementing agency,
         submitted to the Multilateral Fund stage I of an hydrochlorfluorocarbons (HCFC) phase-
         out management plan
 159. In addition, the Government has taken practical measures to protect the environment by
         designating a number of national parks, regulating forest off-take, banning the use of
         plastic bags, distributing the improved traditional energy saving baking and cooking
         stove (Adhanet mogogo).

International Environmental Conventions and Agreements
 160. Eritrean environmental laws and national and sectoral policies and strategies are in
         harmony with the international treaties and conventions. Eritrea has ratified the
         conventions listed in Table 11, whose international principles have been translated into
         national laws and regulations.




                                                                                                46
           Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


           Table 11: International Conventions and Agreements Ratified or Signed by
           Eritrea
                                                                           Date     of   Signed by   Responsible
Convention
                                                                           Signature                 Authority
Multi Focal / Cross-Cutting
Biodiversity
United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (UNCBD) – 12/09/1995     1996          MOLWE
Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety to the UNCBD                               2005          MOLWE
Conservation on Migratory Species (CMS) of Wild Animal                     2005          MOA
International Plant Protection Convention                                  2001
World Heritage Convention on Nature and Culture Sites under UNESCO         2001          MOEM
International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and Agriculture   2002          MOA
MOU on conservation of marine Turtle in IOSEA                              2006          MOMR
MOU conservation and management of sea cow (Dugongs), in the Indian
                                                                           2007          MOMR
Ocean, the Red sea and western pacific.
Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora                                MOA
                                                                           1995          MOLWE
and Fauna (CITES)
Climate Change
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)             1995          MOLWE
Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC                                               2005          MOLWE
Land Degradation
United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD),
                                                                           1996          MOA
14/10/1995
Ozone Depleting Substances
Vienna Convention for the protection of the Ozone Layer (1985)             2005          MOLWE
Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (1987)        2005          MOLWE
Persistent Organic Pollutants
Basel Convention on the Control of Trans-boundary Movement of
                                                                           2005          MOLWE
Hazardous Waste and their Disposal
Rotterdam Convention on Prior Informed Consent (PIC) for Certain
                                                                           2005          MOLWE
Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade
Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)               2005          MOLWE
FAO Code of Conduct on Distribution and Use of Pesticides                  2008                      MOA


           The Role of GEF Support in the Development of the Legal and Policy Framework
             161. As early as 1993, in the National Charter, macro-policy documents and in the national
                     constitution (1997), the Government clearly articulated its development vision,
                     environmental agenda, and policy of cooperation with development partners and

                                                                                                               47
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         donors. These three documents, in particular, have enabled the GOE to be ‘in the
         driver’s seat’ and, as such, it is playing a proactive role in national environmental
         management endeavors. Under this backdrop, the following paragraphs will review the
         extent of the GEF’s influence on Eritrea’s environmental legal and policy environment.

Biodiversity
 162. Eritrea became a party to the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) on
         21 March 1996. The development of a biodiversity strategy was identified as a priority
         in the National Environmental Management Plan for Eritrea (NEMP-E) of 1995.
         Therefore, the GEF provided enabling activity (GEF ID 137) support to help Eritrea in
         developing its National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP), which was
         endorsed in March 2000 and approved by the Government in June 2000. The
         development of the NBSAP was in compliance with Articles 6 and 8 of the CBD, and
         acts as a means of identifying priority actions for biodiversity conservation and
         management. In addition, the project provided resources to the Government to
         prepare its First National Report (FNR) to the COP, and so enhanced the capacity of
         numerous stakeholders in various fields related to biodiversity for the identification of
         priority areas for conservation and management. The report was finalized in December
         1997 and submitted to the CBD in early 1998.
 163. The GEF provided enabling activity support to create an enabling environment for the
        Government to implement the NBSAP (GEF ID 1506). The objectives of the project
        were: to assess the country's capacity building needs for the conservation and
        sustainable use of biodiversity resources; to establish a clearing house mechanism for
        better management of biodiversity information; and to organize national consultations
        for the preparation of a second national report to the CBD, which was finalized in
        March 2003.
 164. Looking forward, a Biodiversity Full Size Project (Enabling Activity (GEF ID 5389) for a GEF
         grant of $US220, 000 has been CEO approved and has the overarching goal of
         integrating CBD obligations into national planning processes. The objectives of the
         project are to enable Eritrea to revise and update its National Biodiversity Strategies
         and Action Plans (NBSAPs) and to develop the Fifth National Report to the CBD.
 165. Furthermore, Eritrea also deposited its instrument of accession to the Cartagena Protocol
         on 10 March 2005, which then entered into force on 8 June 2005. The GEF has received
         CEO approval to provide support to the preparation of the Second National Biosafety
         Reports to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety. According to Biosafetyscanner.org, the
         report was published in December 2012. The GEF has also recently approved another
         Enabling Activity for Eritrea: Support to Eritrean for the Revision of the NBSAP and
         Development of the Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity (GEF
         ID 5389) with UNEP.

Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation
                                                                                                 48
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 166. On 24 April 1995, Eritrea acceded to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
        (UNFCCC), which then entered into force on 23 July 1995. Under one project (GEF ID
        278), the GEF provided enabling activity support for Eritrea to prepare its First National
        Communication (FNC) in response to its commitments under the convention. The
        communication provided GHG emissions estimates, climate change vulnerabilities, as
        well as mitigation and adaptation strategies, and was submitted on 16 September
        2002.
 167. The GEF also provided support (GEF ID 1959) towards the development of Eritrea’s
        National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA). The primary goal of the NAPA
        process is to broadly communicate to the international community priority activities
        that address Eritrea’s urgent needs for adapting to the adverse impacts of climate
        change. The NAPA was finalized and submitted to the UNFCCC in May 2007.
 168. After submitting its Second National Communication (SNC) on 10 August 2012, the GEF
         FSP (ID 5119) received CEO endorsement in 2013 and is aimed at supporting Eritrea to
         formulate and prepare its Third National Communication. The project will seek to
         strengthen the information base and institutional capacity of the national institutions
         involved in the development of national communications in order to integrate climate
         change priorities into development strategies and relevant sector programs. The
         programme will also support the organization of nationally and sub-regionally funded
         workshops to train country teams on key components of the national reporting and on
         mainstreaming climate change into national and sectoral planning frameworks.

Land Degradation
 169. The United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD) was adopted in June
        1994 and Eritrea became the 39th country to ratify the convention on 14 August 1996.
        Through the regional MSP (ID 2469), the GEF supported capacity building in Eritrea for
        the development of its National Report and Country Profile submitted to the UNCCD.
        Under Global MSP (ID 5136), the GEF will provide support to Eritrea for the alignment
        of the National Action Program (NAP) and reporting process under the UNCCD.

Persistent Organic Pollutants (POPs)
 170. On 10 March 2005, Eritrea acceded to the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic
        Pollutants (POPs). However as yet, it has not submitted a National Report in pursuance
        to Article 15 of the Convention. The GEF provided enabling activity support to Eritrea,
        to facilitate early action on the implementation of the Stockholm Convention. The
        overall objective of the project was to strengthen the national capacity and capability
        of Eritrea to prepare a National Implementation Plan (NIP) for the management of
        POPs. This plan will provide a basic and essential level of information to enable policy
        and strategic decisions to be made. The NIP was finalized in June 2012.



                                                                                                49
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 171. In 2005, Eritrea also ratified the two sibling conventions of the Stockholm Convention. The
         ‘Basel Convention on the Control of Trans-boundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes
         and their Disposal’ was adopted by the parties on 22 March 1989. The text of the
         ‘Rotterdam Convention on the Prior Informed Consent Procedure for Certain
         Hazardous Chemicals and Pesticides in International Trade’ was adopted by the COP on
         10 September 1998. The synchronicity of Eritrea’s signature of the three conventions
         highlighted the issue of hazardous chemicals as a growing priority on the country’s
         environmental agenda.

Eritrea Environmental Legal and Policy Framework: Gaps and Challenges
 172. Notwithstanding the broad reach of Eritrea’s environmental policy and legal framework in
        terms of the issues covered and the lessons to be factored when preparing future
        plans, there are several implementation challenges which the country faces. These are
        briefly highlighted in the following section.
•   Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA): The major weakness are the legal provisions for EIA,
    the adequacy of human and environmental data information, the centrality of EIA in decision
    making, and formal provision of Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) of programs, plans
    and policies.
•   The draft nature of legal and policy instruments: Some are in their draft form for almost a
    decade - for example the Environmental Law.
•   Laws and regulations are poorly implemented / enforced: Major reasons, include lack of
    detailed implementation procedures and guidelines, i.e., any legal instrument will require well
    prepared and binding instruments that guide not only implementation but also non-
    compliance.
•   Inadequate sensitization and awareness raising campaigns: Sensitization to the public and
    awareness raising to key stakeholders are two key elements that are needed for the effective
    and efficient implementation of any legal framework
•   Exchange of experience and information sharing: Information sharing and exchange of
    experiences play a critical role in the preparation of an effective and efficient legal instrument.

•   Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E): There is a need for simple and clear M&E instruments
    with simple and achievable indicators and parameters.

         •   Capacity Limitations: In most governmental institution there are few experts with
             the requisite capacity to prepare legal documents and guides, particularly in the
             area of environment. The condition is exacerbated when local and/or international
             consultants, with limited capacity are recruited to do the job.




                                                                                                    50
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




    Figure 4: Timeline illustrating linkage between timing of national Legislation and Policies, international environmental agreements, and GEF projects in Eritrea




                                                                                                                                                                       51
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




4. The GEF Portfolio in Eritrea

 173. This chapter presents an overview of GEF support to Eritrea in terms of financial resources and
         number of projects, according to project modality, GEF focal area, GEF implementing agency
         and/or national executing agency, and GEF phase. It also highlights the GEF support provided to
         the Small Grants Programme (SGP) and regional and global projects that Eritrea is involved
         with. Finally, it examines the roles and responsibilities among different stakeholders in project
         formulation and implementation and the GEF’s national focal point mechanism.

4.1 Defining the GEF Portfolio
 174. The GEF portfolio for the Eritrea CPE takes into account all national projects that had been
        submitted to the GEF up to June 30, 2012. This includes proposals that are at a pre-approval
        stage, projects that have been approved but with implementation yet to start, projects under
        implementation and projects that have been completed and closed. In addition, it also includes
        activities supported through the GEF’s Small Grants Programme (SGP), administered by the
        UNDP.
 175. To identify these activities, data on GEF projects was downloaded from the GEF PMIS. Data on SGP
         grants in Eritrea was requested from the Eritrea National Coordinator of the SGP. The project
         list generated through the PMIS was then shared with the GEF Operational Focal Point in
         Eritrea and the various GEF Agencies for vetting. Additionally, the portfolio was also vetted
         through triangulation with other information sources available including documents available
         through PMIS.
 176. Through this iterative process, the data sets were updated, missing projects were identified and a
         final list of 12 national projects and 22 SGP grants relevant to the Eritrea CPE was prepared. It is
         estimated that GEF has allocated US$ 22.8 million for the national projects. These activities
         involved aggregate co-financing commitments of US$ 41.5 million from other partner
         organizations. Table 12 presents an overview of the GEF Portfolio in Eritrea in terms of the
         number of projects by focal area, the GEF support and co-financing. The analysis of the GEF
         portfolio in Eritrea includes 12 national projects with various operational statuses. 8 have been
         completed or closed, 3 are under implementation, and 1 is in the process of approval. There
         have been projects in each of the 5 GEF replenishment cycles so far; 3 projects came under
         GEF-1, 1 under GEF-2, 3 under GEF-3, 4 under GEF-4, and 1 under GEF-5 to date. The number of
         regional projects supported by the GEF in the Eritrea portfolio is 7, while the number of
         relevant global projects is 3.




                                                                                                          52
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


4.2 Activities in the GEF Portfolio
Table 12: GEF-Supported National Projects in Eritrea
     GEF        Name                                          Focal   Type      Agency     GEF         GEF Grant      Cofinancing
     ID                                                       Area                         Phase          (US$)       (US$)

     Complete

     137        National Biodiversity Strategy, Action Plan   BD      EA        WB          GEF - 1    275,000        0
                and First National Report
     278        Enabling Eritrea to Prepare its First         CC      EA        UNDP        GEF - 1    303,850        -
                National Communication in Response to its
                Commitments to UNFCCC
     411        Conservation Management of Eritrea's          BD      FSP       UNDP        GEF - 1    4,986,000      840,000
                Coastal, Marine and Island Biodiversity
     1136       Wind Energy Applications                      CC      FSP       UNDP        GEF - 3    1,950,561      2,935,536
     1506       Assessment of Capacity Building Needs for     BD      EA        WB          GEF - 2    170,000        15,000
                Biodiversity, Participation in Clearing
                House Mechanism and Preparation of
                Second National Report (add on)
     1584       National Capacity Self - Assessment (NCSA)    MFA     EA        UNEP        GEF - 3    198,000        20,000
                for Global Environmental Management
     1959       Development of a National Adaptation          CC      EA        UNDP        GEF - 3    200,000        17,600
                Program of Action (NAPA)
     3139       Enabling Activities to Facilitate Early       POPs    EA        UNIDO       GEF - 4    346,500        35,000
                Action on the Implementation of the
                Stockholm Convention on POPs
     Under Implementation
     3362       SIP-Catchments        and       Landscape     LD      FSP       IFAD        GEF – 4    4,350,000      21,678,000
                Management
     3364       SIP-Sustainable Land Management Pilot         LD      FSP       UNDP        GEF – 4    1,820,000      2,250,000
                Project
     3987       Eritrea: Prevention and Disposal of POPs      POP     FSP       FAO         GEF – 4    2,150,000      3,209,153
                and Obsolete Pesticides
     Pipeline
     4559       Operationalization of Protected Areas         BD      FSP       UNDP        GEF - 5    5,878,000      10,555,400
                Management Systems of Eritrea
     5389       Support to Eritrea for the Revision of the    BD      EA        UNEP        GEF-5      220,000        216,000
           25   NBSAPs and Development of Fifth National
                Report to the CBD
     TOTAL                                                                                             22,777,91      41,555,689
                                                                                                           1
Note: BD = biodiversity, CC = climate change, LD = land degradation, MFA = multi focal area, POPs = persistent organic pollutants,
    EA = enabling activity, MSP = medium size projects, FSP = full size project.



25   This project entered the pipeline after cut-off for the evaluation portfolio. It is thus mentioned but not considered in the
       analysis.

                                                                                                                               53
  Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


  GEF Support by Modality
   177. Table 13: GEF Support to National Projects by Modality (in USD) and Figure 5 show
          financing for national projects by modality. There are 6 Enabling Activities (EAs), having GEF
          contributions of $1.49 million, and 6 Full Size Projects (FSPs) having GEF contributions of $21.13
          million; 93.4% of the total GEF contribution. The Eritrea portfolio has no Medium Size Projects.
          This suggests a unique and key role that GEF support has played in helping Eritrea to develop
          an enabling environment in support of other activities.

  Table 13: GEF Support to National Projects by Modality (in USD)
Project Modality          No.      of GEF Grant Cofinancing % of GEF %       of Cofinancing
                          Projects       (USD)      (USD)     Grant Cofinancin      Ratio
                                                                     g
Enabling Activities (EA) 6             1,493,350      87,600        6.6            0.2           0.03
Full Size Projects (FSP) 6             21,134,561 41,468,089        93.4           99.8          1.96
Total                     12           22,777,911 41,555,689 100                   100


                             Figure 5: GEF Support to National Projects by Modality




  GEF Support by Project Cycle Status and GEF Phase
   178. Table 14 summarizes the GEF grants allocated to projects according to their current status –
           completed/closed, under implementation and in pipeline. All projects belong to GEF phases
           from GEF-1 to GEF-5, with no projects from the initial pilot phase. There is currently 1 project is
           in the pipeline, 8 projects have been completed, and 3 projects from GEF-4 are under
           implementation. In GEF-5 there were 2 projects initiated: Support to Eritrea for the Revision of
           the NBSAPs and Development of Fifth National Report to the Convention on Biological Diversity

                                                                                                           54
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


            (CBD) GEF ID (5389) a GEF Enabling Activity with a grant of $USD 220,000. The remainder of the
            Eritrean $USD 7 million is allocated to Operationalization of Protected Areas Management
            Systems of Eritrea (GEF ID 4559).

Table 14: GEF Support by Project Status
                                                 Under
                        Completed                                           Pipeline              Total
                                                 Implementation
     GEF Phase
                                Grant                      Grant                  Grant                 Grant
                        No.                      No.                        No.                   No.
                                   (USD)                      (USD)                  (USD)                 (USD)
     Pilot Phase 0              0                0         0                0     0               0     0
     GEF 1              3       5,564,850        0         0                0     0               3     5,564,850
     GEF 2              1       170,000          0         0                0     0               1     170,000
     GEF 3              3       2,348,561        0         0                0     0               3     2,348,561
     GEF 4              1       346,500          3         8,320,000        1     2,150,000       4     8,666,500
     GEF 5              0       0                0         0                2     6,028,000       1     6,028,000
     Total              8       8,429,911 3                8,320,000 1            8,178,000 12          22,777,911

4.3 GEF Support by Implementing Agency
 179. GEF projects in Eritrea have been implemented by a combination of 6 of the 10 GEF Agencies
        operating globally. A detailed distribution of project coverage by implementing agency is
        presented in Table 15. In terms of the number of projects, UNDP is the leading implementing
        agency with 6 projects (50%), followed by the World Bank with 2 projects (17%). The other four
        Agencies – UNEP, UNIDO, FAO and IFAD – have 1 project each. However, in terms of GEF
        grants, the picture is slightly different. UNDP manages approximately 66% of funds, whereas
        FAO and IFAD manage around 10% and 19% of GEF grants respectively. This highlights the
        differences in scale of the projects that Agencies are implementing.

Table 15: GEF support to National Projects by Implementing Agency and Project Status
        Completed                       Under Implementation Pipeline                         Total
Agenc
   y No Grant               Cofinance
                                        No
                                             Grant     Cofinance
                                                                   No
                                                                        Grant     Cofinance
                                                                                              No
                                                                                                   Grant       Cofinance


UNDP    4     7,440,411 3,793,136 1          1,820,000 2,250,000   1    5,878,000 10,555,400 6     15,138,411 16,598,536

UNEP    1     198,000       20,000      -    -         -           1    220,000   216,000     2    418,000     236,000

UNIDO 1       346,500       35,000      -    -         -           -    -         -           1    346,500     35,000

FAO     -     -             -           1    2,150,000 3,209,153   -    -         -           1    2,150,000   3,209,153

WB      2     445,000       15,000      -    -         -           -    -         -           2    445,000     15,000

IFAD    -     -             -           1    4,350,000 21,678,000 -     -         -           1    4,350,000   21,678,000
Total   8     8,429,91 3,863,13 3            8,320,00 27,137,15 1       6,028,00 10,555,40 12 22,777,91 41,555,68

                                                                                                                         55
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


                1          6            0         3             0          0           1          9

Note: All Grant and Cofinancing figures are in USD


 180. Table 16 below, shows GEF support by Agency in the various focal areas. The UNDP has largely
        been involved in biodiversity and climate change, whereas the World Bank focused solely on
        biodiversity. UNIDO and the FAO have been involved with one POPs project each, and UNEP
        and IFAD have managed one project each; multi focal and land degradation, respectively.

Table 16: Number of Projects by Focal Area managed by each Implementing Agency
                     Agency                 BD        CC       LD    POPs      MFA

                     UNDP                    2         3       1
                     UNEP                                                       1
                     UNIDO                                             1
                     FAO                                               1
                     WB                      2
                     IFAD                                      1
                     Total                   4         3       2       2        1

4.4 GEF Support by Focal Area
 181. Table 17presents an overview of the number of GEF projects, the value of GEF grants, and the
        amount of co-financing by focal area in Eritrea. Together, the projects from Biodiversity (33%, 4
        projects) and Climate Change (25%, 3 projects) focal areas comprise 58.3% of the total GEF
        national projects. These are followed by Land Degradation and POPs (17%, 2 projects each),
        and Multi Focal Area (8%, 1 project).
 182. In terms of GEF grants, biodiversity accounts for 50% of the total portfolio, making it the largest
          focal area in the Eritrean portfolio. This is followed by land degradation with 27%, climate
          change with 11%, Persistent Organic Pollutants with 11% and a finally, multi focal area project
          with around 1%. Regarding co-financing, land degradation has been able to generate almost $4
          for each $1 of GEF grants available as a result of bundling with an IFAD loan.




                                                                                                       56
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


Table 17: GEF Support to National Projects by Focal Area
 Focal area                    No. of   GEF Grant                    Co-financing            % GEF            % Co-
                               Projects (USD)                        (USD)                   Grant            financing
 Biodiversity                  4        11,309,000                   11,410,400              50.0             27.5
 Climate Change                3                 2,454,411           2,953,136               10.8             7.1
 Land Degradation 2                              6,170,000           23,928,000              27.3             57.6
 Multi Focal Area              1                 198,000             20,000                  0.9              0.0
 POP                           2                 2,496,500           3,244,153               11.0             7.8
 Total                         12                22,777,911          41,555,689              100              100

Figure 6: GEF Support and Co-financing to National Projects in Eritrea by Focal Area




 183. Table 18 and Figure 7 illustrate GEF support towards each focal area by project status. To date,
        the completed projects are 3 under biodiversity, 3 under climate change, 1 multi focal area and
        1 under POPs. Those currently under implementation are 2 land degradation and 1 POPs, whilst
        there is a further 1 biodiversity project currently in the pipeline.

Table 18: GEF Support by Focal Area and Project Status
                                             Under
                  Completed                                          Pipeline                 Total
                                             Implementation
 Focal Area
                       GEF         Co-             GEF     Co-             GEF     Co-                GEF
                  No                         No.                     No.                      No.               Co-finance
                       Grant       finance         Grant   finance         Grant   finance            Grant

Biodiversity      3    5.43        0. 85     -     -       -         2     5.88    10.55      4       11.31     11.41

Climate Change    3    2.45        2.95      -     -       -         -     -       -          3       2.45      2.95

Land Degradation -     -           -         2     6.17    23.93     -     -       -          2       6.18      23.93

Multifocal Area   1    0. 20       0.02      -     -       -         -     -       -          1       0.19      0.02

POP               1    0.35        0.035     1     2.15    3.21      -     -       -          2       2.49      3.24

Total             8    8.23        3.855     3     8.32    27.14     1     5.88    10.55      12      22.62     41.555

                                                                                                                             57
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


Note: Values are in millions USD

Figure 7: Focal Area and Implementation Status wise distribution of GEF Projects




 184. Table 19 and Figure 8 illustrate the levels of GEF support towards each focal area according to the
         5 GEF replenishment phases. Initially, during GEF-1 and GEF-2, biodiversity and climate change
        were the only two focal areas to receive GEF support. However, as the GEF and national
        agendas evolved, GEF-3 saw the start of support towards multi focal projects, and GEF-4
        brought in 2 projects each under land degradation and POPs. As Table 19 shows, most GEF
        support has gone to the Biodiversity focal area ($11.3m), followed by land degradation
        ($6.2m). It is also of note that funding has tended to increase across the 5 GEF phases, although
        there was very little funding during GEF-2 ($0.17m).
 185. During GEF-5, the System for Transparent Allocation of Resources (STAR), which replaced the
        Resource Allocation Framework (RAF), determines the amount of resources that a given
        country can access in a replenishment period. Under the new system, Eritrea, having access to
        less than US$ 7 million, is able to allocate all of the available funds to one focal area. That being
        the case, it was decided that all funds would be directed towards a single biodiversity project
        which explains the lack of diversity in the GEF-5 portfolio.




                                                                                                          58
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


Table 19: GEF Support by Focal Area across each GEF Phase
                           Climate          Land               Multi    Focal
        Biodiversity                                                            POPs               Total
GEF                            Change       Degradation        Area
Phase                                                               GEF
        No    GEF Grant    No   GEF Grant   No    GEF Grant    No               No     GEF Grant   No      GEF Grant
                                                                    Grant
Pilot   -     -            -    -           -     -            -    -           -      -           -       -

GEF 1   2     5,261,000    1    303,850     -     -            -    -           -      -           3       5,564,850

GEF 2   1     170,000      -    -           -     -            -    -           -      -           1       170,000

GEF 3   -     -            2    2,150,561   -     -            1    198,000     -      -           3       2,348,561

GEF 4   -     -            -    -           2     6,170,000    -    -           2      2,496,500   4       8,666,500

GEF 5   1     6,028,000    -    -           -     -            -    -           -      -           1       6,028,000

Total   4     11,309,000   3    2,454,411   2     6,170,000    1    198,000     2      2,496,500   12      22,777,911


Figure 8: GEF Funding to Focal Areas by GEF Phase




4.5 Small Grants Programme (SGP)
 186. Since beginning operations in 2009, the Small Grants Programme has provided support to 22
         community based activities. The GEF SGP in Eritrea has received financial support totaling US$
         1,034,998, covering the focal areas of Land Degradation, Climate Change Mitigation, and
         Biodiversity. It leveraged an intended US$ 433,883 in cash co-financing and US$ 1,522,323 in
         in-kind resources for a total of 22 projects executed by civil society and community-based
         organizations. The SGP program in Eritrea has predominantly supported Land Degradation
         projects, with US$607,316 amounting to 59% of the portfolio. In terms of focal area, of the 22



                                                                                                                 59
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         projects, 14 are focused on land degradation, 2 on climate change mitigation, 2 on biodiversity,
         and 4 are multi-focal area 26.


                                 Figure 9: SGP Portfolio by Focal Area

                          SGP Country Portfolio by Focal Area
                        Multifocal                           Biodiversity,      Climate
                          Area,                              59,479 , 6%        Change
                        171,186 ,                                              Mitigation,
                          16%                                                  197,017 ,
                                                                                  19%

                                                 Land
                                              Degradation,
                                               607,316 ,
                                                  59%




                             Source: UNDP-SGP Website, Eritrea, Accessed Dec 11th 2013

4.6 Regional and Global Projects
 187. Eritrea has so far had a significant involvement in GEF-supported regional and global activities,
         with 12 projects having components relevant to Eritrea; 10 regional and 2 global. In the case of
         regional projects, it is often impossible to determine how much funding benefitted any
         individual country. While a country may participate substantially in some of these projects (for
         example, where it has a pilot project or operational project office), in others it may be very
         lightly involved. The figures for regional projects therefore simply show that the country has
         had some level of participation in a range of more or less major international projects.


 188. Table 20 summarizes these projects by project status, along with details on focal area,
        implementing agency, GEF phase and financing amounts. In terms of focal area, there have
        been 3 projects under climate change, 3 under land degradation, 2 under biodiversity, 2 under
        POPs, 1 under international waters, and one 1 project was multi-focal area. The total GEF grant
        provided along with co-financing to Eritrea cannot be accurately calculated as the exact dollar
        figure benefitting Eritrea are not available for all global regional projects. Moreover, the
        global/regional projects also take count of grants already considered under the national
        portfolio, e.g. regional project “SIP PROGRAM: Strategic Investment Program for SLM in Sub-
        Saharan Africa (SIP” ) GEF ID 2757 translates to the two SLM projects (UNDP and IFAD) in the
        Eritrea national portfolio.


26
 https://sgp.undp.org/index.php?option=com_sgpprojects&view=allprojects&Itemid=211&paging=1

                                                                                                       60
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




Table 20: Regional and Global GEF Projects relevant to Eritrea
GEF ID      Title                                Focal   Type   Agency   Regional   Phase   GEF Grants    Cofinancing
                                                 Area
                                                                         /Global

 Complete

 1094       Nile Transboundary                   IW      FSP    WB/      Regional   GEF-2   16,800,000    93,700,000
            Environmental Action Project,                       UNDP
            Tranche 1
 1513       Building Sustainable Commercial      CC      MSP    UNEP     Regional   GEF-3   693,600       539,630
            Dissemination Networks for
            Household PV Systems in Eastern
            Africa
 2469       Supporting Capacity Building for     LD      MSP    WB       Regional   GEF-3   900,000       900,000
            the Elaboration of National
            Reports and Country Profiles by
            African Parties to the UNCCD
 Under Implementation
 1028       Mainstreaming Conservation of        BD      FSP    UNDP     Regional   GEF-3   6,243,243     4,887,232
            Migratory Soaring Birds into Key
            Productive Sectors along the Rift
            Valley/Red Sea Flyway (Tranches
            1 and 2)
 1331       Demonstrating Cost-effectiveness     POP     FSP    UNEP     Regional   GEF-3   3,460,296     2,966,950
            and Sustainability of
            Environmentally-sound and
            Locally Appropriate Alternatives
            to DDT for Malaria Control in
            Africa
 3707       Piloting Integrated Processes and    MFA     MSP    UNEP     Global     GEF-4   840,000       800,880
            Approaches to Facilitate National
            Reporting to Rio Conventions
 Pipeline
 2757       SIP PROGRAM: Strategic               LD      FSP    WB/      Regional   GEF-4   122,998,091   978,426,000
            Investment Program for SLM in                       UNDP
            Sub-Saharan Africa (SIP)                            +more

 4523       Support to Preparation of the        BD      MSP    UNEP     Regional   GEF-5   993,950       840,000
            Second National Biosafety
            Reports to the Cartagena Protocol
            on Biosafety-Africa
 5119       Umbrella Programme for National      CC      FP     UNEP     Global     GEF-5   6,180,000     1,098,000
            Communication to the UNFCCC
 5136       Support to 20 GEF Eligible Parties   LD      MSP    UNEP     Global     GEF-5   1,000,000     1,000,000
            for Alignment of National Action
            Programs and Reporting Process
            under UNCCD, Add-on Umbrella 2
 Dropped, Cancelled or Rejected
 2119       African Rift Geothermal              CC      FSP    UNEP/W   Regional   GEF-3   4,750,000     74,261,652
            Development Facility (ARGeo)                        B
 3988       ASP2 Program: Africa Stockpiles      POP     FSP    WB/FAO   Regional   GEF-4   -             -
            Programme - Phase 2

                                                                                                                        61
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


4.7 Roles and Responsibilities                Among        Different   Stakeholders        in    Project
    Implementation
 189. There are GEF Steering Committees and Technical Committees established at the national and
        regional levels. The GEF steering committee at the national level mainly deals with policy
        guidance and endorsement of programs and projects, and its members include ministers and
        DGs from main stakeholders, i.e., MOLWE, MOA, MOE, MOEM and MOMR. They should meet
        once a year but meetings can also be held whenever urgent issues arise. The technical
        committee, on the other hand, is scheduled to meet regularly every three months, although as
        told to Evaluators, in practice this has not always been the case.
 190. The number and composition of the technical committee at the national level differs from one
        focal area to another as depicted in Table 21. Technical committee at the regional level are also
        composed of Directors of line ministries in the region.
Table 21: Technical Committee Members by Focal Area

            No.   Focal Area    National level
            1.    BD            MOA, MOLWE, MOMR, MOEM, MOTI, NBHE, MOTC, NUEW
            2.    CC            MOLWE, MOA, MOEM, MOTI, MOTC, NBHE
            3.    LD            MOA, MOLWE, MOMR, MOC, MOTC, NUEW
            4.    POPs          MOA, MOLWE, MOIT, MOTC, MOME, MOH, Private sector
                                    (service garages, industries, etc.)
Source: Interview with the DG for Environment

 191. National level technical committees coordinate project preparation, and resolve
        misunderstandings and potential conflict among members of stakeholders that may arise
        during planning, resource allocation and project preparation. They forward projects to the
        national level steering committee where they are endorsed. Technical committees also conduct
        visits to project sites and make on the spot decision whenever the need arises.
 192. At the Zoba level, technical committees assume full responsibility for the coordination of GEF
         supported projects during implementation and follow-up. They meet every month and conduct
         regular field visits to project sites for adaptive management.

4.8 The GEF Focal Point Mechanism in Eritrea
 193. GEF guidelines prescribe that there should be two focal points: one operational and one political.
        In Eritrea, both the political point (PFP) and operational focal point (OFP) are held by the
        Director General (DG) of the Department of Environment (DOE), which is under the Ministry of
        Land, Water and Environment. The DG has held this position since 2003. As a PFP, he is
        responsible, among other things, for GEF governance issues and policies and communications
        with national stakeholders and as well as implementing agencies. More specifically, as an OFP
        he carries out project-related consultations with: (i) convention focal points; (ii) steering and
        technical committee for GEF focal areas and the SGP; (iii) relevant national executing agencies;

                                                                                                       62
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         and (iv) GEF Agencies. This consultation process leads to recommendations regarding where
         GEF resources should be allocated.
 194. Within the DOE, there are four conventions Focal Points (CFP) - one each for BD, CC, chemicals
        and LD - who are directly responsible to the DG for environment. The duties of these focal
        points include, to: (i) follow-up latest developments of Conventions and attend meetings and
        conferences; (ii) conduct meetings of concerned stakeholders and disseminate new knowledge
        and practices; (iii) collect, store and disseminate data and information on the focal area; (iv)
        prepare concept paper for national action plans and have it endorsed by the Technical and
        Steering Committees; and, last but not least (iv) actively participate in the preparation and
        implementation of projects in his/her respective focal area.

Preparation and approval procedure of GEF supported projects
 195. In Eritrea, the Government in general, and the DOE in particular, are in the ‘driver’s seat’ when it
         comes to GEF supported project preparation, implementation and monitoring. The procedures
         followed for the flow of GEF resources are in fact, directly controlled by the Government.
         Agencies simply releases the funds upon the request of the DOE, and when a project
         preparation is finalized the Agency would submit to the GEF for endorsement any further
         release of allocated GEF funds for the project. This means that implementing stakeholders,
         including the regions (who are the implementers) are more visible than the GEF Agencies in the
         country. This is the case for all projects including the SGP.
 196. Because all GEF projects have their inception and are planned and implemented by the
        Government, for example, in LD (SIP 3364 and SIP-3362) the concerted efforts by the MOA,
        MOLWE, DOE, FP and CFPs, regional administrations and beneficiary communities have
        resulted in degrees of cooperation and coordination of resources and efforts to attain a desired
        level of synergy. At its best, synergy between implementing partners (the GEF Agencies) should
        be sought during project preparation and monitoring for projects with coordination for the
        same focal area and in the same and/or neighboring geographic areas as this can indeed
        reinforce and/or sustain project outcomes. These synergies could be strengthened especially
        between agencies, for example all those involved in the sustainable land management
        programs, particularly Agencies that do not have an office presence in Eritrea. To date, regional
        cooperation or coordination with national institutions in neighboring or other countries have
        not taken place due to the prevailing geo-political situation in the Horn of Africa.

Challenges faced by the Focal Point
 197. According to interviews with key informants and the FP and CFPs, Eritrea faces several challenges
         for implementing multilateral environmental agreements. Most prominent of these include: (i)
         shortage of motivated and skilled manpower both at the national and region levels; (ii) lack of
         fuel and transport facilities to monitor programs and projects; (iii) inadequate baseline data for
         monitoring progress and (iii) inadequate subsistence allowance that does not invite
         government staff to make field visits.


                                                                                                         63
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 198. Eritrea’s allocation as per the STAR was also noted as a challenge onto itself. While there is no
         objection on the criteria used to determine the allocation of fund based on the existing
         procedure, the area of contention is that GEF applies the same criteria for all countries. In
         Eritrea soil and water conservation activities (constructing of terraces, check-dams, soil bunds,
         planting of trees, establishing enclosures and protected areas, etc.), are age old government
         supported practices of the traditional/subsistence farming communities. Nonetheless, GEF’s
         STAR precludes consideration of such national efforts as having large GEB result and thereby
         allowing for a larger STAR allocation.




                                                                                                        64
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




5. Results, Effectiveness and Sustainability of GEF
   Support to Eritrea

 199. This chapter examines key questions on the results of GEF support to Eritrea in terms of
         effectiveness, results and sustainability. Evidence on progress toward impact of GEF support
         comes from the ROtI studies conducted on two projects in the Eritrea portfolio. Information on
         results achieved on other ongoing and enabling activities comes from triangulation of data
         from various sources, including desk reviews, interviews, and field visits. These assessments
         were completed where possible by meta-evaluation analysis of existing evaluative evidence
         and reports. For the ongoing activities, the two SLM projects, and the Prevention and Disposal
         of POPs and Pesticides Project (GEF IDs: 3362, 3364, 3987), the evaluation assessed the
         likelihood for achievement of results based on the review of project documents and on
         informed comments offered by key stakeholders regarding ongoing processes and activities.
 200. The analysis does not attempt to directly attribute results to GEF activities. Rather, it assesses the
        contribution of GEF projects, along with other factors, to the achievement of expected results.

5.1 Global Environmental Benefits (GEBs)
 201. GEF investments are predicated on the delivery of global environmental benefits (GEBs) in the
        focal areas of biodiversity, climate change, international waters, land degradation, ozone
        depletion, and persistent organic pollutants. In Eritrea, the GEF supported projects have able to
        contribute to GEBs in maintenance of endemic species of coral, protection of unique
        ecosystems and prevention of land degradation. The benefits are specific to each focal area,
        and are elaborated below.

Biodiversity
 202. At the time of review, GEF has supported 3 completed Projects on biodiversity in Eritrea: 2 EAs,
         and 1 FSP. There is currently one more BD project in the pipeline. The two completed EAs are
         the ‘NBSAP and First National Report’(GEF ID 137) and the ‘Assessment of Capacity Building
         Needs for Biodiversity, Participation in Clearing House Mechanism and Preparation of Second
         National Report’ (GEF ID 1506). The completed FSP is the ‘Conservation Management of
         Eritrea's Coastal, Marine and Island Biodiversity’ (CMIB) (GEF ID 411). The ‘Operationalization
         of Protected Areas Management Systems’ (GEF ID 4559) project is currently in the pipeline.
         During the course of the CPE, another BD project also entered into the pipeline, “Support to
         Eritrea for the Revision of the NBSAPs and Development of Fifth National Report to the CBD”
         (GEF ID 5389). Because it came into pipeline entry after the cut-off date for the evaluation
         portfolio, it is mentioned but not considered in the evaluation analysis.



                                                                                                          65
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 203. The various projects within the biodiversity focal area are enabling Eritrea to extend support to
        the country’s approach to mainstream biodiversity into productive landscapes, particularly
        important in Eritrea where food security remains a national priority. Despite the constraints in
        national reporting, there are examples of conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity
        resources in several parts of the country. Biodiversity considerations are also integrated into
        agricultural and forest initiatives and these integrations extend into the GEF LD portfolio.
 204. The long-term impact for biodiversity in the country will largely depend on the extent to which
        institutional and human capacity for sustaining these gains is maintained and improved.
        Certainly, local communities are also more aware about the potential social and economic
        benefits that could be generated from the various conservation activities. However, concrete
        projects outcomes related to poverty reduction and improved livelihood are issues that will
        only be realized only over a stretch of years to come.
 205. Consistent with global and national priorities, the National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
        (NBSAP) and First National Report project (GEF ID 137) was based on the recommendation of
        the NEMP and was supported by GEF and prepared in 1996. More specifically the project
        supported activities related to: (i) stocktaking inventory of existing information with regards to
        Eritrea’s BD and the identification; (ii) analysis of options for conserving Eritrea’s BD based on a
        participatory community-based local workshops and seminars designed to engage communities
        and conservation planning; and (iii) consolidation of findings from these workshops and from a
        series of regional and national workshops into strategic plan leading to the conservation of BD,
        and incorporation of these plans in the national development plans.

 206. The outcomes generated from the NBSAP 27 included: (i) Eritrea’s capacity building needs for the
        conservation and sustainable use of biodiversity resources were assessed; (ii) a better clearing
        house mechanism for the management of biodiversity information was established; and (iii) the
        second national report to UNCBD was prepared using national consultation and discussions.
        The NBSAP also gradually led to the formulation of the National Capacity Self-Assessment
        (NCSA) for Global Environmental Management.
 207. The NBSAP availed resources to the government to prepare the First National Report to the
        Conference of the Parties (CBD) in December 1997. With these in mind, the series of workshops
        and seminars held enabled Eritrea to strengthen its capacity and be better prepared for the
        Conference of the Parties. The Conference recommended that the first national report to the
        parties should focus on general measures “for the conservation and sustainable use of BD as
        well as for studies on biological diversity such as the stocktaking inventory”. Accordingly, the
        NBSAP identified the following five priority areas: (i) Assess the capacity needs, identify
        priorities and build consensus on the overall implementation of general measures for in situ
        and ex-situ programs and projects; (ii) Make initial capacity needs assessment in BD monitoring


27
     (The First BD report to the UNCBD was part of the same project as that of the NBSAP. The Second Report appears to have
       resulted as a result of this project),

                                                                                                                        66
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         program, including taxonomy; (iii) Assess the capacity needs, identify priorities and build
         consensus on the overall conservation and sustainable use of BD resources for agriculture; (iv)
         Assessment of methodologies to evaluate and mitigate specific threats to components of BD;
         (v) Assessment of capacity needs for the implementation of country driven project for
         participation in the CHM. The capacity gaps identified were: inadequate legal authority and
         institutional structure of the relevant stakeholders involved in BD conservation; and
         management and low capacity in biosystematics to study the status and trends of biodiversity
         resources.
 208. Activities under the Assessment of Capacity Building Needs for Biodiversity, Participation in
         Clearing House Mechanism and Preparation of Second National Report (GEF ID 1506) included:
         (i) Assessment of Eritrea’s capacity building needs for the conservation and sustainable use of
         biodiversity resources; (ii) Establishment of a better clearing house mechanism for the
         management of biodiversity information; and (iii) the second national report to COP/CBD was
         prepared using national consultation and discussions. The outcomes also contributed to the
         formulation of the National Capacity Self-Assessment (NCSA) for Global Environmental
         Management.
 209. The Red Sea, an almost enclosed hot, saline body of water has over 1,100 fish species and 44
        genera of hard corals being recorded”1 rendering it with one of the highest levels of endemism
        and species diversity for a water body Around 18% of fish species and 20% of coral species are
        reported to be endemic to the waters1. While other parts of the Red Sea have been subject to
        considerable disturbance, around Eritrea’s coastline, due to restricted access in the coastal
        zone during the war, these ecosystems appear to be still pristine in most areas. With time, they
        too could be under increasing threat from increases in fishing activities, tourism, and
        prospecting and exploration oil and gas.
 210. The Conservation Management of Eritrea's Coastal, Marine and Island Biodiversity (CMCMIB)
        project (GEF ID 411) responded to the 1995 Jakarta Mandate of the Conference of the Parties
        on (COP-11) by promoting the sustainable use of the components of globally significant BD and
        specifically addressed the conservation of marine and terrestrial biodiversity, focusing on
        marine biodiversity such as coral reefs, fish, crustaceans, and marine birds. The project set out
        to enable: (a) the development of an appropriate participatory management framework; (b)
        the establishment of conservation management areas and programs for the conservation of
        habitats and species of special concern outside these areas; (c) the establishment of
        information system on coastal, marine and island biodiversity; and, (d) raising public awareness
        on the needs for and benefits of biodiversity and its sustainable use. The objective was to
        ensure the conservation and sustainable use of the globally important biodiversity of Eritrea’s
        coastal, marine and island ecosystems.
 211. The CMIB was executed by the MOMR and implemented by the UNDP. The project received a
        rating of “moderately unsatisfactory” at completion in its terminal evaluation due to
        shortcomings in the outcomes achieved and lengthy delays in implementation. The evaluation
        does note that the project supported Eritrea to accede into a number of international
                                                                                                 67
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         conventions, for instance the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), the Convention on
         International Trade in Endangered Species (CITES) and the Ramsar Wetlands Convention.
 212. The impact of the comprehensive participatory approach promoted by CMIB to the management
        of sectoral activities, such as combating the causes of degradation to coastal and marine
        resources, as well as integrated management of shared and trans-boundary water bodies such
        as the Red Sea coastal zone and small islands (e.g. Dehlak Archipelago) was still in evidence at
        the time of evaluation through capacity that has been sustained and replicated within the
        MOMR – individuals with ability to continue to monitor key coastal indicator species, an
        institutional set up to be able to manage coastal resources, scaling up of initiatives begun by
        the project to adjacent areas (examples of planting of mangroves, grasses, enclosures, etc.).
 213. From the ROtI exercise, the following outcomes/impacts of the project could be cited, albeit
         systemic issues with data availability made it difficult to decipher and quantify all the results:
         (i) Baselines available on biodiversity and socioeconomic information used in priority CMI
         areas, followed by an extensive awareness raising campaign targeting all stakeholders including
         the population along the coast; (ii) the multi-sectoral steering committee that was established
         to deal with policy issues and guidelines for a common program of action is actively overseeing
         the implementation of a multi-sectoral coastal management framework; and (iii) exotic and
         threatened species identified and zoning plans prepared and published have been utilized for
         the planning of establishment of protected areas for endangered species such as sea turtles,
         sea grass, wild ass, rare coral species, mangrove forests, and other coastal marine resources.
 214. The awareness raising by the project on the management of conservation areas and species
        program, trained stakeholders and involved local community groups (e.g. fishing co-operatives,
        women's groups and traditional leaders (Baitos) policy developers, etc. contributed to new
        sectoral studies, policy actions (such as the National Coastal Policy) and conservation
        management plans for new areas, species and habitats. Moreover, it established a consensual
        and collaborative institutional framework to interact with several interest and relevant
        Ministries. The MOMR is still exploring innovative economic incentives for the conservation of
        BD and its sustainable use, including measures to assist Eritrea to find ways of compensating
        local communities for lost opportunity costs (e.g. loss of short-term fisheries in exchange for
        longer term diversified rewards).
 215. The ROtI found that the project also specifically allowed Eritrea to develop and implement
        legislation appropriate to MARPOL and, where relevant, both legislation and act related to the
        CITES and RAMSAR Conventions and enabled Eritrea to contribute to the Global Coral Reef
        Monitoring Network and the International Coral Reef Initiative. At a regional level, it extends
        Eritrea's cooperation under the GEF Red Sea Strategic Action Programme and a more
        coordinated and holistic approach to the management of the Red Sea, its ecosystems and
        species, and the threats they face.
 216. From the unit in the Ministry of Marine Resources, established with support from the project,
         research gathered is now exchanged and mainstreamed with other institutions, including

                                                                                                        68
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         Universities abroad, providing valuable information on among other things, sea and coastal
         migratory birds, several species of turtle nesting grounds, species of coral reefs, sea grass, and
         dugongs. Based on these conditions the ROtI concludes that the project is making moderate
         progress to impact. The project leaves behind a heightened awareness and sensitivity, at
         various levels, of the values and vulnerabilities of Eritrea’s Red Sea coastal resources. Among
         the challenges that remain, as mentioned by stakeholders and beneficiaries interviewed, was
         the need to keep communities engaged in the promotion of mangrove plantations. Mangrove
         plants are the breeding ground of marine life. They are also the main green feed for camels and
         goats, which love to feed upon the budding mangrove leaves. The communities were sensitized
         and encouraged to come with a solution, which reportedly was solved by establishing limited
         no-go areas for livestock.
 217. The GEF5 project ‘Operationalization of Protected Areas Management Systems of Eritrea’ (GEF ID
        4559), which was originally called the ‘Integrated Semenawi and Debubawi Bahri-Buri-Irrori-
        Hawakil Protected Area System for Conservation of Biodiversity and Mitigation of Land
        Degradation Project’, will be implemented by UNDP and the Eritrean DOE and focus on the
        development of protected areas to support biodiversity of island and coastal areas as well as
        the mountains and riverine ecosystems. The coastal zone, in particular, is a biodiversity store
        house for the country and over-extraction of marine resources could threaten the long-term
        conservation of the rare species and fauna. More specifically, the decision to establish
        protected areas along the coast will go a long way in the protection of, among others, the rare
        African Wild Ass where the Buri Peninsula is the only known habitat to contain a viable
        population of this species. The Evaluation Team notes that the change in name of the project
        seems to move away from an “integrated” approach to protected areas to a singular
        operationalization approach. As per recommendation 1, multi-focal integrated approaches
        would be in keeping with the ecosystem needs and challenges in Eritrea, i.e. addressing
        multiple stressors for land degradation, biodiversity loss and climate change, and also allow
        Eritrea to avail additional funding, such as through the SFM program.


Climate Change
 218. The GEF has so far supported three Climate Change projects in Eritrea, all of which have been
        completed. They key contribution of these climate change projects is to support removal of
        market barriers for renewable energy and influence the establishment of a more enabling
        environment for climate change action.
 219. The projects on climate changes have stemmed from the overall objective of the United Nations
        Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC); to achieve stabilization of greenhouse
        gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic
        interference with the climate system. The following summarizes the outcomes of the CC
        projects:


                                                                                                        69
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 220. The National Climate Change Adaptation Action Plan has helped identify immediate action
        necessary to reduce the vulnerability of fragile ecosystems and populations to the harmful
        effects of climate change
 221. In Eritrea, GEF has provided support to develop Eritrea’s First National Communications to the
         UNFCCC (GEF ID 278), which included the development of a national GHG emissions inventory
         and the identification of national programs and projects for climate change mitigation, study of
         agriculture production vulnerability and adaptation.
 222. Eritrea has no country specific emission factors and emission ratios, thus the GHGs calculation is
         done based on international constants from IPCC guidelines. Nevertheless, some work has
         been accomplished in this regard. The results of the two National Communications are the
         establishment of baseline studies, including the GHG inventories and calculations of the
         country’s GHG emissions targets. This has begun the foundation for effective negotiations and
         strategic decisions/action.
 223. The Eritrea National Adaptation Program for Action (NAPA) (GEF-1959) addressed the priorities
        identified by the stakeholders, who had already realized that the climatic shocks resulted in
        serious negative impacts on rural and urban livelihoods in Eritrea; and unless addressed would
        make Eritrea to be even more susceptible to impacts from climate variability and change. It
        ought to be emphasized that the Eritrean NAPA was designed to be consistent with ongoing
        national strategies and plans and to establish the linkage between national priorities and
        objectives in food security, poverty reduction and sustainable development.
 224. In Eritrea, the groups that are most vulnerable to climate risks are those that directly depend upon
         natural resources for their livelihood. Women, children and the elderly people are the most
         affected of all groups. Other affected group also include: subsistence farmers due to variable
         weather patterns; rural dwellers that depend on climate sensitive forest and woodland
         products; pastoralists, whose livestock is affected by drought; urban poor affected by fuel
         wood shortages, price increases etc.; and, coastal and island inhabitants vulnerable to
         saltwater intrusion.
 225. Eritrea faces numerous challenges and barriers when it comes to the implementation of urgent
         and immediate activities identified by the NAPA process. The barriers include: lack of
         institutional and personnel capacities; policy gaps and lack of regulatory mechanisms and laws,
         such as the environmental law, and maritime code; and last but not least, inadequate funding
         both at the national and international levels may also limit the level of implementation of all
         measures identified in the NAPA.
 226. An integrated approach to adaptation is taken also through the SLM and SGP portfolio with
         activities directed at rehabilitation of degraded lands and enhancing land productivity also
         having GHG mitigation and adaptation benefits.
 227. Finally, the Adaptation Fund is currently supporting a project in Eritrea. The ‘Climate Change
         Adaptation Programme in Water and Agriculture in Anseba Region is being implemented by the

                                                                                                        70
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         UNDP with a total grant fund of USD 6,520,850. The overall goal of the Programme is to
         promote increased food security in Eritrea through ecologically sustainable and climate-
         resilient improvements in agricultural production. The objective of the programme is to
         increase community resilience and adaptive capacity to climate change through an integrated
         water management and agricultural development approach in the sub-zobas of Hamelmalo
         and Habero. Specifically, the project aims to increase the availability of water through
         floodwater harvesting and groundwater recharge; promote a range of climate-resilient
         technologies for enhanced agricultural and livestock production; improve the dissemination of
         climate risk information among community, civil society and government stakeholders through
         a community-based early warning system; and capture and disseminate lessons learned
         through program activities, and to influence policy through advocacy activities. 28,
 228. The Wind Energy Applications project (GEF ID 1136) is the only full size project in CC that has been
        implemented in the country. The project, in the port city of Assab consists of a standalone wind
        turbine with generating capacity of 750KW annually. In addition, the project also planned to
        establish an off grid wind system in seven sites in villages along the coast. The project aimed at
        transforming the market for wind energy applications through the promotion of both on-grid
        and off-grid wind energy systems as a substitute for fossil fuel based energy consumption, and
        thus contribute to the reduction of the country’s CO2 emissions. At the same time the project
        aimed at promoting socio-economic development and improving people's livelihood by
        facilitating access to clean energy 29.
 229. The project has served as a pilot to demonstrate the potential for wind- energy generation in
        Eritrea as a replacement fossil fuel, wood and other biomass consumption.. The concept was
        an innovative solution to protect against forest destruction. By producing cleaner and cheaper
        energy, it could be used in the installation of water pumps for public and school uses and
        electrification of health center in remote areas facilitating access to school, clean water and
        health services. Beyond direct economic benefits, the renewable energy project was also a
        strategic intervention, catalyzing the realization of multiple Millennium Development Goals.
 230. As an alternate form for rural electrification, this pilot aimed to demonstrate an alternative to the
         trend of either grid extension or independent units of diesel generation sets. The Government
         of Eritrea also committed significant cash resources, US$ 1.5 million.
 231. Renewable sources of energy, such as wind, contribute to improved health by lowering indoor and
        outdoor air pollution associated with biomass use; reduces the burden on women and young
        children many of whom spend considerable time collecting and carrying firewood; and frees up
        time for income generation. Renewable energy is also a critical input for providing a host of
        social services, from education and health care to communications. Project activities focused


28
  https://www.adaptation-fund.org/project/1329-climate-change-adaptation-programme-water-and-agriculture-
anseba-region-eritrea
29
   GEF ID 1136, Concept Review

                                                                                                         71
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         on capacity development; strengthening of institutions; raising of awareness; demonstrating
         the technical, financial and institutional viability of a grid connected wind-park and piloting in
         off-grid rural areas, wind-diesel hybrid and wind stand-alone systems to demonstrate that wind
         is a viable option within the rural electrification program as well as an alternative for
         productive use applications.
 232. The decision to support both on-and off-grid wind energy within the same project was mainly due
        to the fact that Eritrea’s exploitable wind resources are found in the coastal areas and adjacent
        mountains as the country’s wind map show. The on-grid component of the project tried to tap
        into these resources thus reducing the consumption of diesel. Approximately 60% of the
        envisioned training and capacity building at the institutional and personnel level was relevant
        to both on- and off-grid systems. The remaining 40% was specific to either on or off-grid
        systems. Therefore, combining on and off-grid was a cost-effective way of building local
        capacities in planning, operating and maintaining wind energy.
 233. The systems intended to eventually meet the end user’s energy needs by offering a viable
        replacement, e.g. electric light instead to using Kerosene lamps or cooking food without using
        wood-fuel). Moreover, both at the national and global level, there would be reduction in the
        level of emission from fire-wood, kerosene smoke, soot, etc., and this was intended to have
        positive effect on the health and living conditions of all the beneficiaries, especially women and
        children.
 234. Although the project received a rating of Satisfactory at completion, the off-grid component of the
         project was not successful in its operations, and concerning the on-grid component; of the
         three initially installed turbines, which were contributing to displacing GHGs, by generating
         power to 20% of the households in Assab; during the ROtI exercise, it was determined that only
         one was operation. Difficulties in transporting fuel from the capital, Asmara, to Assab were
         hampering the full operations of the turbines. The planned reduction of around 1,700 tons of
         CO2 emission per year from the on-grid project was not largely realized due to the interruption
         of production, reportedly due to poor repair and maintenance.
 235. While the project did not result in he expected GHG reduction outcomes (1,700 tons of CO2 per
        year), the project was relevant for the country’s piloting of renewable energy sources.
        According to the beneficiary communities with which the evaluators conducted extensive
        discussions, the results could be assessed also in terms of the awareness created with regards
        to alternative and renewable energy sources. This is true despite the fact that most of the
        members of the community have not even seen what and how a wind turbine operates.
 236. Discussion with local authorities and residents confirmed that the local ecosystem at the projects
         sites once consisted of thickly vegetated with diversified species of woods and trees. An
         increase in population size and over exploitation of forest products for fuel, agriculture and for
         other uses has drastically reduced the forest cover in their area, Moreover, due to the drought
         conditions that have prevailed in the country over decades; the vegetation cover has dwindled
         drastically.

                                                                                                         72
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 237. This situation was exacerbated by the fact that Asseb being a main sea-port, serving especially
         Ethiopia, hundreds of truck drivers were transporting charcoal and fuel wood from the
         hinterland to hotels and households in the port city. Hence, the biomass consumption in the
         project areas (both at the on-grid and off-grid sites) was very high.
 238.
 239. The installation of wind turbine is believed to have had little or no effect on the overall extent of
        wood and biomasss consumption in the target sites for two reasons: (i) the number of wind
        turbines installed was far less than expected and thus did little to overcome the adverse effects
        from areas already degraded by large scale biomass destruction; and (ii) most of the off grid
        turbines installed were not operational for long, due to technical failures and lack of
        appropriate procurement to have impacted significantly on bio-mass consumption.
 240. During the first three years of its operation, the project was streamlined into the Eritrean
        Electricity Authority (EEA) to ensure its sustainability. Prior to this, required technical skill and
        capability was given to the staff of the EEA. The wind energy project also helped to push
        forward the policy framework that will allow a renewable energy market to develop. The
        promotion of the development of alternative and renewable energy production to reduce use of
        biomass as an energy source, particularly in areas with no access to pre-existing grids, both for
        the household and industrial unit level, still remains relevant. Support for renewable energy in
        Eritrea has also come from the European Union’s Development Fund, especially solar sources.

Land Degradation
 241. In the past two decades The GOE has considered sustainable land management (SLM) as a
          strategic intervention contributing directly to the reduction of poverty and hunger. However,
          land degradation projects are a relatively recent addition to the GEF country portfolio,
          beginning in GEF-4. There are two land degradation projects: the SIP-Catchments and
          Landscape Management (GEF ID 3362, 2009) implemented by IFAD and executed by the MOA,
          and the SIP-Sustainable Land Management Pilot Project (GEF ID 3364, 2009) Implemented by
          UNDP and executed by the MOLWE.
 242. The two projects were developed when Eritrea launched its National Action Program (NAP) to
        Combat Desertification and Mitigate the Effects of Drought (MOA, 2002). These projects
        address the interlinked problems of poverty, food insecurity, land degradation and BD losses
        through the development and promotion of innovative SLM technologies and land use planning
        approaches. In all cases, the goal is to restore, sustain and enhance the productive functions of
        the eco-system (UNDP - PIR, 2011 PIR; IFAD - PIR, 2011). Despite the implementation of only
        two projects in this focal area, it should be mentioned that the projects classified under other
        focal areas (e.g. biodiversity) have made relevant contributions to the country’s land
        degradation agenda.
 243. The Catchments and Landscape Management Project (GEF ID 3362) and the Sustainable Land
        Management Pilot Project (GEF ID 3364) also provide specific examples of linking local

                                                                                                           73
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         livelihood benefits and sustainability. As observed and reported through stakeholders, as well
         as by communities engaged in the two projects, besides land degradation measures, the
         capacity of communities to use drip-irrigation in small farms, building bench terraces and
         managing nurseries has also been enhanced.
 244. Between 1994 and 2013, more than 300,000 students, have been involved in tree planting and
         catchment treatment during the summer vacation. The Report of the MOE Summer Work
         Program Office for the year 2013 indicated that more 20 million tree seedlings have been
         planted, around 10 million km of hillside terraces and over 800,000 check dams and micro-
         basins built. A large track of land hitherto unproductive has been reclaimed and turned into
         productive arable land. The result has been increased crop productivity from the national
         average of 7 Q/ha to 15 Q/ha (World Bank, 1994; SLM Report, 2011). Area closure in Serejeka
         pilot project and SGP projects among local communities of Wara and Deki-Gebruhave also
         resulted in similar outputs through reforestation, land reclamation and soil and water
         conservation verified similar results.
 245. The project has also included a community component dedicated to improved energy saving
        stoves. These have been constructed by and largely benefited women and achieved significant
        replication to amongst Eritrean households in village communities through the SGP program.
        The widespread dissemination of improved stoves by the SGP gained such broader adoption to
        the extent, training in the building and use of the stoves became an income generating activity
        for women along the way, many of whom are single-heads of households. The constant power
        interruption in all areas of the country connected to the national grid has forced many urban
        and rural households to build these stoves. Parallel to that, the SGP has provided good
        opportunities for a number of communities and NGO groups to learn from each other’s
        experiences and to replicate the results of GEF support.
 246. The evaluators found no quantitative information on the scale of mitigation measures as a result
        of implementing SLM and SGP projects in collaboration. However, as ascertained from the field
        visits and focused group discussion in areas of SLM and SGP projects scaled up by the
        communities. Such efforts are believed to have replicative effects on the mitigation of land
        degradation being undertaken throughout the country. It should also be reminded that of the
        22 GEF supported projects, 16 are focused on land degradation, 2 on climate change
        mitigation, 2 on biodiversity, and 3 are multi-focal in area.
 247. Several communities in and around the project sites are engaged in nature-based conservation
         activities. Field trips by the evaluation team to some of the project sites helped confirm that
         tree planting and other soil and water conservation activities are still in operation in the various
         sites. The SLM pilot projects in general have shown a high level of success particularly in
         activities such as reforestation, terracing, strengthening existing nurseries and building of the
         energy saving traditional stoves.
 248. Field visits by the evaluation team verified that tree planting in these localities, with reported
         survival rates of 60 % to 70%, has had a positive impact, providing people with improved

                                                                                                           74
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         livelihood activities (2013). Despite such significant achievements, little progress has been
         made in terms of enhancing land tenure security - an issue which has been a major stumbling
         block for more success. It appears that the overall objective of SLM for communities may be
         difficult to achieve unless the usufruct or user rights of the land tenure system are fully
         addressed.
 249. Overall, the SLM program in Eritrea has achieved significant results including the development of:
        (i) replicable models of SLM, which representatives of beneficiary communities are using to
        manage land use; (ii) a system of knowledge management for SLM and mainstreaming of its
        principles into the regional and national development strategies, programs and projects; and
        (iii) capacity building programs and adaptive management systems for enabling grass root
        communities to implement improved SLM.

Persistent Organic Pollutants
 250. There are two projects conducted in Eritrea in the POPs focal area; one Enabling Activity and one
        Full Size Project (FSP). Both projects supported capacity strengthening for compliance with the
        country’s obligations under the Stockholm Convention. GEF enabling support aimed at building
        capacity on obsolete pesticides and provided further support toward completing Eritrea’s
        inventory of POP polluted sites. The country was also successful in attracting GEF funding for a
        full size project, providing for the environmentally safe management and disposal of obsolete
        POPs.
 251. At the time of this evaluation, only the enabling activity related to implementation of the
         Stockholm Convention had been completed. Given the nature of the enabling activity project, it
         is difficult to relate project outcomes to global environmental benefits and far-reaching
         impacts. Nonetheless, the main benefit of this project has been to foster adoption of a policy
         framework that provides an enabling environment within which to address POPs issues in
         Eritrea. The POPs enabling activities supported the country in preparing a report for the
         Stockholm Convention in 2005 in line with UNEP–World Bank guidance. In addition, a baseline
         assessment conducted on the potential damage to the public health and to the environment
         served to further enhance institutional and capacity building. Further, these activities helped
         strengthen ownership within the country, mainly as a result of the participatory approach used
         throughout the project.
 252. The national objective of the POPs prevention and disposal project is to protect the environment
        and human health by safely managing and disposing of stockpiles of POP-contaminated
        pesticides. It also aims at strengthening the regulatory and institutional arrangements for the
        long-term control of POPs and other toxic substances in line with the requirements of the
        Stockholm Convention and other related conventions.
 253. The project has identified a total of 294 stores of obsolete pesticides located at 145 sites. The
        evaluation determined that the targets set by the project for the destruction of POP-
        contaminated stocks of obsolete pesticides were largely achieved. During project preparation,
        the total quantity of obsolete pesticides in Eritrea was estimated at 400 tons and few of these
                                                                                                      75
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         obsolete pesticides were stored under suitable conditions. The safer stores demonstrate that
         Eritrea is making a significant step in meeting its obligations under the Stockholm Convention
         and is contributing— though in a limited way—to the reduction of the global POPs burden.
 254. As a result of the intensive sensitization and awareness raising workshops and activities, national
         end users like famers, civil society and the like have enhanced their knowledge and
         understanding, and are believed to have developed improved practices and behaviors. The
         evaluators observed this in the way end users transport, store, handle and use these
         substances. The projects have also contributed to the popularization of measures that have
         been put to prevent recurrence of obsolete pesticides accumulation and importation or use of
         POPs. In addition, improved knowledge and commitment of skilled personnel and experts on
         the hazards and adverse effects of POPs, have contributed to decreasing the risks associated
         with the environment and human health. Overall the reduction on global POPs burden is
         contributing to GEB and improvements in human health due to minimization of the adverse
         environmental effects.

Multi Focal Area
 255. The National Capacity Needs Assessment (NCSA) (GEF ID 1584) is thus far the only “declared”
        multi focal area project and has now been completed. The objective of the GEF3 was to
        determine, through a country-driven consultative process, the priority needs and a plan of
        action for developing Eritrea’s capacity to meet its commitments to global environmental
        management. The project focused on capacity related issues that are common across all three
        of the key international conventions related to GEF support. It specifically contributed towards
        the following key elements:
    • The capacities needed across these thematic areas in a synergistic fashion were assessed;
    • Using stakeholder analysis, the roles of stakeholders in the NCSA process was determined;
    • The existing institutional mechanisms and developing networks were strengthened;

    • The dialogue, information exchange and co-operation amongst all stakeholders involved in
        UNCBD, UNCCD and UNFCC was strengthened;

    • Development of a framework/mechanism for targeted and coordinated action, including requests
       for external funding assistance was developed;
    • Linkage of country action with respect to capacity building to a broader national environmental
        management and action plan was developed; and
    • A national implementation plan that described how Eritrea will address the priorities identified in
        the capacity assessment was developed.

Results from the Small Grants Programme
 256. The SGP was operationally introduced into Eritrea in 2010 to facilitate innovative approaches in
        community based environmental programs. The Programme has provided support to 22

                                                                                                         76
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         community based activities. The total GEF grants amount so far is US$ 1,034,998. The co-
         financing for the projects had reached US$ 1,956,206. Of the 22 projects, 16 are focused on
         land degradation, 2 on climate change mitigation, 2 on biodiversity, and 3 are multi-focal
         area 30.
 257. What is most interesting about the Programme is that it has become a mechanism to scale up
        tested and known approaches to community environmental improvements, particularly those
        witnessed through the full-size Sustainable Land Management (SLM) portfolio, and thus is
        considered one of the most highly relevant within the country, due to its ability to enhance the
        technical capacity of local communities and to enable them to continue similar activities
        adjacent to existing projects..
 258. All projects that are supported by the SGP in Eritrea have the dual purpose of improving
          livelihoods and addressing the focal areas of GEF. In the SGP projects, Eritrean communities
          confirm defining and prioritizing their needs in a participatory manner and this is transcribed
          into a project proposal submitted to SGP coordinator which is finally validated and approved by
          the SGP Steering Committee. The community-based approach, through the SGP, has had a
          direct contribution to the overall operational goals of the GEF focal areas, especially on land
          degradation and climate change as well as associated community benefits.
 259. The SGP in Eritrea has brought 40 Hectares of land under afforestation programmes, protecting it
        from animal grazing. Three km of sea coast land has been protected, rehabilitated and
        sustainably managed under a mangrove rehabilitation project. In terms of the programme’s
        policy influence at the local level, local authorities have shown their support to protecting
        areas where SGP projects under land degradation and biodiversity have been implemented.
        This attitude and approach is going beyond the local communities to regional and national
        levels as well. At the national level, the only significant green belt area on the eastern
        escarpment of Eritrea, known as Semienawi Bahri, has been at risk of severe degradation from
        intensive farming and animal grazing during the last 20 years. The government recently
        declared the enclosure of the area against agricultural activities in order to protect it from
        further degradation and to nurture biodiversity. This shows the resolve of the Government and
        the willingness of local communities to protect areas from overgrazing and other human
        activities.
 260. As a result, the SGP portfolio has already contributed to communities possessing a better
         understanding about climate change issues and the importance of sustainable management of
         natural resources for improvements in their livelihood and health status. As discussed earlier,
         among the results seen, women in beneficiary communities have been trained on how to
         construct energy saving stoves and as a result, it was common to observe nearby households
         making their own stoves without any outside support. The improved traditional stove projects



30
 https://sgp.undp.org/index.php?option=com_sgpprojects&view=allprojects&Itemid=211&paging=1

                                                                                                       77
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         also enabled local communities to integrate traditional knowledge in the construction of well-
         designed and appropriate technologies.
 261. According to the UNDP-SGP program officers, the SGP interventions are clustered in limited
         geographic locations in order to show the effectiveness community based small projects. The
         field observation by the evaluation team verified that the concentration of projects in the Adi-
         tekelezan area have contributed to the enhancement of the visibility and impact of the overall
         portfolio in the country.

Table 22: Projects in the Eritrean SGP Portfolio
      Project title                                                          Focal      Start       Amount     Phase
                                                                                 Area        Date      (USD)

 1    Azien - Quazien Community Based Afforestation Programme                LD         2013        50,000     5

 2    Community Based Gullie micro watershed Management in Galanefhi         LD         2013        50,000     5
      Subregion
 3    Community Based Rehabilitation of Degraded Land through fruit          LD         2013        50,000     5
      trees
 4    Community based Watershed Management in Debarwa Subregion              LD         2013        50,000     5
 5    Community Based Watershed Management in Laelaygash subregion           LD         2013        50,000     5
 6    Demonstration of low carbon solar home systems and afforestation       CCM        2013        149,998    5
      in Qnafna
 7    Gerger Integrated Watershed Management in Geleb Subregion              LD         2013        50,000     5
 8    Rehabilitation of Land Degradation through Afforestation and           LD         2013        50,000     5
      Introduction of Compost in Serejeka Subregion
 9    Weki-Zagir Community Based Afforestation Programme                     LD         2013        50,000     5
 10   Community based Soil and Water Conservation practices in               LD         2012        45,000     5
      Subregion of Ghindae
 11   Optimizing tillage and rain water conservation in the soils of         LD         2012        40,000     5
      Hamelmalo region of Eritrea for arresting soil degradation and
      achieving sustainable high crop yields
 12   Rehabilitation of Degraded Catchments in Elabered sub region           LD         2012        50,000     5
 13   Rehabilitation of Degraded Sub catchments in Galanefhi subregion       LD         2012        50,000     5
 14   Bio-Gas as alternative source of energy for Environmental protection   BD/LD      2010        31,128     4
      and improving livelihood at household level
                                                                             CCM
 15   Community Based turtle conservation at Dissei Island                   BD         2010        33,101     4
 16   Promotion of community afforestation and land reclamation in Sub       LD         2010        25,568     4
      zoba Aditekelezan
 17   Promotion of Community Based Afforestation and Soil & Water            LD         2010        33,018     4
      Conservation at Sub Zoba Aditekelezan
 18   Training of Trainers to communities on Forest management,              LD         2010        13,730     4
      Improved Traditional Stove and Nutrition
 19   Improved Traditional Stove in three villages of Aditekelezan           MFA        2009        49,260     4
      subregion


                                                                                                                   78
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 20      Improvement of livelihood in rural community through provision of     MFA   2009    40,798      4
         solar lanterns and environmental rehabilitation
 21      Rehabilitation of Hirgigo Mangrove Forests and Improving              BD    2009    26,378      4
         Communities' Livelihood
 22      Solar powered IT system for the schools of Adibeza and Adigultti in   CCM   2009    47,019      4
         sub region Areza
                                                                                     Total   1,034,998

Source: SGP Website: https://sgp.undp.org/index.php [Accessed: Jan 6th 2014]

 262. Under the ‘Rehabilitation of Hirgigo Mangrove forests’ project, the main activities included seed
        collection from established forests, mangrove planting and fertilizing, the provision of 60 small
        ruminants, demonstration of mangrove utilization as fodder crop, and awareness raising
        seminars. As a result, 22.5 ha of sea coast were covered with 30,000 mangrove seedlings.
 263. Under the ‘Improved Traditional Stoves in three villages of Adi-tekelezan Sub-region’ the goal was
        the reduction of GHG emissions by using improved traditional stoves. Activities included the
        collection of gravel and selected soils for stove making, the training of women masons to
        construct the stoves, and the planting trees in homesteads. A key result was that 400 improved
        traditional stoves were constructed and are now under efficient use, reducing tree cutting for
        fire wood and improving the health of women.
 264. The goal of the ‘Promotion of afforestation and land reclamation in Sub region Adi-tekelezan’
        project was to combat soil erosion and conserve water resources through reforestation. The
        main activities included protecting areas from animal grazing and other human activities, land
        terracing, tree planting, and awareness raising on the importance of vegetation cover in
        conserving water and soil from erosion. As a result, 30 Ha of land were protected from grazing
        and 59,990 seedlings were planted. The project site is now covered with vegetation 31.

5.3 Catalytic Effects and Replication
 265. Impact may occur immediately as a result of project activities, but more often than not, the social
        or ecological system that the project aims to influence may manifest change years or even
        decades after the project is completed, especially if large-scale impact is the aim. Broader
        adoption has been found to take place mainly through five processes: Sustaining,
        Mainstreaming, Replication, Scaling-Up and Market Change.

Sustaining: A GEF intervention continues to be implemented without GEF support through clear budget
allocations, implementing structures and institutional frameworks defined by the government and/or
other project stakeholders. The sustained flow of benefits of the intervention is important to demonstrate
the benefits and to provide incentives for adoption by other stakeholders.




31   SGP Presentation, GEF Extended Constituency Meeting, Nairobi, Kenya, 25-27 October, 2011

                                                                                                             79
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


Mainstreaming: Information, lessons, or specific aspects of a GEF initiative are incorporated into a
broader stakeholder initiative. This may occur not only through governments but also in development
organizations and other sectors.
Replication: A GEF intervention is reproduced at a comparable administrative or ecological scale, often in
different geographical areas or regions.
Scaling-Up: GEF-supported initiatives are implemented at a larger geographical scale, often expanded to
include new aspects or concerns that may be political, administrative, economic or ecological in nature.
This allows concerns that cannot be resolved at lower scales to be addressed, and promotes the spread
of GEF contributions to areas contiguous to the original project site.
Market Change: GEF-supported initiatives catalyzing market transformation by influencing the supply of
and/or demand for goods and services that contribute to global environmental benefits. This may
encompass technological changes, policy and regulatory reforms, and financial instruments.



 266. Though national projects have been executed to a significant extent by the by GEF agencies and
        bilateral donors, it is the government that is taking the lead, acting as the real driver in the
        environment sector. Many of those interviewed during the evaluation expressed the view that
        strong involvement from the government in environmental programs has established a strong
        sense of country ownership and sustainability regarding GEF projects.
 267. From 1992 to the present day, the government of Eritrea has regularly made its own financial
         contributions to the various GEF-supported projects. However, it also needs external assistance
         for financing for its environmental projects. The GEF cooperates with other development
         partners in providing financial support, as illustrated by the Community-Based Sustainable Land
         Management Projects. The various developmental partners, such as the World Bank, IFAD,
         FAO, NGO (such as NORAD), etc. have financed a number of land degradation and biodiversity
         projects aimed at the national level and based on national priorities.
 268. The ROtI and the field review by the evaluation team clearly highlighted the progress of the
        portfolio regarding progress to impact. This is particularly apparent in the focal areas in Eritrea:
        land degradation and biodiversity. It is clear that the GEF and its partners in the country have
        generally managed to build successes out of the projects and influenced other development
        partners to support global environmental objectives. The innovative approaches for
        participatory management of natural resources and reclamation of degraded lands in rural
        areas are particularly noteworthy. Lessons learned from a number of GEF-funded projects in
        Eritrea have advanced the development of new GEF initiatives as well as those of other
        development assistance programs.
 269. There exists a high sense of ownership for GEF-supported projects, which have served as a catalyst
        for launching subsequent environmental programs. GEF enabling activities have played a key
        catalytic role in securing funding and other support for national projects to such a degree that
        some GEF-supported activities have been mainstreamed and are now supported by other
                                                                                                          80
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


           donors and government programs. Despite the failures of the wind energy projects as
           discussed in the previous sections a good example in this regard could be the 15 to 20 million
           euro solar powered projects that are being supported under the EDF 10 and the large EDF 11
           allocation to the country to be devoted to alternative and renewable power generation.
 270. The SGP, in particular, has provided good opportunities for a number of communities and NGO
        groups to learn from each other’s experiences and to replicate the results of GEF-funded
        projects. As described several communities in and around the project sites are engaged in
        nature-based conservation projects with support from the GEF and the Government. These
        projects have enormous potential for collaboration and information sharing, thereby increasing
        the likelihood of achieving positive and timely results.

5.4 Institutional Sustainability and Capacity Building
 271. This evaluation of institutional sustainability of all GEF support projects in Eritrea has a number of
         key findings:
            The major challenge related to the sustainability of results remains the limited capacity at
             both individual and institutional levels which strengthening has been targeted through the
             numerous Enabling Activities (6 out of 12 national projects) as well as dedicated training
             components of FSPs targeting government staffs and institutions. Another challenge for
             Eritrea has been to continue supporting and scaling up once funding has ended, despite the
             government’s efforts to sustain the outcomes achieved. The exit strategies put in place have
             not adequately addressed the financial, technical and managerial sustainability of projects
             outcomes.
            Currently, the potential for institutional sustainability appears somewhat limited, given the
             capacity constraints that limit the scale of interventions implemented in Eritrea, particularly
             under climate change and POPs.
            The absence of replacement financing from other national or international development
             partners could also pose challenges for the country’s effort to build results that are both
             replicable and sustainable.
            The portfolio has performed well overall in terms of developing and strengthening the local
             structures involved in co-managing natural resources and their benefits. These structures
             have played an essential role in producing sustainable results in several projects.

5.5 Knowledge Generation and Learning
 272. An analysis of the GEF portfolio in Eritrea clearly reveals a number of development initiatives
         based on lessons learned across projects. Stakeholders have played a significant role in the
         country’s environmental programs, and the UNDP has served as a key actor and information
         clearing house, which, among other things, has facilitated exchange and informal networking.
         Nonetheless, there is still a need for systematic coordination and exchange of lessons and


                                                                                                           81
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


         experience across projects, particularly when different agencies and government organizations
         implement projects.
 273. During the initial phase of the GEF in Eritrea, lessons learned from other projects were not
        regularly applied to the design of new projects. There was no formal mechanism that allowed
        for the exchange of lessons learned across the GEF portfolio and sharing of lessons from GEF
        projects at national levels has had limited trial. Projects were designed and applied across GEF
        Agencies and as a result, opportunities for replication and scaling-up of best practices have
        been limited. This situation has gradually improved as government institutions and GEF
        agencies have expressed their readiness for a more collaborative approach. As a result, GEF
        supported projects have increasingly, been able to build on projects funded and supported by
        other partners.
 274. Eritrea’s experiences have also been incorporated into project design, particularly with regard to
         the establishment of priorities. The following highlight some of the key lessons learned: a
         decentralized and programme-approach is more successful than a centralized project
         approach; cross-sectoral involvement supports a spirit of “sharing-the-load and the benefits”
         and results in a more rapid implementation of planned activities; community involvement is
         critical in order to incorporate the concerns of main user groups; and a strong emphasis on
         training and implementation at all levels enhances sustainability.




                                                                                                       82
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




6. Relevance of GEF Support to Eritrea

6.1 Relevance of GEF Support to the Country’s Sustainable Development Agenda and
    Environmental Priorities
 275. Concerning guiding documents, The Eritrea NEMP (1995) is the blue print for “coordinating the
        protection and enhancement of Eritrea’s natural resources, so that social and economic
        development endeavors are optimized in consonance with the national and sustainable use of
        these resources for current and future generations”. The NEMP calls for the establishment of a
        program for greater environmental awareness at all levels and addressing the shortage of
        trained environmental planners and managers. It also calls for:
          The Environmental Management Development Program;
            The establishment of parks, botanical gardens and animal orphanages; and
            The development of coastal and marine protection systems
            Conservation Education and Training;
            Survey of elephants and wild ass populations; and
            Baseline on coral reefs.
 276. The Eritrean constitution (1997) stipulates that for sustainable development to take place, fair and
        equitable share of resources among citizens through their participation should take place; and
        the right of equal access to publicly funded social services must be assured. In view of this, the
        GEF portfolio has addressed a number of environmental laws, policies regulations and priorities
        to enable the government manage its resources sustainably. Equally, the Macro Policy
        document, adopted in 1994 to spearhead Eritrea’s comprehensive development, emphasizes
        the need for the protection and restoration of the environment. Its guiding principle adheres to
        a development orientation that is environmentally sustainable. In line with this guiding
        principle, the Government is striving to redress environmental imbalances by mobilizing
        communities to arresting further deterioration.
 277. At the macro level, the Government of Eritrea (GOE) produced its most recent National
         Development Planning Framework in February 2009, to chart out the Ten Year long-term
         Indicative Perspective Development Plan (TYIPDP) and the medium-term, five-year indicative
         development plan (FYIDP). These documents are useful tools for managing Eritrea’s socio-
         economic development efforts. Among others, the documents set out a broad vision on the
         macroeconomic and sector policy framework, as well as the potential prospects for
         development. In an attempt to achieve the country‘s environmental goals, the Government has
         stipulated the following measures during the plan period and beyond:




                                                                                                       83
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



           Comprehensive national base line data on the environment, including soil loss, gaseous
            emissions and water quality, shall be prepared;
           existing legal provisions pertaining to the restoration, protection and management of
            natural resources and the environment shall be reviewed to determine their adequacy;
           land use classifications be undertaken and land use maps be developed to promote
            sustainable land use management, including afforestation, intensification of agriculture, and
            retirement of marginal lands;
           alternative renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar, shall be harnessed and
            developed to substitute for the use of fuel wood and petroleum products for food
            preparation and general heating;
           non-wood construction materials and farm implements shall be continuously developed to
            prevent further depletion of the country‘s forest resources;
           measures shall be taken to establish appropriate vehicle emission standards, inspection
            procedures, and to develop adequate capacities to enforce them; and
           Environmental protection, restoration and enhancement measures shall be mainstreamed in
            all investments and development programmes by requiring appropriate environmental
            impact assessments, provision of mitigation measures and effective enforcement
            mechanisms for compliance with established national standards.
 278. The Government has taken practical measures to implement these actions and protect the
        environment by designating a number of national parks, banning the use of plastic bags,
        developing and distributing a more energy efficient cooking stove (Adhanet mogogo)and
        protecting the forest and wildlife resources. It is believed that a combination of these measures
        have resulted in a marked restoration of the flora and fauna of the country, albeit that more
        needs to be done to protect, restore and enhance the general environment. Among other
        things, there exists urgent need for ratifying the Eritrean Environmental Law. Such practical
        measures will certainly help people sustainably use resources and increase the chances for
        improved living standards while building the necessary institutions that influence
        environmental policies and decisions.
 279. The GEF and its agencies have supported the establishment of priorities for sustainable
        development and environmental protection mainly through enabling activities in Eritrea. These
        activities were helping the country fulfill its obligations under the international conventions.
        The outcomes of enabling activities have often been used for setting priorities in the national
        policies and strategic documents. However, in certain cases, outcomes from such projects have
        not been endorsed officially mainly due to lack of capacity for establishing and disseminating
        data and information. The GEF supported portfolios, by and large, have addressed these
        national priorities particularly with regards to sustainable land management as witnessed by
        the large Land Degradation projects with IFAD and UNDP.




                                                                                                      84
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



 280. The Government of Eritrea recently established a multi-agency steering committee for the GEF
        supported ‘Operationalization of Protected Areas’ project. The project was selected on the
        basis of the critical role that biodiversity can play in the sustainable development of the
        country; and the country decision that this potential is under-utilized due to the current
        absence of a national framework for protected areas. The decision was also in recognition of
        the fact that although the coastal zone is a biodiversity store house for the country, over-
        extraction of resources is threatening long-term conservation, particularly the only known
        habitat of the African wild ass, in the Buri Peninsula. This country-driven project is one vivid
        example of the relevance of GEF support to Eritrea’s sustainable development agenda and
        environmental priorities.
 281. In general, GEF support in CC projects, both enabling and FS as well as through the SGP, have been
         relevant to the country’s development and growth strategies and environmental priorities,
         particularly in assisting in the fulfillment of the country’s international conventions. As far as
         fulfilling GEF mandate is concerned, the projects have targeted social and economic
         development issues and have addressed the Government’s long term and medium term
         indicative development plans and priorities (2009-2015). For example, direct benefits to the
         communities include initiatives that promote energy efficiency in the use of biomass, while also
         looking for alternative sources of renewable energy including solar, wind, and biogas.
 282. An opportunity to further enhance the overall relevance of GEF support exists in the Eritrean
         renewable energy sector. The main source of electricity in Eritrea is thermal generation (98 %),
         whereas renewable energy mainly solar and wind electricity accounted for only 2 % as of 2008.
         the overall access to modern electricity services continues to be among the lowest in the world.
         At the national level, only 32 % of the population has access to electricity (78 % in urban areas
         compared to 3 % in rural areas) (EDHS, 2004). Electricity contributes less than 3 % in the final
         energy supply of the country.
 283. Through the national communications to the UNFCCC in 2001 and 2012, Eritrea had identified a
         number of renewable energy sources such as geothermal, wind and solar energy. With fuel
         costs rising and a lack of access to energy, the government has yet to fully develop those
         alternate energy sources. Except for the Wind Energy Applications Project (GEF ID 1136) there
         have been no further GEF interventions in this area. The promotion of the development of
         alternative and renewable energy production in areas with no access to pre-existing grids, both
         for the household and industrial unit level, would be strongly relevant to the country’s needs,
         and should be pursued in GEF-6.

6.2 Relevance of GEF Support to Eritrea’s Development Priorities and Challenges

 284. Poverty is oft quoted as the first enemy of the environment. To address the root cause of poverty
        and development challenges, the Eritrean government has taken important measures towards
        improving socio-economic conditions since independence in 1991. Development priorities, in
        part, are laid out in a number of policy documents, including: the Interim Poverty Reduction
        Strategy Paper (I-PRSP), The Food Security Strategy, Education Sector Development Program,


                                                                                                           85
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



          The National Water Supply Emergency Acton Plan, the National Policy on Gender (2004), the
          (2012-2016) National Gender Action Plan and the National Health Policy.
 285. The Interim-Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (I-PRSP) in particular, established the national
        priorities: enhancing the competitiveness of the national economy, human resource
        development, and promoting social inclusion, and regional development. The National Macro
        Policy for Sustainable Development of Eritrea (2009) was the first policy document based on
        sustainable development principles. The document clearly indicated the necessity for a
        development targeted at the improvement of life quality; and a wider dimension covering
        economic, social and environmental aspects.
 286. In support of the government’s strategy, various agencies, the most visible of which is the UNDP,
          have shown commitment to assist in reaching these goals in accordance with the development
          outcomes adopted in the country’s first, second and most recent United Nations Strategic
          Partnership Cooperation Framework for the period 2013-2016. Environmental Sustainability is
          one of the GOE expressed priorities in the Framework along with Basic Social Services, National
          Capacity Development, Food Security and Sustainable Livelihoods and Gender Equity and
          Advancement of Women.
 287. The GEF portfolio in Eritrea aims to support these goals by maintaining the integrity of the
        environment vis a vis protecting the future economic potential of biodiversity conservation,
        rehabilitation of degraded lands, mitigating the impacts of climate change, resilience to effects
        of climate change, safeguarding against POPs, or by securing ecological services. GEF projects
        have addressed local communities’ development efforts through the promotion of
        environmentally friendly agricultural practices, and natural resources management practices.

6.3 Relevance of GEF Support to National Action Plans within GEF Focal Areas

 288. The evaluation exercise revealed that GEF projects have been relevant to Eritrea’s National Action
        Plans, by both supporting the activities laid out within them and, in some cases, by helping to
        develop the plans themselves. The GEF has provided support towards the preparation of:
           National Implementation Plan (NIP) for the Stockholm convention on POPs (GEF ID 3139),
            which helped in identifying approaches and methods for inventories of pesticides and
            thereby reducing the volume of wastes.
           National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA) for climate change (GEF ID 1959)
           National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan (NBSAP) for the UNCBD (GEF ID 137)
 289. The National Adaptation Program of Action (NAPA) of 2007 aligned itself to focus to the
        adaptation needs and projects that were identified in the priority vulnerable sectors. That is to
        say, the project to develop NAPA was relevant in that it put national focus on reviewing
        country’s adaptation needs and priority projects in vulnerable sectors. Subsequent projects and
        their proposed action are developing as expected. All this said, the project assists in the
        conservation of natural resources as it includes proposed actions and expected results, such as



                                                                                                       86
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



         the development and implementation of a management plan on protected areas through
         public participation, and as well as policies on community-based PAs management.
 290. Eritrea has received GEF funds to put in place its National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
         (NBSAP), which was adopted in July 2000. There are three other GEF supported projects under
         biodiversity. The goal of the NBSAP is to restore, conserve and manage Eritrean biodiversity so
         that it provides environmental services and natural resources that contribute to sustainable
         and socially fair national economic development (MOLWE-DOE, NBSAP, 2000). This plan enlists
         a comprehensive set of actions and recognizes three-core areas: Terrestrial, Marine and
         Agricultural Biodiversity. The plan covered four major components: (i) the Eritrea Biodiversity
         Stocktaking Assessment Report; (ii) the Eritrea Biodiversity Economic Assessment; (iii) the
         Assessment of the National Policies, Legislative and Institutional Frameworks; and (iv) the
         preparation of the First National Report.
 291. Relevant to these components, GEF support followed on from the NBSAP to enable Eritrea to
         prepare its first (GEF ID 137) and second (GEF ID 1506) national reports to the UNCBD. The
         pipeline project, ‘Operationalization of Protected Areas Management Systems of Eritrea’, is
         directly relevant to the NBSAP’s programmatic element of ‘in-situ conservation’.
 292. The two land degradation projects, which are relatively recent in the GEF portfolio, consist of SIP-
        Catchments and Landscape Management (GEF ID 3362) and SIP-Sustainable Land Management
        Pilot Project (GEF ID 3364). These projects address the interlinked problems of poverty, food
        insecurity, land degradation and biodiversity losses through the development and promotion of
        innovative SLM technologies and land use planning approaches. Both projects are explicitly
        linked to the Eritrean National Action Plan to Combat Desertification & Mitigate the Effects of
        Drought (2002).
 293. They both identify a key outcome as addressing the priorities laid out in the NAP, including the
        following recommendations: to introduce community land use planning in pilot areas; to assist
        farmers for in situ conservation of indigenous crops; to establish protected areas conservation
        activities; develop agro-forestry in farm forestry; strengthening traditional coping mechanisms;
        strengthening the capacity of local communities to combat desertification; establishment of
        local land degradation committees; undertake community awareness raising and to distribute
        improved traditional stoves. Projects classified under other focal areas (e.g. biodiversity,
        climate change) have also made relevant contributions to the country’s land degradation
        agenda.
 294. The GEF projects in Eritrea have been designed in a way that ensures the needs of communities
        addressing the problems of poverty, reduced land productivity, and biodiversity loss, through
        the development and promotion of sustainable land management technologies. The primary
        target groups are those who depend on natural resources for survival, and yet have limited
        access to such resources. Such groups suffer greatly from the adverse impacts of land
        degradation as they derive their livelihoods mainly from public forests and communal
        rangelands, and operate on lands which are prone to erosion. For example, all SGP projects in



                                                                                                       87
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



         and around Aditekelezan have elements of environmental conservation and sustainable
         livelihood creation.

6.4 Relevance of GEF Support to the Achievement of Global Environmental Benefits
 295. The main purpose of the Global Environmental Benefits Assessment (GEBA) for GEF projects in
        Eritrea is to appraise the country’s contribution to the GEF mandate and its focal areas based
        on appropriate environmental indicators.
 296. Eritrea, to a large extent, depends on its environmental resources including land, pasture, forestry,
         and fisheries. Agriculture accounts for the major portion of the country’s GDP. Environmental
         resources have profound significance serving as a principal form of income for the rural
         communities and providing opportunities for poverty reduction. Environmental resources are a
         source of food, shelter, domestic energy, and traditional medicines, which are essential to the
         vast majority of the rural population.
 297. The Global Environmental Benefits Assessment for Eritrea presents an overview of each focal area
        in the country, a situational analysis and a trend analysis for each focal area. It also refers to
        the status of the environmental resources by GEF focal area in the country and in respect to
        the global environment.
 298. The six enabling activities have inherently helped to create the enabling framework necessary to
        underpin the creation of environmental policy and legislative development in Eritrea to
        underpin the generation of GEB. GEF supported the development of several national
        environmental plans and strategies necessary for implementation of multilateral
        environmental agreements.
 299. In the course of assessing the relevance of GEF-funded projects one notes there has been no GEF
          support addressing International Waters. International Waters may be a notable omission in
          the GEF portfolio as Eritrea shares the Red Sea along with its tremendous and endemic marine
          biodiversity and fish stocks with at least five other countries. It also sits on one of the most
          trafficked international shipping routes in the world.
 300. Eritrea also has had a very limited number of overt multi-focal projects, only two: The National
         Capacity Self-Assessment exercise and a global project to facilitate national reporting to the Rio
         Conventions (GEF ID 3707). The GEF portfolio, however, by its nature has consistently
         addressed more than one focal area, i.e. has been multi-focal in project implementation. The
         Sustainable Land Management projects have an element of agro bio-diversity conservation as
         well as climate change mitigation; similarly the Coastal Marine and Island Biodiversity project
         had elements of preventing coastal land degradation. While at the single project level results
         have been evidenced, the portfolio has been less effective at instigating systemic level and
         global level environmental changes. GEF 5 dedicated funds focus principally on biodiversity and
         natural resource management by local communities, again this project has elements of
         sustainable land management and climate change adaptation benefits.




                                                                                                         88
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



 301. The issue of land degradation is of particular importance and a priority in Eritrea. The current
        allocation system does not allow for more resources dedicated specifically for LD. Hence, an
        integrated multi-focal approach to tackling land degradation and other global environmental
        issues could generate more overt synergies between focal areas and the institutions that
        execute the projects.
 302. Finally, Eritrea did not avail expanded support for forests in GEF5. Using the flexibility of a multi-
         focal area program GEF-5 established a separate funding window of $250 million for
         sustainable forest management (SFM) operated as an incentive mechanism for countries to
         enhance financing of their forests. To access a dollar from the SFM set aside a beneficiary
         country is required to allocate three dollars from its STAR allocations to a project that
         addresses SFM related concerns. This could have translated to millions more for Eritrea with a
         SFM project rather than a BD project. Increased promotion of the SFM program by the GEF and
         its Agencies would help to increase overall utilization of SFM resources in Eritrea.

6.5 Relevance of the GEF Portfolio to Other Global and National Institutions
 303. The GEF Agencies working in Eritrea (UNDP, UNEP, FAO, UNIDO, IFAD) also seek to strengthen the
        capacity of the national institutions to manage the environment and natural resources;
        integrate environmental dimensions into poverty reduction strategies and national
        development frameworks; and strengthen the role of communities and of women in promoting
        sustainable development. These UN Agencies indicated priority areas for the State of Eritrea
        (2013–2016) and which are also are anchored on the GOE-UN Strategic Partnership
        Cooperation Framework (SPCF) (2013-2016), which itself is aligned with the national
        development priorities articulated in sector plans, strategies and policies. The GEF is aligned to
        the three UN agency priority areas described in the SPCF, mostly to the priority area of
        Environmental Sustainability.

UN Strategic Priorities for Eritrea (UN SPCF-2013-2016)
National Capacity Development: Strengthening human and institutional capacities in support of national
policies and strategies. This includes engaging in advocacy and policy dialogue in areas related to
sustainable livelihoods and agriculture, and integrated water resources management.
Sustainable Livelihoods: Developing long-term empowerment of local communities through area-based
development and integrated approaches. The major area of intervention will be strengthening
communities’ productive capacity in PA management. It will also support building local leadership capacity
over a wide range of areas including planning, programming, management and efficient utilization of
resources as well as raising awareness of legal frameworks which benefit the poor.
Environmental Sustainability: Contributing to the implementation of GOE’s overall strategy on integrated
land, water and environmental resources management. The specific areas of support will be: i) Integrated
water resource management ii) Conservation and sustainable use of natural resources, and biodiversity
through the establishment of new protected areas (PAs) and application of sustainable land management
system (SLM) iii) Increasing community resilience and adaptive capacity to climate change through



                                                                                                         89
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



implementation of appropriate mitigation and adaptation programs aimed at reducing climate change
risks and communities’ vulnerability iv) Support in advocacy and awareness raising on the effects of
climate change and building adaptive capacity of national institutions to undertake adaptive and
mitigation assessments to generate information for decision making.

 304. The UN Development Assistance Framework (UNDAF) is also intended to represent “collaboration
        and coherence in the UN’s assistance programs”, an endeavor which includes a range of
        climate change adaptation and adaptation relevant activities. In achieving its overarching goal
        of contribution to the reduction in absolute poverty in Eritrea, UNDAF pursues activities in six
        major areas including the highly relevant areas of food security and sustainable agricultural
        development.
 305. During the past several years, UNDP, being the lead UN agencies representative in-country, has
        assisted Eritrea to implement several important environment and energy-related international
        conventions and agreements. The UNDP-Eritrea Country Programme Action Plan (CPAP) for
        2007-2011 was geared towards the promotion of sustainable management of natural
        resources, renewable energy and the environment. UNDP specifically supported the
        Government efforts to (a) promote and use renewable and other energy sources; (b) ensure
        sustainable management of Eritrea’s coastal, marine and island biodiversity; and (c) implement
        selected elements of the National Action Programme on Desertification. Good lessons were
        drawn from that Plan for the development of the current Country Programme Document (CPD)
        2013-2016, and Strategic Partnership Cooperation Framework (SPCF), 2013-2016.
 306. The GEF portfolio is particularly of relevance to the outlined Outcome 7 for Environmental
        Sustainability which focuses mainly on strengthening the capacity of national institutions to
        establish the management systems of protected areas, forest trees restoration, mangrove and
        biodiversity species protection systems, sustainable land management systems, and reduction
        of forest deterioration. It calls for support of studies and assessments on natural resource and
        environmental management issues.
 307. GEF projects in Eritrea have been strategically prioritized by the GE Operational Focal Point (OFP),
        taking into account the existing opportunities and constraints, relevance to national agenda
        and a projects’ objective. Ownership is further demonstrated by the fact that GEF projects in
        Eritrea originate within national institutions, including the Department of Environment, the
        Ministry of Agriculture, Ministry of Energy and Mines and other national bodies.




                                                                                                        90
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




7. Efficiency of GEF Support to Eritrea

7.1 Time, Effort and Financial Resources for Project Processing
 308. This section presents a review of the efficiency of GEF-supported activities in Eritrea, as measured
         by the time and financial resources it requires to process a project through the GEF activity
         cycle. The analysis refers to the project preparation and implementation stages in the GEF
         project cycle approved by the GEF Council in June 2007.
 309. The GEF project cycle has evolved over the years. Following the GEF Evaluation Office’s 2006
        Joint Evaluation of the GEF Activity Cycle and Modalities, the GEF project cycle underwent
        a revision in 2007 (at the beginning of GEF-4), and processing time frame limits were
        adjusted. For example, a limit of 22 months for project development was imposed during
        GEF-4. This limit has been further reduced to 18 months for GEF-5. This section reviews the
        efficiency of GEF-supported activities in Eritrea, measured through the time and money it takes
        to process a project through the GEF Activity Cycle.
 310. The evaluation of the GEF Activity Cycle and several CPEs originated reforms going in the direction
        of simplification and streamlining of the project cycle, which was renewed in 2007. This CPE
        refers to this new GEF project cycle and assigns dates of previous projects, enabling activities,
        medium-size and full-size projects to the 5 major steps (A to E) in a way to allow comparison
        over time (Figures 10 and 11 describe the various steps in the project cycles for FSPs and
        MSPs). Estimating these figures raises several problems, mostly related to the lack of full and
        reliable information, which resides in different places (GEF Secretariat, Agencies, and focal
        point mechanisms).
                             Figure 10: The GEF FSP Project Cycle since 2007




                             Source: http://www.thegef.org/gef/project_cycle



                                                                                                        91
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



                             Figure 11: The GEF MSP Project Cycle since 2007




                             Source: http://www.thegef.org/gef/project_cycle
 311. The Project Management Information System (PMIS) provided, in a few cases, inconsistent
        information, which had to be cross-checked with information collected from GEF Agencies and
        national executing agencies. However, in general terms information up to the approval and
        disbursement of GEF funds to GEF agencies is accurate. Information on the full costs supported
        by project components or implementers in the formulation phase, particularly government and
        civil society organizations, are not always available. In some cases, information on dates is
        incomplete.

Project Preparation Costs
 312. The cost of preparing a GEF project has been derived from the PMIS dataset. It includes the cost of
        a PDF or PPG (for projects approved after 2007). Table 23 presents more details on project
        preparation support provided by the GEF in national projects in Eritrea. Of the 12 national
        projects in GEF’s Eritrea portfolio, 8 are completed, 3 are under implementation and 1 project
        is in the pipeline. Of these, 6 projects have received the PDF or PPG grants and one biodiversity
        project (GEF ID 411) has received PIF 1. One Enabling Activity and all six FSPs have received GEF
        project preparation support. In terms of focal areas, all land degradation and MFA projects
        have received PDF/PPG as compared to 50% of the biodiversity and POPs project. In the
        climate change focal area 1 project out of 3 received PDF/PPG.
 313. Of the seven projects to which GEF has provided PDF/PPG/PRIF grants, the preparation grants
         amounted to US$ 1.05 million, which is 19.9% of the total funding. Considering the entire
         portfolio of 12 national projects in Eritrea, the PDF/PPG/PRIF grants for GEF- supported FSPs in
         Eritrea account for 4.3% and EA account for 0.1% of the total GEF funding.




                                                                                                       92
 Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



 Table 23: Project Preparation Costs as a percentage of GEF Grant
GEF ID   Project Title                  Type   Agency   Focal   GEF Grant   GEF PDF/    Total GEF   PDF/PPG GEF
                                                        Area    (USD)       PPG (USD)   Grant       as % of Phase
                                                                                        (USD)       total GEF
                                                                                                    Grant

Complete
137      National       Biodiversity    EA     World    BD      275,000     -           275,000     0.00    GEF -1
         Strategy, Action Plan and             Bank
         First National Report
278      Enabling     Eritrea    to     EA     UNDP     CC      303,850     -           303,850     0.00    GEF -1
         Prepare its First National
         Communication            in
         Response        to      its
         Commitments to UNFCCC
411      Conservation                   FSP    UNDP     BD      4,986,000   311,800     5,297,800   5.89    GEF -1
         Management of Eritrea's
         Coastal, Marine and
         Island Biodiversity
1136     Wind Energy Applications       FSP    UNDP     CC      1,950,561   315,000     2,265,561   13.90   GEF-3
1506     Assessment of Capacity         EA     World    BD      170,000     -           170,000     0.00    GEF -2
         Building     Needs      for           Bank
         Biodiversity, Participation
         in     Clearing      House
         Mechanism              and
         Preparation of Second
         National Report (add on)

1584     National Capacity Self -       EA     UNEP     MFA     198,000     25,000      223,000     11.21   GEF -3
         Assessment (NCSA) for
         Global    Environmental
         Management
1959     Development      of    a       EA     UNDP     CC      200,000     -           200,000     0.00    GEF -3
         National      Adaptation
         Program of Action (NAPA)
3139     Enabling Activities       to   EA     UNIDO    POPs    346,500     -           346,500     0.00    GEF -4
         Facilitate Early Action   on
         the Implementation        of
         the Stockholm Conv.       on
         POPs
Under Implementation
3362     SIP-Catchments    and          FSP    IFAD     LD      4,350,000   150,000     4,500,000   3.33    GEF -4
         Landscape Management
3364     SIP-Sustainable       Land     FSP    UNDP     LD      1,820,000   50,000      1,870,000   2.67    GEF -4
         Management            Pilot
         Project




                                                                                                                93
   Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



 GEF ID    Project Title               Type    Agency      Focal   GEF Grant     GEF PDF/      Total GEF     PDF/PPG GEF
                                                           Area    (USD)         PPG (USD)     Grant         as % of Phase
                                                                                               (USD)         total GEF
                                                                                                             Grant

 3987      Eritrea: Prevention and     FSP     FAO         POPs    2,150,000     50,000        2,200,000     2.27        GEF -4
           Disposal of POPs and
           Obsolete Pesticides
 Pipeline
 4559      Operationalization    of    FSP     UNDP        BD      5,878,000     150,000       6,028,000     2.49        GEF -5
           Protected          Areas
           Management Systems of
           Eritrea
 Total                                                                           1,051,800     23,679,711    4.44

Note: CC: Climate Change, BD: Biodiversity, MF: Multi focal, LD: Land degradation, POPs: Persistent Organic Pollutants, FSP: Full
    size projects, EA: Enabling Activities


   The GEF Project Cycle
    314.       Table 24, Table 25, and Figure 10 present the distribution of time taken by proposals to move
              from entry into the GEF pipeline to project start-up for the FSPs, and EAs, respectively. GEF
              FSPs could take anywhere between 7 to 30 months to start implementation from day of entry
              into the GEF pipeline. There is no standard for the overall project time-lapse from pipeline to
              start date, but there are measures of effectiveness long the way. In Eritrea, all the 6 FSPs have
              taken more than 18 months from work-program entry stage to CEO approval. Stakeholder
              views suggested that project formulation processes for preparation of GEF projects are
              perceived as complex and time consuming.




                                                                                                                              94
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



Table 24: Duration of the Activity Cycle for FSPs in Eritrea
                                              Duration between stages (Months)

  GEF_ID          Title                                          AtoB         BtoC   CtoD       DtoE   AtoC   BtoD   BtoE   CtoE


                  Integrated Semenawi and Debubawi Bahri-
                  Buri-Irrori- Hawakil Protected Area System
  4559                                                           5            26     N/A        N/A    31     N/A    N/A    N/A
                  for Conservation of Biodiversity and
                  Mitigation of Land Degradation
  1136            Wind Energy Applications                       N/A          6      1          N/A    N/A    7      7      1
                  Conservation Management of Eritrea's
  411                                                            N/A          7      12         N/A    N/A    19     19     12
                  Coastal, Marine and Island Biodiversity
                  SIP:     Catchments      and      Landscape
  3362                                                           5            22     N/A        N/A    17     N/A    33     12
                  Management
                  SIP: Sustainable Land Management Pilot
  3364                                                           5            26     1          1      21     27     27     1
                  Project
                  Eritrea: Prevention and Disposal of POPs and
  3987                                                           2            22     1          3      24     23     40     18
                  Obsolete Pesticides
                  Average time (Months)                          4            18     3          2      23     19     25     9
Note: A: Entry into GEF pipeline, B: Approval by Council / Work Program Inclusion, C: GEF CEO Endorsement / Approval, D:
    Approval by IAs/EAs, E: Project start-up

Figure 12: Time taken (months) for FSPs proposals from entry into the GEF pipeline to
    project start

             4

            3.5

             3
                                                                                          <6
            2.5
                                                                                          7 to 12
   Months




             2                                                                            13 to 18
            1.5                                                                           19 to 24

             1                                                                            >24

            0.5

             0
                     A to B     B to C     C to E     A to C         A to E


 315. The Enabling Activities have also been running over their allocated times: 3 out of the 5 projects
        were delayed, the first by 1 years, and the other two by 2 years. In the case of Enabling
        Activities, the lack of access to some dates presented challenges in determining and assessing
        the durations of each stage of the activity cycle. Moreover, EAs are set up in a way that allows
        for a swift approval process, but no specific time standard has been set. The duration for the



                                                                                                                            95
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



         projects to travel from stage C (GEF CEO Approval) to stage D (Approval by IAs/EAs) varies from
         8 days to 7 months. The available data have been presented in Table 25.

    Table 25: Duration of the Project Cycle for EAs in Eritrea
                                                                      Duration between stages (Months)
      GEF_ID     Title                                                AtoC     CtoD    DtoE    AtoD    AtoE
                 National Biodiversity Strategy, Action Plan and First
      137                                                              N/A     0.27    N/A     N/A     N/A
                 National Report
                 Enabling Eritrea to Prepare its First National
      278        Communication in Response to its Commitments to N/A           N/A     N/A     N/A     N/A
                 UNFCCC
                 Assessment of Capacity Building Needs for
                 Biodiversity, Participation in Clearing House
      1506                                                     3               2       N/A     5       N/A
                 Mechanism and Preparation of Second National
                 Report (add on)
                 National Capacity Self - Assessment (NCSA) for
      1584                                                      3              2       N/A     5       5
                 Global Environmental Management
                 Development of a National Adaptation Program of
      1959                                                       0             7       N/A     7       7
                 Action (NAPA)
                 Enabling Activities to Facilitate Early Action on the
      3139       Implementation of the Stockholm Convention on 11              1       N/A     12
                 POPs
                 Average time (Months)                                 4       2       -       5       6


Note: A: Entry into GEF pipeline, B: Approval by Council / Work Program Inclusion, C: GEF CEO Endorsement / Approval, D:
    Approval by IAs/EAs, E: Project start-up

Trends in Dropped or Cancelled Projects
 316. A total of 15 projects or proposals have been listed in the PMIS for Eritrea. Of these, 12 projects
         are active or completed and 3 (1 from GEF-3, 2 from GEF-4) have been dropped or cancelled,
         representing 20% of the total projects entering the GEF pipeline. During GEF-3, 1 project was
         dropped as compared to 3 completed projects. Similarly in GEF 4, 2 projects were
         dropped/cancelled vis-à-vis 2 projects being under implementation and 2 in pipeline. There
         have been no dropped or cancelled projects from GEF-1 or GEF-2, which together have 4
         completed projects. More attention to portfolio planning by Eritrea, in order to reduce the rate
         of dropped or cancelled projects and associated waste of resources, could be considered.

   Co-finance
 317. Co-financing is considered to be an indicator of a project’s sustainability, country ownership, and
         mainstreaming of GEF activities; and a way to mobilize additional resources for achieving global
         environment benefits by the GEF.
 318. The GEF projects in Eritrea are reported to have generated almost twice the amount of co-
        financing as compared to GEF grants, which is often made available in a timely manner. In most



                                                                                                                     96
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



         cases, there is also alignment between proposed and actual co-financing. The GEF portfolio in
         Eritrea generated co-financing of US$ 41.55 million as compared to GEF grants of US$ 22.63
         million for 12 national projects.
 319. The analysis of the co-financing data shows that among the various modalities, the FSPs and
        among focal areas, land degradation have generated more co-financing as compared to others.
        However, for the ‘SIP-Catchments and Landscape Management’ project (GEF ID 3362) the
        amount of co-financing generated so far is much less than the initial figures.

Cost Effectiveness
 320. The review of the TEs and TERs for 2 completed projects out of the total five Biodiversity projects
        showed that the delays in project start-up resulted in more usage of administrative budget as
        compared to enabling activities. For instance, in the project ‘Conservation Management of
        Eritrea's Coastal, Marine and Island Biodiversity’ (GEF ID 411) the TER reported that the project
        was highly inefficient during the first five years of implementation. During this period it spent
        about 20% of the project budget with little accomplishment. The restructuring after five years
        of implementation did help the project in cutting the losses. The project was expected to close
        after a four year delay, implying a significant sum being diverted from the programmatic
        activities to administrative costs.
 321. For the Wind Applications Project, the TE states that the procurement process solicited 22
         expressions of interest and subsequently three bids were received from the nine invited pre-
         qualified suppliers. Two of the bidders pulled out during the process, resulting in only one fully
         responsive bid at 80% higher than the budgeted amount. Unfortunately, the PMU had no
         option but to accept the bid, due to limited interest by suppliers. The period from pre-
         qualification to commissioning in November 2008 was 38 weeks, compared to 16 weeks in the
         project document.
 322. The Project’s original budget was directed to the procurement of equipment and executing civil
        works, capacity building, and barrier removal programmes. Given the financial constraints
        faced by GoE, GEF agreed to finance on a grant basis half of the equipment of the decentralized
        systems component and the grid reinforcement in addition to the training and technical
        assistance components. Thus, bulk of the equipment procurement was left to GoE financing.
        UNDP stepped in to provide additional funding to meet the additional costs associated with
        price escalation. In hindsight, the original cost estimates for the turbines and equipment were
        not realistic, in light of the small number of units ordered and the impact this has on pricing.

Implementation Delays
 323. Implementation delays have been reported in 2 projects, GEF ID 411 and 1136, owing to capacity
        constraints. In project 1136, the project start-up was timely and efficient, however,
        implementation started to drag after the first 6-8 months. This was due to less experience of
        the PMU staff in the wind energy related ICB process and requirements, the failure of the TA to
        provide sufficient technical support to the PMU, and seriously delays in the preparations of bid
        documents. According to the TE the procurement process for the wind farm project delayed


                                                                                                         97
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



         the project milestones significantly due to the non-performance of the TA, delays in civil works
         in the Assab wind farm component, failed contract negotiations and cost increases, which
         necessitated topping-up financing by UNDP. All The Enabling Activities have also been running
         over their allocated times: 3 out of the 5 projects we delayed, the first by 1 years, and the other
         two by 2 years.

7.2 Coordination and Synergies
 324. While mechanisms for networking among GEF Agencies, national institutions, GEF projects and
        other donor-supported projects and activities exist, they have not been fully effective for
        better synergies in GEF project programming and implementation.
 325. The Eritrean Focal Point Office has on several occasions chaired a Steering Committee to guide
        discussions on portfolio formulation, SGP initiatives, etc. All GEF supported projects had
        national steering committees that were formed to guide the project management units (PMUs)
        as well as to set priorities for project activities.
 326. However, the potential for increased synergy and collaborative efforts among the agencies and
        national institutions involved in programming and implementation could be further realized.
 327. Roles and areas of cooperation between the Government and the UNDP, the most predominant
         Agency in the portfolio, are clearly specified for interactions even beyond the GEF portfolio. In
         practice, the mechanisms are functioning adequately however Eritrean national institutions
         could be better informed of one another’s related activities and there are few forums to
         discuss the challenges of sustainable livelihoods, land degradation and biodiversity loss
         amongst all interested parties.
 328. For example, the coordination to steer the implementation of the country’s two SLM projects
         appears to have weaknesses at the national level. More synergies were visible at the regional
         level (i.e. between the line ministries and local administrations), but it appears to be less
         transparent when it comes to coordination between the various executing agencies and the
         Operational Focal Point (OFP) at the national level. There is a tendency for institutions to move
         forward with their own agendas with no definite schedule for meetings and contacts between
         themselves. Improvements were noted with coordination moving steadily in the right direction
         with greater awareness and willingness among all those concerned, although cases of
         ambiguity still remain.
 329. Efforts have been underway to achieve a more synergistic approach across the various Eritrean
         departments involved in delivery of the GEF projects. Less evidence is available to assess
         meaningful synergistic approaches amongst Eritrea national institutions for GEF supported
         activities.

7.3 Monitoring and Evaluation for Project Adaptive Management
 330. At the project level, there are two completed projects within the Eritrea portfolio: the
         Conservation Management of Eritrean Coastal, Marine and Island Biodiversity Project has a



                                                                                                         98
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



         terminal evaluation report with a rating of Moderately Unsatisfactory. At the time of
         completion, the project was found to most likely have outcomes that would be sustainable;
         however, the project outcomes themselves and the quality of execution was found to be
         Moderately Unsatisfactory. The completed Wind Energy Applications project received an
         outcome rating of Satisfactory. Both projects were studied further as part of ROtI analysis for
         their progress to impact.
 331. Two supervision missions have been conducted for the ongoing Catchments and Landscape
        Management Project (GEF ID 3362) and the SIP: Sustainable Land Management Pilot Project
        (GEF ID 3364). Both projects were rated recently as satisfactory and found to be achieving their
        global environmental objectives and developmental objectives.
 332. The evaluation exercise showed that most GEF projects have monitoring and evaluation protocols
        in the form of Project Implementation Reports (PIRs) and Terminal Evaluations (TEs). However,
        these were not always available within the GEF PMIS system. Once they were compiled, a
        review concluded that monitoring information was not adequately employed to make on the
        timely corrections of problematic issues especially those related to outcome sustainability. A
        case in point would be the CMIB (GEF ID 411), where its supervision (or lack thereof) allowed
        the over-ambitious project to carry on until close to original project completion date before its
        parameters were redefined. For the wind energy project, supervision reports simply did not
        appropriate record the inappropriate procurement of technical services and equipment and
        supplies not only causing delays but affecting the sustainability of the off-grid wind energy
        component of the project. All supervision reports and even the final terminal evaluation itself
        conclude satisfactory results, even for M&E.
 333. The executing institutions for GEF-supported programs have made progress by way of establishing
        mechanisms for M&E. Unfortunately, these institutions infrequently come together internally
        and discuss procedural as well as operational matters related to GEF projects. Within the
        context of the above, more remains to be desired in terms of putting things into practice as the
        record of results are not adequately shared and reported on regular basis. Furthermore,
        interviews with concerned government officials reveal that a lack of sufficient funds, shortage
        in transport facilities, and limited human capacity have been reported as formidable
        constraints to put M&E into practice.
 334. M&E appears to be well established and mainstreamed when it comes to the SGP projects. The
        community-led program has national and local steering committees to oversee program
        design, implementation and M&E. Members are composed of representatives from local NGOs,
        government, academia, UNDP, co-funding donors, beneficiary communities, the private sector
        and the media. Among its other responsibilities, it undertakes periodic field visits and by
        reviewing M&E reports makes important decisions concerning the activities of on-going
        projects.
 335. SGP beneficiary communities also hold regular quarterly meeting to discuss project performance.
        Stakeholders for FS projects are also reported to meet, though not on a regular basis. However,



                                                                                                           99
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



         there is no evidence that the practices have been used as feedback for informed decision and
         adaptive management by decision makers and project management.




                                                                                                   100
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




Annex A: Country Response




                                                               101
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




Annex B: Quality Assurance Statement




                                                               102
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




                                                               103
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




Annex C: Country-Specific Terms of Reference

Terms of Reference
GEF Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea
(1992-2012)
Background and Introduction
     1. Country Portfolio Evaluations (CPEs) are one of the main evaluation streams of work of the GEF
        Evaluation Office 32. By capturing aggregate portfolio results and performance of the GEF at the
        country level they provide useful information for both the GEF Council and the countries. CPEs’
        relevance and utility will increase in GEF-5 with the increased emphasis on country ownership and
        country driven portfolio development.
     2. GEF eligible countries are chosen for portfolio evaluations, based on a selection process and a set
        of criteria including the size, diversity and maturity of their portfolio of projects 33. Among several
        considerations, Eritrea was selected as it is a part of Sub-Saharan Africa and also a ‘Least
        Developed Country’. Eritrea has a comparatively large, diverse and mature portfolio with
        emphasis on climate change and biodiversity and has high co-financing amounts. Furthermore,
        Eritrea includes several on-going projects as well as those that are on the verge of
        implementation.
     3. Eritrea is situated in an arid and semi-arid region of Sub-Saharan Africa. After a war lasting
        approximately 30 years, it gained independence in 1991. It is bordered by Sudan in the
        west, Ethiopia in the south, and Djibouti in the southeast with Asmara as the capital of the
        country. The northeastern and eastern parts have an extensive coastline along the Red Sea,
        directly across from Saudi Arabia and Yemen. The nation has a total area of approximately
        120,000 km2 (45,406 sq. mi), including approximately 390 islands, the prominent being the Dahlak
        Archipelago and several of the Hanish Islands 34.
     4. Eritrea is a multi-ethnic country, with nine recognized ethnic groups namely the Afar, Bilen,
        Hidarb, Kunama, Nara, Rashaida, Saho, Tigre, and Tigryna. The estimated population is around six
        million. Most residents speak Afro-Asiatic languages, either of the Semitic or Cushitic branches.
        Among these communities, the Tigrinya make up about 55% of the population and




32
   A complete list of countries having undergone CPEs can be found on Office’s website (www.gefeo.org).
33
   http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/CPE_final_country_selection_note-0910_0.pdf,
Website access: 1st May 2013
34
    Eritrea’s Initial National Communication, UNFCC, Pub: The State of Eritrea Ministry of Land, Water and
Environment, December 2001.


                                                                                                           104
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



         the Tigre constitute around 30%. In addition, there is a number of Nilo-Saharan
         speaking Nilotic ethnic minorities 35.
     5. Despite its small land area, Eritrea has diverse climate zones, mainly due to its high topographic
        variations. Physiographically the country is divided into the Central Highlands (above 2000 m from
        sea level), the Midlands (1500-2000 m from sea level) and the Lowlands (below 1500 m from sea).
        The rainfall pattern is affected by this topographic variation in the country; annual rainfall varying
        from about 100mm in the lowlands to about 700mm in the central highlands. Further, Eritrea is
        divided in six agro-ecological zones, namely, the Moist Highland, Arid Highland, Sub-Humid, Moist
        Lowland and the Semi-Desert. The variations in mean annual temperature range from 15°C in the
        moist and arid highlands to 32°C in the semi-desert 36.
     6. The Human Development Index (HDI) is 0.351, giving country a rank of 181 out of 187 countries.
        The HDI of Sub-Saharan Africa as a region increased from 0.366 in 1980 to 0.475 today, thus
        placing Eritrea below the regional average 37. Since independence from Ethiopia in 1991, Eritrea
        has economic problems similar to other small, developing country states, accentuated by the
        recent implementation of restrictive economic policies 38. However, According to the World Bank’s
        June 2012 Global Economic Prospects, Eritrea became one of the fastest growing African
        economies in 2011, with growth in gross domestic product (GDP) projected at 14%, up from an
        estimated 2.2% in 2010, The growth was mainly stimulated by favorable harvest and the mining
        sector (mainly gold), which has attracted substantial foreign direct investment 39. However, growth
        in absolute terms is small. Eritrea is one of the least developed countries in the world, with an
        average annual per capita income of US$403 in 2010.
     7. The predominant economic activity for more than two thirds of the population is the rain-fed
        agriculture. It is a risky enterprise, and food security remains one of the government’s main
        concerns. Favorable rains and rehabilitation of rural infrastructure have led to improved
        agricultural performance and food security in the last three years. Large fiscal and trade deficits
        are managed through price, exchange rate and interest rate controls, which have led to a shortage
        of foreign exchange and a fall in private sector activity. The size of the public debt in proportion to
        GDP is a concern. The official annual inflation rate rose to 13.3% in 2011, from 11.6% in 2010, but
        much improved compared to 29.5% in 2009.In the longer term, sustained real economic growth of
        7% or more will be required for to reach the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) of halving the
        proportion of people living in extreme poverty by 2015.

     8. Major environmental issues faced by Eritrea are continued deforestation, desertification, soil
        erosion, overgrazing, and significant land loss as a result of the presence still of hundreds of

35
    Eritrea’s Initial National Communication, UNFCC, Pub: The State of Eritrea Ministry of Land, Water and
Environment, December 2001.
36
   http://www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/Counprof/eritrea/Eritrea.htm#3. CLIMATE AND AGRO ECOLOGICAL,
Website access 2nd May 2013
37
   http://hdrstats.undp.org/en/countries/profiles/ERI.html, Website access 1st May 2013
38
   http://www.indexmundi.com/eritrea/economy_profile.html, Website access 1st May 2013
39
   http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/eritrea/overview, Website access 2nd May 2013


                                                                                                           105
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



         thousands of land mines. Significant strides towards sustainability and environmental recovery
         have been made by the Government of Eritrea. It has embarked on a program to reforest (which
         in 1900 was 30% forested land, despite heavy logging) and prevent wood from being used as a fuel
         source. Land Degradation is a central issue causing serious concern. Lack of proper land use
         practices is the primary cause of degradation. In the central and the northern highlands, the land
         degradation is mainly due to water erosion.
     9. As the main form of land use in Eritrea is agriculture and pastorals, land management is the prime
        concern to protect the arable land from land degradation. The major constraint facing soil
        conservation and water management have been the traditional land tenure system known as
        ‘Dessa’ System (village ownership). The heavy dependence on biomass fuel has led to aggravated
        deforestation, soil erosion and flooding.
     10. Deforestation is another cause of concern, with a fall of forest cover to less than 1% as compared
         to 30% in the last century. Factors like agriculture expansion, increased firewood consumption,
         heavy livestock grazing, internal strife and construction of traditional houses known as ‘Hidmo’ 40
         in rural are associated with the loos of forest cover.
     11. Water is also a scarce commodity in Eritrea, with no perennial water source, all rivers and their
         tributaries being mostly seasonal and intermittent. Ground water is the major source of water.
         But no drinking water standards have been formulated which resulted in increase in water
         pollution affecting the quality of ground water. There is high amount of fluoride which is also a
         chemical detrimental to human health. Sanitation and solid waste management are other issues
         that need to be addressed. Industrialization in Eritrea started quite early which resulted in
         industrial pollution as the machinery and technology can be outdated. The total quantity of
         hazardous liquid waste generated from the industries is to the tune of 3,640 metric/year 41.
     12. GEF has been active in Eritrea since 1 9 9 2 with 12 national projects. The portfolio includes 3
         climate change projects, 4 projects in biodiversity, 1 multifocal area project, 2 in POPs and 2 in
         land degradation (Table1). The total GEF grant is approximately $22.62 million with $41.55 million
         of co-financing. The Eritrean projects are evenly spread within the GEF project cycle with 4
         projects completed, 2 projects under implementation and 6 pending (these include CEO, Council
         and Agency approved).
     13. The portfolio in Eritrea is split as follows: UNDP has been a main channel for support with 6
         projects totaling over $15.13 million in GEF budget; World Bank has implemented $0.44 million in
         GEF support through 2 projects; IFAD has 1 project with a total GEF budget of $4.35 million and
         UNEP, UNDP, FAO also with 1 project each having GEF budget of $0.19 million, $0.34 million and
         $2.15 million respectively. Respective co-financing amounts by focal area are indicated in Table 1.



40
  It is estimated that 100 trees have to be felled to be felled to construct one such traditional house (Environment
Eritrea, 1995)
41
  Srikanth, R. Challenges of Environmental Management in Eritrea – A case study, Department of Environment,
Asmara, Eritrea.


                                                                                                               106
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



Table1: GEF Support to National Projects by Focal Area and GEF Agency

     Focal Area           Agency        GEF Amount($)            Co-financing              Total Amount           of
                                                                 Amount ($)                ($)                    Projects
                          UNDP          2,454,411                2,953,136                 5,407,547              3
     Climate Change
                          Subtotal 2,454,411                     2,953,136                 5,407,547              3
                          World
                                   445,000                       15,000                    460,000                2
                             Bank
     Biodiversity         UNDP     10,864,000                    11,395,400                22,259,400             2
                          Subtotal      11,309,000               11,410,400                22,719,400             4
                          UNEP          198,000                  20,000                    218,000                1
     Multi Focal Area
                          Subtotal      198,000                  20,000                    218,000                1
     POPs                 FAO           2,150,000                3,209,153                 5,359,153              1
                    UNIDO               346,500                  35,000                    381,500                1
                    Subtotal            2,496,500                3,244,153                 5,740,653              2
                    UNDP                1,820,000                2,250,000                 4,070,000              1
     Land
                    IFAD                4,350,000                21,678,000                26,028,000             1
        Degradation
                    Subtotal            6,170,000                23,928,000                30,098,000             2
     TOTAL                              22,627,911               41,555,689                64,183,600             12

Objectives of the evaluation

     14. The purpose of the Eritrea CPE is to provide the GEF Council with an assessment of results and
         performance of the GEF supported activities in the country, and of how the GEF supported
         activities fit into the national strategies and priorities as well as within the global environmental
         mandate of the GEF. Based on this overall purpose, the Eritrea CPE will have the following specific
         objectives:

       •    Evaluate the effectiveness and results 42 of GEF support in a country, with attention to the
            sustainability of achievements at the project level and progress toward impact on global
            environmental benefits.
       •    Evaluate the relevance and efficiency 43 of GEF support in Eritrea from several points of view:
            national environmental frameworks and decision-making processes, the GEF mandate of

42 From the GEF Monitoring and Evaluation Policy, 2010: Effectiveness: the extent to which the GEF activity’s objectives were
achieved, or are expected to be achieved, taking into account their relative importance; Results: in GEF terms, results include
direct project outputs, short to medium-term outcomes, and progress toward longer term impact including global
environmental benefits, replication effects, and other local effects; Sustainability: the likely ability of an intervention to
continue to deliver benefits for an extended period of time after completion; projects need to be environmentally as well as
financially and socially sustainable.
43
 Relevance: the extent to which the activity is suited to local and national environmental priorities and policies
and to global environmental benefits to which the GEF is dedicated; Efficiency; the extent to which results have
been delivered with the least costly resources possible.



                                                                                                                              107
  Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



          achieving of global environmental benefits, and GEF policies and procedures.
      •   Provide feedback and knowledge sharing to (1) the GEF Council in its decision making process,
          (2) Eritrea on its collaboration / participation in the GEF, and (3) the different agencies and
          organizations involved in the preparation and implementation of GEF support.
    15. The Eritrea CPE will also be used to provide information and evidence to other evaluations being
        conducted by the Office; for example the Small Grants Programme evaluation and the Fifth Overall
        Performance Study (OPS5) to the GEF Replenishment Committee.

    16. The Eritrea CPE will analyze the performance of individual projects as part of the overall GEF
        portfolio, but without rating such projects. CPEs are conducted to bring to the attention of Council
        different experiences and lessons on how the GEF is implemented at the national level from a wide
        variety of countries. CPEs do not aim at evaluating the performance of GEF agencies, national
        entities (agencies / departments, national governments or involved civil society organizations), or
        individual projects.


Key Evaluation Questions

    17. GEF CPEs are guided by a set of key questions that should be answered based on the quantitative
        and qualitative analysis of the evaluative information and perceptions collected during the
        evaluation exercise. The Eritrea CPE will be guided by the following key questions:

   Effectiveness, results and sustainability
           a) Is GEF support effective in producing results at the project level,
           b) the aggregate level (portfolio and program) by focal area? country level?
           c) Is GEF support effective in producing results that build on previous lessons learned and good
               practices from GEF projects and partners?
           d) Is GEF support effective in producing results that are making progress to impact after
               project completion?
           e) Is GEF support effective in replicating / up-scaling the successful results it has
               demonstrated in its projects?
           f) Is the GEF support effective in linking environmental conservation measures with
               compatible sustainable livelihood and development activities for achieving global
               environmental benefits?
           g) Is GEF support effective at developing institutional and individual capacity within Eritrea?
           h) Has the GEF support to Eritrea facilitated the channeling of additional resources for
               preventing land degradation efforts for achieving global environmental benefits?
   Relevance
          a) Is GEF support relevant to the Eritrea sustainable development agenda and environmental
             priorities, to the country’s development needs and challenges, and to national GEF focal
             area action plans?
          b) Is GEF support relevant to the objectives linked to the different global environmental
             benefits in the climate change, biodiversity, international waters, land degradation, and
             chemicals focal areas?
          c) Are GEF and its Agencies supporting environmental and sustainable development
             prioritization, country ownership and decision-making process in Eritrea, and if so, how has



                                                                                                        108
  Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



                 this evolved overtime?
              d) To what extent have GEF-supported activities also received support from the country
                 and/or from other donors?
          Efficiency
              a) How much time, effort and financial resources (including co-financing) does it take to
                 formulate and implement projects, by type of GEF support modality (including SGP)?

              b) What are the roles, types of engagement and coordination among different stakeholders
                 in project implementation?

              c) What are the synergies among GEF agencies, Eritrea national institutions and other donors
                 in support of GEF programming and implementation?

              d) What role does Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) play in project adaptive management
                 and overall efficiency?

       18. Each of these questions is complemented by indicators, potential sources of information and
           methods in an evaluation matrix, which is presented in Annex 1.


Scope and Limitations
       19. The Eritrea CPEs will cover all types of GEF supported activities in the country at all stages of the
           project cycle (pipeline, on-going and completed) and implemented by all active GEF Agencies in all
           active focal areas, including applicable GEF corporate activities such as the Small Grants
           Programme (SGP) and as election of regional and global programs that are of special relevance to
           these countries. However, the main focus of the evaluation will be the projects implemented
           within the country boundaries, i.e. the national projects, be these full-size, medium- size or
           enabling activities. 44 The stage of the project will determine the expected CPE focus (see Table2).

  Table2.Focus of evaluation according to stage of project
     Project          Focus                              On a exploratory basis
    Status            Relevance        Efficiency       Effectiveness     Results/Benefits
    Completed         Full             Full             Full             Full
    On-going          Full             Partially        Likelihood       Likelihood
    Pipeline          Expected         Processes        Not applicable   Not applicable

       20. The GEF does not establish country programs that specify expected achievements through
           programmatic objectives, indicators, and targets. However, since 2010 the GEF has started
           supporting countries in undertaking national portfolio formulation exercises on a voluntary basis.
           These exercises serve as a priority setting tool for countries and as a guide for GEF Agencies as
           they assist recipient countries. These country programming efforts are rather recent, which limits
           their usefulness in country portfolio evaluations that look back up to the start of GEF operations,

  44
   The review of selected regional projects will feed in the aggregate assessment of the national GEF portfolio
  described above



                                                                                                             109
  Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



           i.e. sometimes 20 years back. This is why generally CPEs entail some degree of retrofitting of
           frameworks to be able to judge the relevance of the aggregated results of a diverse portfolio of
           projects. Accordingly, the CPE evaluation framework described here will be adapted along with the
           other relevant national and GEF Agencies’ strategies, country programs and/or planning
           frameworks as a basis for assessing the aggregate results, efficiency and relevance of the GEF
           portfolio in Eritrea.

       21. GEF support is provided through partnerships with many institutions operating at many levels,
           from local to national and international level. It is therefore challenging to consider GEF support
           separately. The Eritrea CPE will not attempt to provide a direct attribution of development results
           to the GEF, but address the contribution of the GEF support to the overall achievements, i.e. to
           establish a credible link between what GEF supported activities and its implications. The evaluation
           will address how GEF support has contributed to overall achievements in partnership with others,
           through analysis on roles and coordination, synergies and complementarities and knowledge
           sharing.

       22. The assessment of results will be focused, where possible, at the level of outcomes and impacts
           rather than outputs. Project-level results will be measured against the overall expected impact and
           outcomes from each project. Special attention will be paid to the identification of factors affecting
           the level of outcome achievements and progress to impact, as well as to the risks that may prevent
           further progress to long term impacts. Outcomes at the focal area level will be primarily assessed
           in relation to catalytic and replication effects, institutional sustainability and capacity building, and
           awareness.
       23. Progress towards impact of a representative sample of mature enough projects 45 (i.e. completed
           at least since 2 years) will be looked at through field Reviews of Outcome to Impact (ROtI) studies.
           Expected impacts at the focal area level will be assessed in the context of GEF objectives and
           indicators of global environmental benefits.
       24. The inclusion of regional and global projects increases the complexity of this type of evaluations
           since these projects are developed and approved under different context (i.e. regional or global
           policies and strategies) than national countries.
       25. Within the national portfolio, 4 full size project are completed, 2 full size projects are under
           implementation and 6 pending (includes CEO, Council and Agency approved – 4 full-size and 2
           enabling activity). The context in which these projects were developed, approved and are being
           implemented constitutes another focus of the evaluation. This includes a historic assessment of
           the national sustainable development and environmental policies, strategies and priorities, legal
           environment in which these policies are implemented and enforced, GEF Agencies country
           strategies and programs and the GEF policies, principles, programs and strategies.
Methodology


  45
   It is expected that at least two ROtIs would be conducted.



                                                                                                                110
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



  26. The Eritrea country portfolio evaluation will be conducted by staff of the GEF Evaluation Office
      and staff and consultants from ECOSOC. The team includes technical expertise on the national
      environmental and sustainable development strategies, evaluation methodologies, and GEF. 46
  27. ECOSOC staff qualifies under the GEF Evaluation Office Ethical Guidelines, and have signed a
      declaration of interest to indicate no recent (last 3-5 years) relationship with GEF support in the
      country. The Operational Focal Point in the country will act as resource person in facilitating the
      CPE process by identifying interviewees and source documents, organizing interviews, meetings
      and field visits.
  28. The methodology includes a series of components using a combination of qualitative and
      quantitative evaluation methods and tools. The expected sources of information include:

        •   Project level: project documents, project implementation reports, terminal evaluations,
            terminal evaluation reviews, reports from monitoring visits, and any other technical
            documents produced by projects;

        •   Country level: national sustainable development agendas, environmental priorities and
            strategies, GEF-wide, focal area strategies and action plans, global and national environmental
            indicators;

        •   Agency levels: country assistance strategies and frameworks and their evaluations and
            reviews;
        •   Evaluative evidence at country level from other evaluations implemented either by the Office,
            by the independent evaluation offices of GEF Agencies, or by other national or international
            evaluation departments;
        •   Interviews with GEF stakeholders, including the GEF Operational Focal Point and all other
            relevant government departments, bilateral and multilateral donors, civil society organizations
            and academia (including both local and international NGOs with a presence in the country),
            GEF Agencies, SGP and the national UN conventions’ Focal Points;
        •   Interviews with GEF beneficiaries and supported institutions, municipal governments and
            associations, and local communities and authorities;
        •   Surveys with GEF stakeholders in the country;
        •   Field visits to selected project sites, using methods and tools developed by the Office such as
            outlined in the Review of Outcomes to Impact (ROtI) Handbook;
   • Information from national consultation workshops.


46The team from ECOSOC headed by Mr. Tessfa Mariam Tekie (Team Leader and Socio-Economist) and composed of Mr.
Weldetensea Tewelde (Senior researcher and Associate Professor in Geography in the College of Social Science), Mr.
Weldeselassie Okubazghi (Senior researcher and Associate Professor in Plant Production Ecology and Resources Conservation in
the College of Agriculture) and Mulubrhan G/yohannes Mehreteab.




                                                                                                                       111
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



  29. The quantitative analysis will use indicators to assess the relevance and efficiency of GEF support
      using projects as the unit of analysis (that is, linkages with national priorities, time and cost of
      preparing and implementing projects, etc.) and to measure GEF results (that is, progress towards
      achieving global environmental impacts) and performance of projects (such as implementation
      and completion ratings). Available statistics and scientific sources, especially for national
      environmental indicators, will also be used.
  30. The Evaluation Team will use standard tools and protocols for the CPEs and adapt these to the
      national and regional context. These tools include a project review protocol to conduct the desk
      and field reviews of GEF projects and interview guides to conduct interviews with different
      stakeholders.
  31. The Eritrea CPE will include visits to project sites. The criteria for selecting the sites will be
      finalized during the implementation of the evaluation, with emphasis placed on both ongoing and
      completed projects. The evaluation team will decide on specific sites to visit based on the initial
      review of documentation and balancing needs of representation as well as cost- effectiveness of
      conducting the field visits.
  32. Quality assurance will be performed on the final report by a Quality Assurance Panel composed
      of two national independent national experts. The expertise provided covers the relevant scientific
      and technical aspects of the peer review function related to the GEF focal areas as well as to
      evaluation.
Process and Outputs
  33. These country-specific TOR have been prepared based on two GEF Evaluation Office visits to
      Eritrea in February and April 201. The first mission was conducted with the purpose of assessing
      institutional and human capacity for joint management, quality assurance and national conduct of
      the evaluation. The 2nd mission was for scoping the evaluation and identifying key issues to be
      included in the analysis. The scoping mission was also an opportunity to officially launch the
      evaluation and introduce the selected consultants to GEF national stakeholders. These TOR
      conclude the preparatory phase, and set the scene for the evaluation phase, during which the
      Evaluation Team will collect information and review literature to extract existing reliable
      evaluative evidence and prepare specific inputs to the CPE, including:
        -   the GEF Portfolio Database which describes all GEF support activities within the country, basic
            information (GEF Agency, focal area, implementation status), their implementation status,
            project cycle information, GEF and co-financing financial information, major objectives and
            expected (or actual) results, key partners per project, etc.
        -   Country Environmental Legal Framework which provides an historical perspective of the
            context in which the GEF projects have been developed and implemented in Eritrea. This
            document will be based on information on national environmental legislation, environmental
            policies of the government administration (plans, strategies and similar), and the
            international agreements signed by Eritrea presented and analyzed through time so to be able
            to connect with particular GEF support.




                                                                                                        112
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



           -    Global Environmental Benefits Assessment which provides an assessment of the country’s
                contribution to the GEF mandate and its focal areas based on appropriate indicators, such as
                those used in the System for the Transparent Allocation of Resources (STAR) (biodiversity,
                climate change and land degradation) and others used in projects documents.
           -    Review of Outcomes to Impact (ROtI) Field studies of three projects completed since at least
                2 years, selected in consultation with the Evaluation Office staff, which will contribute to
                strengthen the information gathering and analysis on results.
           -    The Evaluation Team will also conduct additional field visits of other (3-5) ongoing and/or
                completed national projects, including those from the Small Grants Programme (SGP)
                Portfolio of projects 47, selected in consultation with the Evaluation Office staff, which will
                contribute to strengthen the information gathering and analysis on results.
           -    Conduct the evaluation analysis and triangulation of collected information and evidence
                from various sources, tools and methods. This will be done during a mission to Eritrea by the
                Office’s Task Manager working with the ECOSOC team. The aim will be to consolidate
                evidence gathered thus far, identify missing information and analysis gaps and arrive at
                preliminary findings. These will be summarized in a concise Aide Mémoire, which will be
                distributed to stakeholders one week prior to the final consultation workshop. 48 During this
                mission, additional analysis, meetings, document reviews and/or field work might be
                undertaken as needed.
           -    Conduct a Stakeholder Consultation Workshop for the Government and national
                stakeholders, including project staff, donors and GEF Agencies, to present and gather
                stakeholders’ feedback on the GEF Eritrea CPE key preliminary findings, contained in the Aid-
                Mémoire and circulated prior to the workshop. The workshop will be an opportunity to verify
                eventual errors of facts or analysis in case these are supported by adequate additional
                evidence brought to the attention of the Evaluation Team. The workshop will also aim at
                identifying potential areas of recommendations and verify their concreteness and feasibility;
           -    Prepare a Draft GEF Eritrea CPE Report, which incorporates comments received at the final
                consultation workshop. The draft report will be sent out for factual error checking as well as
                errors of analysis to stakeholders;
           Consider the eventual incorporation of comments received to the draft report and prepare
           -
           the Final Eritrea CPE Report. The GEF Evaluation Office will bear full responsibility for the
           content of the report.
Evaluation Key Milestones
33.     The evaluation will be conducted between February and September 2013.The key milestones of
the evaluation are presented here below:

     Preparation                                                           Status
     Preparatory work, preliminary data gathering                          Completed in January 201
     Pre-evaluation mission                                                Completed in February 2013
     Evaluation Work plan                                                  Completed in March 2013
     Evaluation matrix                                                     Completed in March 2013


47
     Field visits to SGP projects will be undertake when opportunistic in relation to other field work.
48
     The Aide Mémoire will be circulated to GEF stakeholders with an invitation to the final consultation workshop.


                                                                                                                 113
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



  Quality control/peer review, finalization and disclosure of Eritrea-   June 2013
      specific CPE TOR
  Milestone                                                              Deadline
  Launching evaluation phase, literature review, data gathering          March 2013
  Country Environmental Legal Framework                                  July 2013
  Global Environmental Benefits Assessment                               July, 2013
  Data collection/interviews, GEF portfolio database and project         March-August, 2013
       review protocols
  Finalization of the GEF country portfolio database                     August 2013
  Two ROtI field studies                                                 August 2013
  Consolidation and triangulation of evaluative evidence, additional     Week of July 22, 2013
       analysis/gap-filling
  Preparation of a Aid Mémoire (Report of Preliminary Findings)          August 31, 2013
  Presentation of Preliminary Findings in a Consultation workshop        Week of September 16, 2013
  Draft CPE report for circulation                                       October 1, 2013
  Delivery of final CPE report                                           October 15, 2013


Eritrea CPE Report Outline
34.      The CPE report will be a concise, stand-alone document organized along the following general
table of contents:
CHAPTER 1. Main Conclusions and Recommendations
              Background
              Objectives, Scope and Methodology
             Conclusions
                  • Results and effectiveness
                  • Relevance
                  • Efficiency
              Lessons
              Recommendations

CHAPTER 2. Evaluation Framework
           Background
           Objectives and Scope
           Methodology
           Limitations

CHAPTER 3. Context
           The under analysis: General description
           The Global Environmental Facility: General description
           Environmental resources in key GEF support areas
           The Environmental Legal Framework in Eritrea
           The Environmental Policy Framework in Eritrea

CHAPTER 4. The GEF portfolio in Eritrea
           Defining the GEF Portfolio
           Activities in the GEF Portfolio



                                                                                                      114
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



            Evolution of GEF Support by Focal Area and by GEF Agency
            Corporate, Regional and Global Programs
            Roles and Responsibilities among Different Stakeholders in Project Implementation
            The GEF Focal Point Mechanism in Eritrea

CHAPTER 5. Results of GEF support to the Eritrea
           Global Environmental Benefits/Impacts
           Catalytic and Replication Effects
           Institutional Sustainability and Capacity Building
           Results by Focal Area
           Knowledge Generation and Learning

CHAPTER 6. Relevance of the GEF support in The Republic of Eritrea
           Relevance of GEF Support to the Country’s Sustainable Development Agenda and
           Environmental Priorities
           Relevance of GEF Support to Country’s Development Priorities and Challenges
           Relevance of GEF Support to National Action Plans within GEF Focal Areas
           Relevance of GEF Support to the achievement of Global Environmental Benefits
           Relevance of the GEF Portfolio to Other Global and National Institutions

CHAPTER 5. Efficiency of GEF supported activities in The Republic of Eritrea
           Time, Effort, and Financial Resources Required for Project formulation
           Coordination and synergies
           Monitoring and Evaluation for Project Adaptive Management

ANNEXES
            A.   Country Response
            B.   Quality Assurance statement
            C.   Country-specific Terms of Reference
            D.   Evaluation Matrix
            E.   Interviewees
            F.   Sites Visited
            G.   Workshop Participants
            H.   GEF Portfolio in Eritrea
            I.   Bibliography
            J.   Acronyms




                                                                                                115
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




Annex D: Evaluation Matrix

 Questions                               Indicators                                           Sources of information                                 Method

 EFFECTIVENESS, RESULTS AND SUSTAINABILITY
                                                                                              Project staff and beneficiaries, national and local    Focus groups and       individual
                                         Overall project outcomes and impacts of GEF          government representatives, NGOs                       interviews
                                         support
                                                                                              ROtI studies                                           ROtI methodology
                                                                                              Project-related reviews (implementation reports,
                                         Existing ratings for project outcomes (self-                                                                Desk review,     project   review
                                                                                              terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation
                                         ratings and independent ratings)                                                                            protocols
                                                                                              reviews, etc)
                                                                                                                                                     Literature review, meta analysis
                                         Changes in global benefit indexes and other          Evaluative evidence from projects and donors,          of evaluation reports, national
                                         global environmental indicators                      global environmental benefits assessment               and global state of environment
                                                                                                                                                     reports
                                         Overall project outcomes and impacts of GEF          Project staff and beneficiaries, national and local    Focus groups and individual
 a) Is GEF support effective in
                                         support                                              government representatives, NGOS                       interviews
     producing results (outcomes
     and impacts) at the project                                                              ROtI studies                                           ROtI methodology
     level, aggregate (portfolio and                                                          Project-related reviews (implementation reports,
     program) level and country          Sustainability ratings for projects that are still
                                                                                              terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation              GEF Portfolio aggregate analysis
     level? Are these results (project   under implementation re likelihood that
                                                                                              reviews, etc)
     level) sustainable?                 objectives will be achieved
                                                                                              Data from overall projects and other donors, ,
                                         Catalytic and replication effect on national                                                                Desk review
                                                                                              including evaluation studies by other donors
                                         and regional programs
                                                                                              ROtI studies                                           ROtI methodology
                                                                                              Project staffs and beneficiaries, national and local   Focus groups and       individual
                                                                                              government representatives                             interviews
                                                                                              Data from overall projects and other donors,
                                                                                                                                                     Desk review
                                                                                              including evaluation studies by other donors
                                         Use of tracking tools and M&E data?                  ROtI studies                                           ROtI methodology
                                                                                              Project staffs and beneficiaries, national and local   Focus groups and individual
                                                                                              government representatives, NGOs                       interviews
                                         Existing ratings for project outcomes (self-         Project-related reviews (implementation reports,       Desk review, project review
                                         ratings and independent ratings)                     terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation              protocols

                                                                                                                                                                                   116
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


    Questions                                    Indicators                                              Sources of information                                Method

                                                                                                         reviews, etc)

                                                                                                         Project-related reviews (implementation reports,
                                                 Existing ratings for project outcomes (self-                                                                  Desk review,    project   review
                                                                                                         terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation
                                                 ratings and independent ratings)                                                                              protocols
                                                                                                         reviews, etc)
    b) Is GEF support effective in
        producing results related to the         Dissemination of positive impacts of GEF
                                                                                                         project staff and beneficiaries, national and local
        dissemination     of    lessons          projects and best practices into national                                                                     Focus groups and       individual
                                                                                                         government representatives civil society staffs
        learned in GEF projects and              development plans and other channels to                                                                       interviews
                                                                                                         (NGOs and academia),
        with partners? If so, how are            mainstream lessons from GEF projects
        such lessons shared in-                                                                          Project-related reviews (implementation reports,
        country?                                 Lessons learned are shared nationally and               terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation             Desk review, ROtI methodology,
                                                 regionally and models/interventions are in              reviews, and so on), ROtI studies, project staffs     GEF portfolio and pipeline
                                                 use                                                     and beneficiaries, national and local government      analysis
                                                                                                         Representatives, NGOs and academia

                                                 Continued existence of the intended
                                                 change/activity beyond the GEF support                  Project-related reviews (implementation reports,      Desk review, focus groups and
    c) Has GEF support led to progress                                                                   terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation             individual interviews, project
         toward impact over an                   Availability of financial and technical                 reviews, etc.); Project staffs and beneficiaries,     review      protocols,    ROtI
         extended period of time after           resources to carry out the interventions                national and local government representatives;        methodology, GEF portfolio
         completion?                             beyond GEF funding                                      ROtI studies                                          analysis
                                                 Ownership of projects by local institutions or
                                                 by beneficiary groups who continue to engage
                                                 with the interventions
    d ∗) Is the GEF support effective in                                                                 Project related reviews; project staffs and
                                                                                                                                                               Project Review Protocols, focus
          creating individual capacity at        Evidence of individual capacity improvement             beneficiaries, national and local government
                                                                                                                                                               groups and individual interviews,
          national, regional and local           by credentials and performance                          representatives; NGOs and academia, ROtI
                                                                                                                                                               ROtI methodology
          levels?                                                                                        studies, evaluation studies by other donors
    e*) Is the GEF support effective in
                                                 Evidence     of   institutional     capacity            Project related reviews; project staffs and           Project Review Protocols, focus
         strengthening     institutional
                                                 strengthening by institutional creation,                beneficiaries, national and local government          groups and individual interviews,
         capacity at national, regional
                                                 performance measures, staffing or budget                representatives; ROtI studies, NGO reps               ROtI methodology
         and local levels?




∗
    For the purposes of analysis, the review of the key question concerning individual capacity and institutional strengthening has been split.

                                                                                                                                                                                             117
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 Questions                               Indicators                                        Sources of information                                 Method

                                                                                           Project-related reviews (implementation reports,
                                         Incorporation of livelihood needs into project    terminal evaluations (TE), TE reviews,                 Desk Project Review Protocols,
                                         design                                            etc.);project staffs and beneficiaries, national and   stakeholder consultations (focus
 f) Is the GEF support effective in                                                        local government representatives, NGOs,                groups and individual interviews)
 linking environmental conservation                                                        academia
 measures       with      compatible     Evidence of environmental stress reduction;
 sustainable     livelihood      and     status improvement                                Project-related reviews, ROtI studies, project staff
                                                                                                                                                  Project Review Protocols, ROtI
 development activities for achieving                                                      and beneficiaries, national and local government
                                                                                                                                                  methodology, GEF portfolio
 global environmental benefits?                                                            representatives and civil society representatives
                                         Evidence of livelihood improvements among                                                                analysis,          stakeholder
                                                                                           (NGO and academia), evaluation studies by other
                                         communities who are dependent on natural                                                                 consultation
                                                                                           donors
                                         resources
                                                                                           Project related reviews; project staff and
                                         % allocated for livelihood support from the                                                              Project review protocols, focus
                                                                                           beneficiaries, national and local government
                                         total support?                                                                                           groups and individual interviews
                                                                                           representatives, NGOs and academia
                                         Institutions continue the projects or use
 g) Is GEF support effective in          lessonsto provide services and interventions      Project staff and beneficiaries, national and local
     replicating/up-scaling      the                                                       government representatives;                            Desk review; Project Review
     successful results it has                                                             Project-related reviews (implementation reports,       Protocols, Meta-analysis, ROtI
     demonstrated in its projects?       Evidence of an increase in the use of similar     terminal evaluations (TE), TE reviews, etc.); Data     methodology, Focus groups and
                                         interventions.                                    from overall projects and other donors; ROtI           individual interviews
                                         Catalytic up-scaling & replication effects        studies
                                         Evidence of land degradation prevention
                                         projects/activities as supported by the
                                         Govt/other donors                                 Project staff and beneficiaries, national and local
 h) Has GEF support facilitated the                                                        government representatives;
     channelling   of     additional
                                                                                                                                                  Desk Review, Project Review
     resources for preventing land
                                         National/regional      policies   (agriculture,   Project-related reviews (implementation reports,       Protocols, individual interviews,
     degradation as a means to
                                         forestry, envmt, etc) to slow the rates of land   terminal evaluations (TE), TE reviews, etc.); Data     RotI, Meta-evaluation
     achieve global environmental
     benefits?                           degradation                                       from overall projects and other donors, including
                                                                                           evaluation studies; ROtI studies
                                         Active monitoring of land degradation by
                                         government/non-government entities
 RELEVANCE

 a) Is the GEF support relevant to the   GEF support for environmental protection is       Eritrean relevant sustainable development and          Desk review, GEF portfolio
 national sustainability development     within Eritrea’s development vision and           environment policies, strategies and action plans      analysis by focal area, Agency,

                                                                                                                                                                                118
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 Questions                              Indicators                                        Sources of information                                Method

 agenda        and      environmental   national strategies, including strategies for     Project-related      documentation        (project    modality, and project status
 priorities, the national development   progress     towards      the     Millennium      document and log frame, implementation                (National), selected key person
 needs and challenges and national      Development Goals?                                reports, terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation    interviews
 GEF focal area action plans?                                                             reviews, etc.), PMIS, Agencies’ project databases,
                                                                                          evaluation studies by other donors
                                                                                                                                                Desk review, GEF portfolio
                                        Level of GEF support compared to other                                                                  analysis by focal area, Agency,
                                                                                          GEE focal point and its agencies, government
                                        development partners in activities prioritized                                                          modality and project status
                                                                                          authorities and others)
                                        in national sustainable development and                                                                 (national)
                                        environmental policies and legislations
                                                                                                                                                Stakeholder consultation (focus
                                                                                          Government officials, agencies' staff, donors and
                                                                                                                                                groups, individual interviews)
                                                                                          civil society representatives
                                        GEF support has country ownership and is
                                        Eritrea based (i.e. project origin, design and                                                          Literature review, timelines, etc.
                                                                                          Country Legal Environmental Framework
                                        implementation)
                                                                                                                                                Meta-evaluation
                                        GEF supports development needs (i.e.,             Relevant country level sustainable development
                                        income generating, capacity building) and         and environment policies, strategies and action       Desk review, GEF portfolio
                                        reduces challenges                                plans                                                 analysis by focal area, Agency,
                                                                                          Project-related       documentation        (project   modality and project status
                                                                                          document and log frame, implementation                (national)
                                                                                          reports,     terminal    evaluations,     terminal
                                        The GEF’s various types of modalities, projects   evaluations reviews, etc.), PMIS, Agencies' project
                                        and instruments are in coherence with             databases
                                        country’s needs and challenges                    Government officials, agencies' staff, donors and     Stakeholder consultation (focus
                                                                                          civil society representatives                         groups, individual interviews)

                                                                                          Country Legal Environmental Framework                 Literature review, timelines etc.
                                                                                          GEF-supported enabling activities and products
                                                                                          (NCSA, NEAP, NAPA, national communications to         Desk review
                                        GEF support linked to the national                UN Conventions, etc.)
                                        environmental action plan (NEAP); national
                                        communications to UNFCCC; national POPs;          Small Grant Programme country strategy
                                        National Capacity Self-Assessment (NCSA);
                                        adaptation to climate change (NAPA), etc.         Government officials, agencies' staff, donors and     Stakeholder consultation (focus
                                                                                          civil society representatives                         groups, individual interviews)



                                                                                                                                                                                119
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 Questions                             Indicators                                         Sources of information                                Method


                                       Level of GEF funding compared to other
                                       development assistance in the environmental                                                              Desk reviews and meta-analysis
                                       sector and development activities                  Available databases (global such as World Bank,       for     evaluating     financing
                                                                                          ADB, etc, and national, such as Ministry of           information       to       assess
                                                                                          Finance. planning and economy, Ministries             contributions of government,
 b) Are GEF and its Agencies
                                                                                          responsible for Environment etc)                      donors, private and civil society
    supporting environmental and       Co-financing rate (from Government, private                                                              organizations
    sustainable        development     sector and/or civil society)
    prioritization,          country
    ownership       and    decision-   GEF support has Eritrean ownership and is          Project design and implementation documents,          Desk        review,    stakeholder
    making process in Eritrea? And     country based (i.e. project design and             evaluation studies from other donors,                        consultation (focus group
    if so, how has this evolved over   implementation by in-country national              Government officials, agencies’ staff, donors, and           discussions,      individual
    time?                              institutions)                                      civil society representatives                                interviews)
                                       Relevant national policies and strategic           STAR/RAF      documents,           Project-related
                                       documents include set of priorities that reflect   documentation                                         Literature review, timelines,
                                       the results and outcomes of relevant GEF                                                                      historical causality, etc.
                                       support                                            Country environmental legal framework


                                       GEF Project outcomes and impacts are in line       National Conventions action plans and                 Desk review, project field visits,
                                       with the Global Benefit Index (for biodiversity    reference/links in the RAF, STAR documents.               project review protocols
                                       and climate change) and with other global
                                       indicators for greenhouse gases, POPs, land        Global environmental benefits
 c) Is the GEF support in Eritrea      degradation, and international waters                                                                    Literature review
      relevant to the objectives
      linked to the different Global                                                      Assessment
      Environmental Benefits in the                                                       Project-related documentation (project
      climate change, biodiversity,
      international waters, land                                                                                                                GEF portfolio analysis by focal
                                                                                          document and log frame, implementation                    area, Agency, modality, and
      degradation, and chemicals       GEF support linked to meeting national             reports, terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation        project status (national)
      focal areas?                     commitments to conventions                         reviews, and so on), PMIS, Agencies’ project
                                                                                          databases,
                                                                                          Government officials, Agencies’ staff,
                                                                                                                                                Stakeholder consultation (focus
                                                                                                                                                     groups,          individual
                                                                                          donors and civil society representatives (including        interviews)
                                                                                          NGOs and academia)



                                                                                                                                                                                120
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 Questions                             Indicators                                      Sources of information                                Method

                                                                                       Global environmental benefits
                                                                                                                                             Literature review
                                                                                       Assessment

                                                                                       GEF Instrument, Council decisions, focal area         Desk review; GEF portfolio
                                       GEF activities, country commitment and          programs and strategies,                              analysis by focal area, Agency,
                                       project counterparts support GEF mandate                                                              modality, and project status
                                       and focal area programs and strategies          Project-related documentation(project document        (national)
                                       (catalytic and replication, etc.)               and log frame, implementation reports, terminal
                                                                                       evaluations, terminal evaluation reviews, etc.),      Meta evaluation
 d) To what extent have GEF-                                                           PMIS, Agencies’ project databases, evaluation
     supported   activities also                                                       studies from other donors
                                       Co-financing amounts
     received support from the                                                         GEF Secretariat staff and technical staff from GEF
                                       National and regional budgets for                                                                     Individual interviews
     country and/or from other                                                         Agencies
                                       environmental protection activities
     donors?
                                       Donor support to non-GEF supported
                                       environmental activities                        Global environmental benefits assessment              Literature review

                                                                                                                                             Literature review, timelines,
                                                                                       Country environmental legal framework
                                                                                                                                             historical causality, etc.
                                                                                       National allocations for related projects (Ministry
                                       Level of funding from Eritrean Government                                                             Government documents        and
                                                                                       of Finance and economy, Ministry responsible for
                                       for GEF projects and its trajectory over time                                                         interviews with officials
                                                                                       environment)

                                       Alignment of Global Environmental Benefits      Comparison    of    country   context/national
                                       (GEBs) to national sustainable development      development strategies and GEB(through country        Desk review
                                       priorities                                      context and GEB assessment)

                                       (i.e.        encouraging     economic           Government officials, agencies' staff, donors and
 e) Are there tradeoffs between the                                                    civil society representatives                         Stakeholder consultation (focus
                                       development/poverty reduction in a
      relevance of GEF support to                                                                                                            groups, individual interviews,
                                       sustainable manner)
      Eritrea's national priorities                                                                                                          national workshop)
      versus the relevance to Global
      Environmental Benefits?
                                       Contribution of GEF projects to support or      Project-related  documentation,         STAR/RAF
                                                                                                                                             GEF portfolio analysis
                                       integrate environment objectives into the       strategy documents
                                       larger development agendas.
                                                                                       Government officials, agencies' staff, donors and     Stakeholder consultation (focus
                                                                                       civil society representatives                         groups, individual interviews,
                                                                                                                                             national workshop)

                                                                                                                                                                         121
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 Questions                              Indicators                                        Sources of information                               Method




                                                                                                                                               Literature review, timelines,
                                                                                          Country Environmental Legal Framework
                                                                                                                                               historical causality, etc.
                                                                                          Government officials, agencies' staff, donors and
                                        Alignment of international projects to            civil society representatives                        Stakeholder consultation (focus
                                        meeting     local/regional       sustainable                                                           groups, individual interviews,
                                        development priorities and needs                                                                       national workshop)

 EFFICIENCY
                                        Process indicators: processing timing
                                        (according to project cycle steps), preparation
                                        and implementation cost by type of                Project-related      documentation        (project
                                        modalities etc.                                   documents and log frames, implementation
                                                                                                                                               Desk review, GEF          portfolio
                                                                                          reports, terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation
 a) How much time, effort and                                                                                                                  analysis, timelines
                                                                                          reviews, etc.), PMIS and Agencies project
     financial resources does it take   Financial spending timeline intact with plans     databases.
     to formulate and implement         Plans are adapted as necessary
     projects, by type of GEF           Financial allocations are used as scheduled
     support modality in Eritrea?                                                         GEF Secretariat and Agencies’ staff and
                                        Projects drop-outs from PDF and cancellations
                                                                                          government officials, GEF focal point                Individual interviews, field visits,
                                                                                          National and local government officials,             project review protocols
                                        GEF vs co-financing
                                                                                          donors, NGOs, beneficiaries
                                        Use of M&E inputs to guide the project
                                        towards achieving results                         Project-related    documentation especially          Desk reviews, GEF portfolio
                                                                                          progress reports, terminals and terminal             analysis, interviews with GEF
 b) What role does Monitoring and       Consideration of lessons learned?                 evaluation reviews.                                  agencies, focal point
     Evaluation (M&E) play in           Tracking tools used, correctly filled in
     project adaptive management
     and overall efficiency?            Project learning provides information for         Project     termination        reports,   policy
                                                                                                                                               Desk review, interviews with GEF
                                        decisions for future projects, programs,          makers/government officials, GEF secretariat and
                                                                                                                                               agencies, focal point.
                                        policies and portfolios.                          agencies staff, project reports




                                                                                                                                                                               122
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 Questions                              Indicators                                        Sources of information                               Method

                                        Types of actors involved and levels of
                                        participation                                     Project-related documentation (implementation
                                                                                          reports, terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation
                                        Working relationships between partners/           reviews, etc)
                                        stakeholders                                                                                           Meta evaluation (review of other
 c) What are the roles, types of        Roles and responsibilities of GEF actors                                                               donor reports) Desk review and
     engagement and coordination        defined                                                                                                Portfolio Analysis, stakeholder
     among different stakeholders                                                         Project-related                    documentation     analysis
     in project implementation?         Capacity gapbs defined                            (implementation/progress reports) Project staff,
                                        Coordination      and     exchange     of         government officials, beneficiaries
                                        information/knowledge/lessons between GEF
                                        projects

                                        Existence of a national          coordination     GEF Secretariat staff and technical staff from GEF   Interviews,       field     visits,
                                        mechanism for GEF support                         Agencies, and GEF operational focal point staff      institutional analysis

                                                                                          Project-related reviews (implementation reports,
                                        Acknowledgments among GEF agencies and
                                                                                          terminal evaluations, terminal evaluation reviews,
                                        institutions of each other’s projects
                                                                                          etc.), evaluations from other donors
                                                                                                                                               Desk review, interviews, and field
 d) Are there synergies for GEF
                                        Effective communication and technical                                                                  visits
     project programming and                                                              GEF Agency staff, national executing agencies
                                        support between GEF project agencies and
     implementation among: GEF                                                            (NGOs, other) Project staff, national and local
                                        organizations     and     between      national
     Agencies, national institutions,                                                     government officials, beneficiaries
                                        institutions
     GEF projects, and other donor-
     supported      projects     and    Budget allocations and alignment of GEF           Government documents          and     data    and
                                                                                                                                               Document review, Interviews
     activities?                        projects to carry out these activities            information from officials.
                                        Effective communication and technical
                                                                                          GEF Agency staff, national executing agencies
                                        support between GEF project agencies and
                                                                                          (NGOs, other) Project staff, national and local
                                        organizations  and   between     national
                                                                                          government officials, beneficiaries
                                        institutions




                                                                                                                                                                              123
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




Annex E: Interviewees and Focus Group Discussants

List of Interviewees
 No.   Name                        Institution            Position

 1.    Tewelde Kelati              MOMRF                  Minister
 2.    Moges Woldeyahannes         MOLWE                  D/G -Department of Environment and GEF Focal Office

 3.    Solomon Haile               Ministry        of     D/G - Planning and Research
                                       Agriculture
 4.    Tesfay Zekarias             MOME                   D/G - Renewable Energy
 5.    Andom Gebretnsae            MOMR                   D/G
       Weldemicael Berhe           EEC                    Head, Generation and Transmission

 6.    Aman Salih                  MOLWE                  GEF Coordinator
 7.    Tewolde G/yessus            MOLWE                  Stockholm Convention Focal point and DOE, Environmental
                                                               Assessment and information Dissemination Director
 8.    Abraham Daniel              Head-MOA/Zoba          SLM National Coordinator
                                       Maekel
 9.    Saeid Salih                 MOMRF                  Director:Office of the Minister
 10.   Sami Mahmmoud               MOMRF                  Former Director of Research, andCoordinator of the CMIB
                                                               coordinator
 11.   Basilios                    MOA, Anseba            Head of administration and Finance, Branch Office, Keren
                                                               (Horticulture Expert)
 12.   Yosief Admekom              UNDP                   Specialist Program Officer/ARR, Sustainable Environment Unit(GEF
                                                               focal person)
 13.   Teodros Demoz               UNDP                   SGP-Coordinator

 14.   Freweini Negash             UNDP                   SGP-Assistant Coordinator
 15.   Mibrak                      National Union for     Sub-Zoba Aditekelezan
                                        Eritrean
                                        Women
 16.   Tsion Ogbaselassie,         NUEW, Anseba           Head of Social Services, NUEW, Anseba Chapter
 17.   Tirhas Nrayo                NUEW, Anseba           SGP project coordinator, NUEW, Anseba Chapter
 18.   Luigi                       NUEYS                  Anseba, Branch, NUEW, Anseba Chapter
 19.   Hagos Kiflom                NUEYS                  Aditekelezan, NUEW, Anseba Chapter
 20.   Micael Berhane              MOA                    Catechment and Land scape Mangement Program - CLMP National
                                                               Coordinator
List of Focus Group Discussants
 No.    Name                 Sex                 Community

 1.     SabaTaffere          Female              Wara-Community Home Economics Agent (MOA)

 2.     Hiruy Idris          Male                Wara Community- NUEW

 3.     Seida Omer           Female              Wara Village -Beneficiary

 4.     Elsa Afewroki        Female              Wara-Adi-Tekelezan - NUEW

                                                                                                                    124
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 5.     Zaid Salih           Female          Wara Community - Beneficiary

 -      -                    -               -

 1      Saba Taffere         Female          Deki Gebru - MoA, Home Economics

 2      Elsa Afewroki-       Female          Adi-Tekelezan - NUEW

 3      Nigisti Haile        Female          Deki Gebru - NUEW -

 4      Lekan Yohannes       Male            Deki Gebru - Beneficiary -

 5      Elsa Weldehaimanot   Female          Deki Gebru - Beneficiary




                                                                                125
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



Annex F: Sites Visited

Land Degradation:
        •    Serejeca Village - SLM project in Zoba Maekel,
        •    Wara, Dekie Gebru, Aditekelezan and Dekizeru village communities - SGP project
             in Anseba Zoba,
Biodiversity:
        •    Coastal Management Island Biodiversity Project: - Massawa, Hirigo, and Disee
             Islands in Zoba Northern Red Sea
Climate Change:
         •   Aseb –wind turbine, TIO, IDI, Berasole in Zoba Southern Red Sea.




                                                                                       126
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014



Annex G: Final Workshop Participants
 No      Full Name                           Organization

 1.      Bisrat Gebru                        NBHE

 2.      Aster Redazghi                      DOE/MOLWE

 3.      Tesfai Zekarias                     MOEM

 4.      Daniel Yohannes                     GEO Science

 5.      Abraham Daniel                      MOA-Maekel

 6.      Estifanos Bein                      FWA/MOA

 7.      Tesfai Ghebrehiwet                  MOEM

 8.      Ephrem Kifelmariam                  MOLWE/DOE

 9.      Teodros Demoz                       UNDP/SGP

 10.     Tekie Tesfamicael                   MOLWE/DOE

 11.     Sammy Mahmud                        MOMR

 12.     Mahta Goitom                        MOMR

 13.     Tekle Mengistu                      MOMR/NRS

 14.     Yohannes Tekelmariam                MOMR/NRS/Research

 15.     Zere Woldetensae                    MOLWE-Anseba

 16.     Abraha Gebreamlak                   MOLWE-Gash Barka

 17.     Teklit Andom                        Molwe-SRS

 18.     Haileab Berhane                     Molwe-NRS

 19.     Muluberhan Gebreyohannes            MOLWE-Maekel

 20.     Fanus Aregay                        Anseba - Administration

 21.     Amanuel Negassi                     MOA

 22.     Eyob Ghebrekal                      MOA

 23.     Micael Berhane                      MOA

 24.     Osman Abdulahi                      MOLWE-LANDDEPART

 25.     Yonas Tekleab                       FWA/MOA

 26.     Fessahaye Bairu                     MOLWE/CADASTRAL

 27.     Minas Leake                         NUEYS

 28.     Afeworki Tesfai                     MOND

 29.     Teodros Kibrom                      MOLWE

 30.     Fikreyesus Ghilai                   FWA



                                                                       127
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


 31.     Mihreteab Micael Yemane             MOLWE

 32.     Yosief admekom                      UNDP

 33.     Filmon Yosief Araya                 MOLWE

 34.     Weldeselassie Okubazghi             HAC

 35.     Roza Kiflemariam                    NUEW

 36.     Weldetensae Tewelde                 CASS

 37.     Tewelde Gebreyesus                  MOLWE/DOE

 39.     Andom Gebretensae                   MMR

 40.     Okubamicael Wahad                   MOT

 41.     Aman Salih                          MOLWE/DOE

 42.     Freweini Negash                     UNDP/SGP

 43.     Tadesse Mehari                      NBHE

 44.     Mogos Weldeyohannes                 MOLWE/DE

 45.     Mulugeta Asmelash                   MOLWE/LAND DEPARTMENT

 46.     Asegedesh Estifanos                 NCEW

NBHE=National Board for Higher Education; FWA=Forestry and wildlife; HAC=Hamelmalo
Agricultural College; CASS=College of Arts and Social Sciences; MMR=Ministry of Marine Resources;
MOT=Ministry of Tourism; NCEW=National Confederation of Eritrean Workers




                                                                                             128
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




Annex H: GEF Portfolio in Eritrea
National Projects
                                                                                                                                    GEF         Co-
                                            Focal
  No.        GEFID    Agency     Scope              Type   Name                                      Status               Phase     Grant       financing
                                            Area
                                                                                                                                    (US$)       (US$)
                                                           National Biodiversity Strategy, Action
  1          137      WB         National    BD     EA                                               Project Closure      GEF - 1   275,000
                                                           Plan and First National Report
                                                           Enabling Eritrea to Prepare its First
  2          278      UNDP       National    CC     EA     National Communication in Response        Project Closure      GEF - 1   303,850
                                                           to its Commitments to UNFCCC
                                                           Conservation Management of Eritrea's
  3          411      UNDP       National    BD     FSP                                              Project Completion   GEF - 1   4,986,000   840,000
                                                           Coastal, Marine and Island Biodiversity
  4          1136     UNDP       National    CC     FSP    Wind Energy Applications                  Project Completion   GEF - 3   1,950,561   2,935,536
                                                           Assessment of Capacity Building Needs
                                                           for Biodiversity, Participation in
  5          1506     WB         National    BD     EA     Clearing House Mechanism and              Project Closure      GEF - 2   170,000     15,000
                                                           Preparation of Second National Report
                                                           (add on)
                                                           National Capacity Self - Assessment
  6          1584     UNEP       National    MFA    EA     (NCSA) for Global Environmental           Project Closure      GEF - 3   198,000     20,000
                                                           Management
                                                           Development of a National Adaptation                                     (LDCF)
  7          1959     UNDP       National    CC     EA                                               Project Closure      GEF - 3               17,600
                                                           Program of Action (NAPA)                                                 200,000
                                                           Enabling Activities to Facilitate Early
  8          3139     UNIDO      National    POPs   EA     Action on the Implementation of the       Project Closure      GEF - 4   346,500     35,000
                                                           Stockholm Convention on POPs
                                                           SIP-Catchments      and      Landscape    Under
  9          3362     IFAD       National    LD     FSP                                                                   GEF - 4   4,350,000   21,678,000
                                                           Management                                Implementation
                                                           SIP-Sustainable Land Management Pilot     Under
  10         3364     UNDP       National    LD     FSP                                                                   GEF - 4   1,820,000   2,250,000
                                                           Project                                   Implementation

                                                                                                                                                             129
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


                                                               Eritrea: Prevention and Disposal of          Under
  11         3987     FAO          National    POPs     FSP                                                                       GEF - 4    2,150,000   3,209,153
                                                               POPs and Obsolete Pesticides                 Implementation
                                                               Operationalization of Protected Areas
  12         4559     UNDP         National    BD       FSP                                                 Council Approved      GEF - 5    5,878,000   10,555,400
                                                               Management Systems of Eritrea


Regional and Global Projects
                                                                                                                                     GEF
                                    Focal                                                                                                        Co-financing
  GEFID   Agency        Scope                 Type    Name                                         Status                 Phase      Grant
                                    Area                                                                                                         (US$)
                                                                                                                                     (US$)
                                                      Mainstreaming Conservation of Migratory
                                                      Soaring Birds into Key Productive Sectors    Under
  1028    UNDP          Regional    BD        FSP                                                                         GEF - 3
                                                      along the Rift Valley/Red Sea Flyway         Implementation
                                                      (Tranches 1 and 2)
                                                      Nile Transboundary Environmental Action
  1094    WB/UNDP       Regional    IW        FSP                                                  Project Completion     GEF - 2
                                                      Project, Tranche 1
                                                      Demonstrating Cost-effectiveness and
                                                      Sustainability of Environmentally-sound      Under
  1331    UNEP          Regional    POPs      FSP                                                                         GEF - 3
                                                      and Locally Appropriate Alternatives to      Implementation
                                                      DDT for Malaria Control in Africa
                                                      Building      Sustainable      Commercial
  1513    UNEP          Regional    CC        MSP     Dissemination Networks for Household PV      Project Closure        GEF - 3
                                                      Systems in Eastern Africa
          UNEP/
                                                      African Rift Geothermal Development
  2119    World         Regional    CC        FSP                                                  CEO Endorsed           GEF - 3
                                                      Facility (ARGeo)
          Bank
                                                      Supporting Capacity Building for the
          World                                       Elaboration of National Reports and
  2469                  Regional    LD        MSP                                                  Project Closure        GEF - 3
          Bank                                        Country Profiles by African Parties to the
                                                      UNCCD
          WB/UNDP
                                                      SIP PROGRAM: Strategic Investment
          /UNEP/Af
  2757                  Regional    LD        FSP     Program for SLM in Sub-Saharan Africa        Council Approved       GEF - 4
          DB/IFAD/F
                                                      (SIP)
          AO

                                                                                                                                                                      130
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


                                                 Support to Preparation of the Second
  4523    UNEP          Regional   BD     MSP    National Biosafety Reports to the         CEO Approved       GEF - 5
                                                 Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety-Africa
                                                 Piloting Integrated Processes and
  3707    UNEP          Global     MFA    MSP    Approaches to Facilitate National         IA Approved        GEF - 4
                                                 Reporting to Rio Conventions
                                                 Umbrella Programme for National
  5119    UNEP          Global     CC     FSP                                              Council Approved   GEF - 5
                                                 Communication to the UNFCCC
                                                 Support to 20 GEF Eligible Parties for
                                                 Alignment of National Action Programs
  5136    UNEP          Global     LD     MSP                                              CEO Approved       GEF - 5
                                                 and Reporting Process under UNCCD (Add-
                                                 on Umbrella 2)




                                                                                                                        131
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




Annex I: References

Government of Eritrea & IFAD (2006) Post-Crisis Livestock Rehabilitation and Development Program:
   Formulation Report, Main Report.
Government of Eritrea, National Statistical Office (2010) Eritrean Population Survey, Asmara: NSO.
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of Health (2012) Health Facility Report, Asmara.
Government of Eritrea (2004) National Policy on Gender: A Framework, Asmara.
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of Marine Resources (2007) State of the Coast, 2006-2007, Online,
Available:       http://www.eritreaembassy-japan.org/data/State_of_the_Coast_2006-2007_FULL.pdf
    (Accessed December 2013).
Government of Eritrea, Eritrean Environment Agency (1995) National Environment Management Plan
   (NEMP).
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of Agriculture (2002) National Report on the Implementation of the
   UNCCD, Online, Available: http://www.unccd-prais.com/Uploads/GetReportPdf/d7cc0234-822d-
   4dc4-90c1-a0fa014a4a69 (Accessed December 2013).
Government of Eritrea (2008), Country Social and Environmental Assessment (document prepared by the
   GOE) This provides an assessment of the Environmental and social impacts of the stock piles of
   Obsolete pesticides in Erirea. It also recommends a strategy their safeguarding and disposal. The
   assessment was undertaken as part of FAO project GCE/ERI/011/JPN “Obsolete, Banned and
   Unwanted Pesticides Stock Piles in Eritrea-Phase I.
Government of Eritrea, Department of Environment (2001) Eritrea’s Initial National Communication under
   the UNFCCC, Online, Available: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/erinc1.pdf (Accessed December
   2013).
Government of Eritrea, Department of Environment (2012) Eritrea’s Second National Communication
   under the UNFCCC, Online, Available: http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/natc/erinc2.pdf (Accessed
   December 2013).
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of Agriculture (1994) National Agricultural Development Strategy and
   Policy.
Government of Eritrea, Department of Energy (1997) Renewable Energy Sub-Sector Policy.
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of Agriculture (2006) Pesticide Regulation: Regulatory Services
   Department.
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of Agriculture (2006) Wildlife Conservation and Development
   Proclamation, No. 155/2006.

                                                                                                     132
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


Government of Eritrea, Ministry of Marine Resources (2006) National Coastal Policy (Draft).
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of Agriculture (2005) Forest and Wildlife Policy (Draft).
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of Land, Water and Environment (1999) Land Use Planning Regulatory
   Framework.
Government of Eritrea, Water Resources Department (2003) Integrated Water Resource Management.
Government of Eritrea, Department of Environment (2006) National Capacity Needs Self-Assessment
   (NCSA) for Global Environmental Management in Eritrea: Final Report, Online: Available:
   http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/documents/document/354.pdf        (Accessed
   December 2013).
Government of Eritrea, Department of Environment (2012) Eritrea`s Five Years Action Plan for the Great
   Green      Wall      Initiative    (GGWI)     Draft      (2011-2015),       Online,       Available:
   http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/great_green_wall/docs/Eritrea_Five_Years_Action_Plan.p
   df (Accessed December 2013).
GEF (2009) Wind Energy Applications in Eritrea, Terminal Review: Final Report, Online, Available:
   http://www.thegef.org/gef/sites/thegef.org/files/gef_prj_docs/GEFProjectDocuments/MandE/TE/F
   Y2009/UNDP/G001136/EritreaWindEnergyTerminal%20Evaulation%20Final%20Report.doc(Accesse
   d December 2013).
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of Agriculture (2002) The National Action Programme for Eritrea to
   Combat Desertification and Mitigate the Effects of Drought (NAP), Online, Available:
   http://www.unccd.int/ActionProgrammes/eritrea-eng2002.pdf(Accessed December 2013).
Government of Eritrea, Department of Environment (2000) Eritrea Biodiversity Stocktaking Assessment
   Report.
Government of Eritrea, Department of Environment (2000) National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan
   for Eritrea, Online, Available: http://www.cbd.int/doc/world/er/er-nbsap-01-p1-en.pdf(Accessed
   December 2013).
Government of Eritrea, Department of Environment (1997) National Report on the Implementation of
   Article 6 of the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), First Report, Online, Available:
   http://www.cbd.int/doc/world/er/er-nr-01-en.pdf(Accessed December 2013).
Government of Eritrea (XXXX) The Indicative Five Year Development Plan (XXXX).
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of National Development (2004) Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy
   Paper                       (I-PRSP),                    Online,                     Available:
   http://www.itacasmara.esteri.it/itacasmara/english/side_menu/documenti/I-
   PRSP%20Eritrea.pdf(Accessed December 2013).
Government of Eritrea (2008) National Economic Policy Framework and Program (1998-2000), Asmara.
Government of Eritrea, Ministry of National Development (2009) National Development Planning
   Framework.
                                                                                                   133
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


Government of Eritrea (1994) Macro-Policy Document.
New Eritrean Union of Women (NUEW) (2004) Implementation of the Beijing Platform for Action and The
   Outcome of the 23rd Special Session of the General Assembly, Online, Available:
   http://www.un.org/womenwatch/daw/Review/responses/ERITREA-ENGLISH.pdf
IFAD       (2010)      Rural       Poverty       Profile,     Other         Resources       available:
    http://www.ruralpovertyportal.org/country/resources/tags/eritrea
FAO (1997) Support to Forestry and Wildlife sub-sector: Pre-investment study, TCP/ERI/6721, FAO: Rome.
Population Reference Bureau (2012)
UNDP (2011) Supervision Report, Eritrea.
UNICEF (1994)Children and women in Eritrea, UNICEF: New York.
Edmond Barraw (XXXX) The Economic and Social Aspects of Biodiversity.
FAO (1994) Agricultural Sector Review: Project Identification.
Haile, A., Gebretatios, I., Ogbazghi, W., Omer, M. K., Araia, W., Gebremariam, T., & Gebreselassie, G.
    (1998) Rehabilitation of degraded lands in Eritrea.
World      Bank      (2013)       Eritrea       Overview,       Website,     Available             at:
   http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/eritrea/overview (Accessed December 2013)
Waithaka. M., Nelson, G.C, Thomas, T.S and Kyotalimye, M. 2013, East African Agriculture and Climate
   Change: A Comprehensive Analysis, IFPRI, Washington D.C. Page 121 – 148.
UNDP (2009). Sustainable Land Management, Asmara, Eritrea
FAO (2000). Food Supply Situation and Crop Prospects in Sub-Saharan Africa. Rome




                                                                                                  134
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014




Annex J: Acronyms
BD              Biodiversity                           MF/MFA   Multi-focal Projects
CC              Climate Change                         MOA      Ministry of Agriculture
CITES           Convention on International Trade      MOC      Ministry of Construction
                of Endangered Species                  MOE      Ministry of Education
CELF            Country      Environmental     Legal   MOH      Ministry of Health
                Framework                              MOLWE    Ministry of Land Water and
CESA            Country Environmental and Social                Environment
                Assessment                             MOND     Ministry       of      National
CFP             Convention Focal Points                         Development
CMIB            Coastal     Marine      and   Island   MOEM     Ministry of Energy and Mines
                Biodiversity                           MOMR     Ministry of Marine Resources
CMCMIB          Conservation Management of                      and Fisheries
                Eritrea’s Coastal Marine Islands       MOTC     Ministry of Transport and
                Biodiversity Project                            Communication
COP             Conference of the Parties              MOTI     Ministry of Trade and Industry
CPE             Country Portfolio Evaluation           MOU      Memorandum                   of
DOE             Department of Environment                       Understanding
DHS             Demographic and Health Survey          NAP      National Action Program
DOL             Department of Land                     NAPA     National Adaptation Program
EA              Enabling Activity                               of Action
EINC            Eritrea:        Initial     National   NARI     National Agricultural Research
                Communication                                   Institute
EEA             Eritrean Electric Authority            NBSAP    National Biodiversity Strategy
CESIA           Country Environmental and Social                and Action Plan
                Impact Assessment                      NBHE     National Board for Higher
D/G             General Director of Department                  Education
FAO             Food and Agriculture Organization      NCP      National Coastal Policy
FGD             Focus Group Discussions                NCSA     National      Capacity     Self-
FYIDP           Five Year Indicative Development                Assessment
                Plan                                   NEAPG    National         Environmental
FNC             First National Communication on                 Assessment Procedures and
                Climate Change                                  Guidelines
FSP             Full Size Projects                     NEMP     National         Environmental
GEF             Global Environment Facility                     Management Plan
GHG             Green House Gas                        NEPFP    National Economic Policy
GOE             Government of the State of Eritrea              Framework and Program
ICAMP           Integrated         Coastal      Area   NGO      Non-Governmental
                Management Proclamation                         Organization
IFAD            International Fund for Agricultural    NIP      National Implementation Plan
                Development                            NUEW     National Union of Eritrean
I-PRSP          Interim Poverty Reduction Strategy              Women
                Paper                                  NUEYS    National Union of Eritrean
IWRM            Integrated Water Resource                       Youth and Students
                Management                             ODS      Ozone Depleting Substances
LD              Land Degradation                       OFP      Operational Focal Point
LUCF            Land Use Cover and Forestry            PCU      Project Coordination Unit
MDG             Millennium Development Goal
M&E             Monitoring and Evaluation

                                                                                           135
Country Portfolio Evaluation: Eritrea Report – December 2014


PFDJ            Popular Front for Democracy and Justice
PERSAC          Program for Environment of Red Sea and Gulf of Aden Countries
PIF             Project Implementation Fund
PFP             Political Focal Point
POPs            Persistent Organic Polluting Substances
RAF             Resource Allocation Framework
ROtI            Review of Outcomes to Impact
SGP             Small Grants Programme
SLM             Sustainable Land Management
SIP             Strategic Investment Program
SNC             Second National Communication on Climate Change
STAR            System for the Transparent Allocation of Resources
SWC             Soil and Water Conservation
TER             Technical Evaluation
TER             Terminal Evaluation Report
TICD            Toker Integrated Community Development
TOC             Theory of Change
TOR             Terms of Reference
UNCCD           United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification
UNDAF           United Nations Development Assistance Framework
UNEP            United Nations Environmental Program
UNDP            United Nations Development Program
UNFCCC          United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
UNSO            United Nations Sudano-Sahelean Organisation
WB              World Bank




                                                                                136
