                          99363




Instrument for the
Establishment of the Restructured
Global Environment Facility
March 2015
Instrument for the
Establishment of the Restructured
Global Environment Facility
March 2015
COPYRIGHT 2015
GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY
1818 H STREET NW
WASHINGTON, DC 20433 USA


ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
MANUFACTURED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
FIRST PRINTING OCTOBER 1994
SECOND PRINTING MAY 2004
THIRD PRINTING MARCH 2008
FOURTH PRINTING OCTOBER 2011
FIFTH PRINTING MARCH 2015
                         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                C ONT ENT S




Introduction	                                                                                  5

Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility	              7

Decisions by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee 	                                      43

	 The United Nations Development Programme	                                                   45

	 The United Nations Environment Programme	                                                   50

	 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 	                                     57

Replenishment Resolutions	                                                                    73

	 Resolution No. 98-2 of the IBRD Executive Directors approving the second 	                  75
	 replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund

	 Resolution No. 2002-0005 of the IBRD Executive Directors approving the third 	              84
	 replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund

	 Resolution No. 2006-0008 of the IBRD Executive Directors approving the fourth 	             97
	 replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund

	 Resolution No. 2010-0004 of the IBRD Executive Directors approving the fifth 	              109
	 replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund

	 Resolution No. 2014-0002 of the IBRD Executive Directors approving the sixth 	              124
	 replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund

Updated Commitments by Contributing Participants	                                             137




                                                         3
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                             INT R ODUC T ION

Negotiations to restructure the Global Environment Facility (GEF) concluded at a GEF Participants
meeting in Geneva, Switzerland, in March 1994, with the acceptance by representatives of 73
States of the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility. The
Instrument was formally adopted, in accordance with its paragraph 1, by the three Implementing
Agencies of the GEF: the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment
Programme, and the World Bank. The Instrument became effective on July 7, 1994.


Following the procedures set forth in paragraph 34 of the Instrument for its amendment, the
Second GEF Assembly held in Beijing, China, in October 2002, agreed to the recommendations of
the Council to amend the Instrument. The amendments approved by the Assembly became effec-
tive on June 19, 2003, after final adoption by the United Nations Development Programme, the
United Nations Environment Programme, and the World Bank. At the Third GEF Assembly held in
Cape Town, South Africa, in August 2006, participants approved an additional amendment to the
Instrument. This amendment approved by the Assembly became effective on September 14, 2007,
after adoption by the United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment
Programme, and the World Bank. At the Fourth GEF Assembly held in Punta del Este, Uruguay, in
May 2010, participants approved two additional amendments to the Instrument. These amend-
ments approved by the Assembly became effective on February 24, 2011, after adoption by the
United Nations Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme, and the
World Bank. At the Fifth GEF Assembly held in Cancun, Mexico, in May 2014, participants approved
additional amendments to the Instrument. These amendments approved by the Assembly became
effective on September 15, 2014, after adoption by the United Nations Development Programme,
the United Nations Environment Programme, and the World Bank.

This publication contains the text of the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured
Global Environment Facility, as amended by the Second, Third, Fourth and Fifth GEF Assemblies.
The publication also includes the decisions of the governing bodies of the three Implementing
Agencies approving the Instrument and its amendments. The publication includes the resolu-
tions adopted by the IBRD Executive Directors approving the second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth
replenishments of the GEF Trust Fund in 1998, 2002, 2006, 2010 and 2014 respectively. Finally,
the publication concludes with a section on Updated Commitments to the GEF Trust Fund by
Contributing Participants.




                                                          5
Instrument for the
Establishment of the Restructured
Global Environment Facility
          I NS TRUMENT F OR T H E EST ABLISH ME NT OF T H E RES T RU C T U RED




                                                                                           INSTRUMENT
                         GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT F A C ILIT Y



PREAMBLE	                                                                             11

I. 	 BASIC PROVISIONS	                                                                12
		 Restructuring and Purpose of GEF	                                                  12
		 Participation	                                                                     13
		 Establishment of GEF Trust Fund	                                                   13
		 Eligibility	                                                                       14

II.	   CONTRIBUTIONS AND OTHER FINANCIAL PROVISIONS FOR REPLENISHMENT	                14

III.	 GOVERNANCE AND STRUCTURE	                                                       15
		 Assembly	                                                                          15
		 Council	                                                                           15
		 Secretariat	                                                                       18
		 Implementing Agencies	                                                             19
		 Scientific and Technical Advisory Panel (STAP)	                                    19

IV. 	 PRINCIPLES OF DECISION-MAKING	                                                  19

V.	 RELATIONSHIP AND COOPERATION WITH CONVENTIONS	                                    20

VI.	 COOPERATION WITH OTHER BODIES	                                                   21

VII.	 OPERATIONAL MODALITIES	                                                         21

VIII.	 REPORTING	                                                                     22

IX.	 TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS	                                               22
		 Termination of the GET	                                                            22
		 Interim Period	                                                                    22
		 Amendment and Termination	                                                         23

ANNEXES

Annex A:	 Notification of Participation/Termination of Participation	                 24

Annex B:	 Role and Fiduciary Responsibilities of the Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund	   25

Annex C:	 GEF Trust Fund: Financial Provisions for Replenishment	                     28
Annex D:	 Principles of Cooperation among the Implementing Agencies	                  36
Annex E:	 Constituencies of the GEF Council	                                          40




                                                 9
                             Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                           Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                    PR EAMBLE




                                                                                                       INSTRUMENT
Whereas:

(a)	   The Global Environment Facility (GEF or the Facility) was established in the International
       Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD or World Bank) as a pilot program in
       order to assist in the protection of the global environment and promote thereby environ-
       mentally sound and sustainable economic development, by resolution of the Executive
       Directors of the World Bank and related interagency arrangements between the United
       Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Environment Programme
       (UNEP), and the World Bank;

(b)	   In April 1992, Participants in the GEF agreed that its structure and modalities should be
       modified. Agenda 21 (the action plan of the 1992 United Nations Conference on
       Environment and Development), the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
       Change and the Convention on Biological Diversity subsequently called for the restructur-
       ing of the Facility;

(c) 	 Representatives of the States participating at present in the Facility and of other States
      wishing to participate in it have requested that the Facility be restructured in order to take
      account of these developments, to establish the GEF as one of the principal mechanisms
      for global environment funding, to ensure a governance that is transparent and democratic
      in nature, to promote universality in its participation and to provide for full cooperation in
      its implementation among UNDP, UNEP and the World Bank (together referred to here-
      inafter as the Implementing Agencies), and to benefit from the evaluation of experience
      with the operation of the Facility since its establishment;

(d)	   It is necessary to replenish the resources for these purposes under a restructured Facility
       which includes a new GEF Trust Fund on the basis of this Instrument;

(e)	   It is desirable to terminate the existing Global Environment Trust Fund (GET) and to trans-
       fer any funds, receipts, assets and liabilities held in it upon termination to the new GEF
       Trust Fund;

(f)	   The Implementing Agencies have reached a common understanding of principles for coop-
       eration as set forth in the present Instrument, subject to approval of their participation by
       their respective governing bodies;

It is resolved as follows:




                                                            11
                             Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                           Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                          I. BASIC PR OVISION S

Restructuring and Purpose of GEF

1. 	   The restructured GEF shall be established in accordance with the present Instrument. This
       Instrument, having been accepted by representatives of the States participating in the GEF
       at their meeting in Geneva, Switzerland, from March 14 to 16, 1994, shall be adopted by
       the Implementing Agencies in accordance with their respective rules and procedural
       requirements.

2. 	   The GEF shall operate, on the basis of collaboration and partnership among the
       Implementing Agencies, as a mechanism for international cooperation for the purpose of
       providing new and additional grant and concessional funding to meet the agreed incremental
       costs of measures to achieve agreed global environmental benefits in the following focal
       areas:
	
       (a)	   biological diversity;
       (b)	   climate change;
       (c)	   international waters;
       (d)	   land degradation, primarily desertification and deforestation;
       (e)	   chemicals and wastes.

3. 	   The agreed incremental costs of activities to achieve global environmental benefits con-
       cerning chemicals management as they relate to the above focal areas shall be eligible for
       funding. The agreed incremental costs of other relevant activities under Agenda 21 that
       may be agreed by the Council shall also be eligible for funding insofar as they achieve
       global environmental benefits by protecting the global environment in the focal areas.

4.	    The GEF shall ensure the cost-effectiveness of its activities in addressing the targeted
       global environmental issues, shall fund programs and projects which are country-driven
       and based on national priorities designed to support sustainable development and shall
       maintain sufficient flexibility to respond to changing circumstances in order to achieve its
       purposes.

5.	    The GEF operational policies shall be determined by the Council in accordance with para-
       graph 20(f) and with respect to GEF-financed projects shall provide for full disclosure of all
       non-confidential information, and consultation with, and participation as appropriate of,
       major groups and local communities throughout the project cycle.




                                                            12
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




6.	   In partial fulfillment of its purposes, the GEF shall:




                                                                                                           INSTRUMENT
      (a) 	 Operate the financial mechanism for the implementation of the United Nations
            Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), on an interim basis, in accor-
            dance with such cooperative arrangements or agreements as may be made pursuant
            to paragraphs 27 and 31 of this Instrument. The GEF shall also be available to meet
            the agreed full costs of activities described in Article 12, paragraph 1, of the UNFCCC.
            The GEF shall be available to continue to serve for the purposes of the financial
            mechanism for the implementation of the UNFCCC if it is requested to do so by the
            Conference of the Parties pursuant to its Article 11, paragraph 4. In such respects,
            the GEF shall function under the guidance of, and be accountable to, the Conference
            of the Parties which shall decide on policies, program priorities and eligibility criteria
            related to the UNFCCC pursuant to its Article 11, paragraph 1;

      (b) 	 Be, on an interim basis, the institutional structure which carries out the operation
            of the financial mechanism for the implementation of the Convention on Biological
            Diversity (CBD), in accordance with such cooperative arrangements or agreements
            as may be made pursuant to paragraphs 27 and 31 of this Instrument. The GEF shall
            be available to continue to serve for the purposes of the financial mechanism for the
            implementation of the CBD if it is requested to do so by the Conference of the Parties
            pursuant to its Article 21, paragraph 3. In such respects the GEF shall function under
            the guidance of, and be accountable to, the Conference of the Parties which shall
            decide on policies, program priorities and eligibility criteria for the purposes of the
            CBD pursuant to its Article 21, paragraph 1;

      (c)	   Be available to serve as an entity entrusted with the operation of the financial mecha-
             nism of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. In such respects
             the GEF shall function under the guidance of, and be accountable to, Conference of the
             Parties which shall decide on policies, strategy, program priorities and eligibility crite-
             ria for the purposes of this Convention pursuant to its Article 13, paragraph 7(a);

      (d)	   Be available to serve as a financial mechanism of the United Nations Convention
             to Combat Desertification in Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
             Desertification, particularly in Africa (UNCCD), pursuant to Article 20, paragraph 2 (b),
             and Article 21 of the UNCCD. The Council shall consider and approve arrangements
             to facilitate collaboration between the GEF and the UNCCD and among countries with
             respect to affected countries, particularly Africa; and




                                                           13
                             Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                           Global Environment F ac ilit y




      (e)	    Operate as one of the entities comprising the financial mechanism of the Minamata
              Convention on Mercury, pursuant to its Article 13, paragraphs 5, 6 and 8. In such
              respects, the GEF shall operate under the guidance of, and be accountable to the
              Conference of the Parties, which shall provide guidance on overall strategies,
              policies, program priorities and eligibility for access to and utilization of financial
              resources. In addition, the GEF shall receive guidance from the Conference of the
              Parties on an indicative list of categories of activities that could receive support; and
              shall provide resources to meet the agreed incremental costs of global environmen-
              tal benefits and the agreed full costs of some enabling activities, pursuant to Article
              13, paragraph 7, of the Minamata Convention on Mercury.

Participation

7.	   Any State member of the United Nations or of any of its specialized agencies may become a
      Participant in the GEF by depositing with the Secretariat an instrument of participation sub-
      stantially in the form set out in Annex A. In the case of a State contributing to the GEF Trust
      Fund, an instrument of commitment shall be deemed to serve as an instrument of participa-
      tion. Any Participant may withdraw from the GEF by depositing with the Secretariat an
      instrument of termination of participation substantially in the form set out in Annex A.

Establishment of GEF Trust Fund

8.	   The new GEF Trust Fund shall be established, and the World Bank shall be invited to serve
      as the Trustee of the Fund. The GEF Trust Fund shall consist of the contributions received in
      accordance with the present Instrument, the balance of funds transferred from the GET
      pursuant to paragraph 32, and any other assets and receipts of the Fund. In serving as the
      Trustee of the Fund, the World Bank shall serve in a fiduciary and administrative capacity,
      and shall be bound by its Articles of Agreement, by-laws, rules and decisions, as specified
      in Annex B.

Eligibility

9.	   GEF funding shall be made available for activities within the focal areas defined in paragraphs
      2 and 3 of this Instrument in accordance with the following eligibility criteria:

      (a)	 GEF grants that are made available within the framework of the financial mechanisms
           of the conventions referred to in paragraph 6 shall be in conformity with the eligibility
           criteria decided by the Conference of the Parties of each convention, as provided
           under the arrangements or agreements referred to in paragraph 27.




                                                            14
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




       (b)	 All other GEF grants shall be made available to eligible recipient countries and, where




                                                                                                          INSTRUMENT
            appropriate, for other activities promoting the purposes of the Facility in accordance
            with this paragraph and any additional eligibility criteria determined by the Council.
            A country shall be an eligible recipient of GEF grants if it is eligible to receive World
            Bank (IBRD and/or IDA) financing or if it is an eligible recipient of UNDP technical
            assistance through its target for resource assignments from the core (specifically
            TRAC-1 and/or TRAC-2). GEF grants for activities within a focal area addressed by
            a convention referred to in paragraph 6 but outside the framework of the financial
            mechanism of the convention, shall only be made available to eligible recipient coun-
            tries that are party to the convention concerned.

       (c)	 GEF concessional financing in a form other than grants that is made available within
            the framework of the financial mechanism of the conventions referred to in paragraph
            6 shall be in conformity with eligibility criteria decided by the Conference of the Parties
            of each convention, as provided under the arrangements or agreements referred to in
            paragraph 27. GEF concessional financing in a form other than grants may also be
            made available outside those frameworks on terms to be determined by the Council.



               I I . CO NTR IBUT IONS AND OT H ER F INA N C IA L P ROVIS ION S
                                   F OR RE PLENISH MEN T

10. 	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund for the first replenishment period shall be made to the
      Trustee by Contributing Participants in accordance with the financial provisions for replen-
      ishment as specified in Annex C. The Trustee’s responsibility for mobilization of resources
      pursuant to paragraph 20(e) of this Instrument and paragraph 4(a) of Annex B shall be ini-
      tiated for subsequent replenishments at the request of the Council.



                              III. GOV ER NANC E AND ST RU C T U RE

11.	   The GEF shall have an Assembly, a Council, and a Secretariat including an independent
       evaluation office. In accordance with paragraph 24, a Scientific and Technical Advisory
       Panel (STAP) shall provide appropriate advice.

12.	   The Implementing Agencies shall establish a process for their collaboration in accordance with
       an interagency agreement to be concluded on the basis of the principles set forth in Annex D.




                                                           15
                             Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                           Global Environment F ac ilit y




Assembly

13.	   The Assembly shall consist of Representatives of all Participants. The Assembly shall meet once
       every three years. Each Participant may appoint one Representative and one Alternate to the
       Assembly in such manner as it may determine. Each Representative and each Alternate shall
       serve until replaced. The Assembly shall elect its Chairperson from among the Representatives.

14.	   The Assembly shall:

       (a)	 review the general policies of the Facility;

       (b)	 review and evaluate the operation of the Facility on the basis of reports submitted by
            the Council;

       (c)	 keep under review the membership of the Facility; and

       (d)	 consider, for approval by consensus, amendments to the present Instrument on the
            basis of recommendations by the Council.

Council

15. 	 The Council shall be responsible for developing, adopting and evaluating the operational
      policies and programs for GEF-financed activities, in conformity with the present Instrument
      and fully taking into account reviews carried out by the Assembly. Where the GEF serves for
      the purposes of the financial mechanisms of the conventions referred to in paragraph 6, the
      Council shall act in conformity with the policies, program priorities and eligibility criteria
      decided by the Conference of the Parties for the purposes of the convention concerned.

16.	   The Council shall consist of 32 Members, representing constituency groupings formulated
       and distributed taking into account the need for balanced and equitable representation of
       all Participants and giving due weight to the funding efforts of all donors. There shall be 16
       Members from developing countries, 14 Members from developed countries and 2
       Members from the countries of central and eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, in
       accordance with Annex E. There shall be an equal number of Alternate Members. The
       Member and Alternate representing a constituency shall be appointed by the Participants
       in each constituency. Unless the constituency decides otherwise, each Member of the
       Council and each Alternate shall serve for three years or until a new Member is appointed
       by the constituency, whichever comes first. A Member or Alternate may be reappointed by
       the constituency. Members and Alternates shall serve without compensation. The Alternate
       Member shall have full power to act for the absent Member.


                                                            16
                             Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                           Global Environment F ac ilit y




17. 	 The Council shall meet semi-annually or as frequently as necessary to enable it to discharge




                                                                                                             INSTRUMENT
      its responsibilities. The Council shall meet at the seat of the Secretariat unless the Council
      decides otherwise. Two-thirds of the Members of the Council shall constitute a quorum.

18.	   At each meeting, the Council shall elect a Chairperson from among its Members for the
       duration of that meeting. The elected Chairperson shall conduct deliberations of the Council
       at that meeting on issues related to Council responsibilities listed in paragraphs 20(b), (g), (i),
       (j) and (k). The position of elected Chairperson shall alternate from one meeting to another
       between recipient and non-recipient Council Members. The Chief Executive Officer of the
       Facility (CEO) shall conduct deliberations of the Council on issues related to Council responsi-
       bilities listed in paragraphs 20(c), (e), (f) and (h). The elected Chairperson and the CEO shall
       jointly conduct deliberations of the Council on issues related to paragraph 20(a).

19. 	 Costs of Council meetings, including travel and subsistence of Council Members from
      developing countries, in particular the Least Developed Countries, shall be disbursed from
      the administrative budget of the Secretariat as necessary.

20. The Council shall:

       (a)	 keep under review the operation of the Facility with respect to its purposes, scope
            and objectives;

       (b)	 ensure that GEF policies, programs, operational strategies and projects are monitored
            and evaluated on a regular basis;

       (c)	 review and approve the work program referred to in paragraph 29, monitor and evaluate
            progress in the implementation of the work program and provide related guidance to
            the Secretariat, the Implementing Agencies and the other bodies referred to in paragraph
            28, recognizing that the Implementing Agencies will retain responsibility for the further
            preparation of individual projects approved in the work program;

       (d) 	 arrange for Council Members to receive final project documents and within four weeks
             transmit to the CEO any concerns they may have prior to the CEO endorsing a project
             document for final approval by the Implementing Agency;

       (e) 	 direct the utilization of GEF funds, review the availability of resources from the GEF
             Trust Fund and cooperate with the Trustee to mobilize financial resources;

       (f) 	 approve and periodically review operational modalities for the Facility, including oper-
             ational strategies and directives for project selection, means to facilitate arrangements
             for project preparation and execution by organizations and entities referred to in para-

                                                            17
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




          graph 28, additional eligibility and other financing criteria in accordance with paragraphs
          9(b) and 9(c) respectively, procedural steps to be included in the project cycle, and
          the mandate, composition and role of STAP;

     (g)	 act as the focal point for the purpose of relations with the Conferences of the Parties
          to the conventions referred to in paragraph 6, including consideration, approval and
          review of the arrangements or agreements with such Conferences, receipt of guidance
          and recommendations from them and compliance with requirements under these
          arrangements or agreements for reporting to them;

     (h)	 in accordance with paragraphs 26 and 27, ensure that GEF-financed activities relating
          to the conventions referred to in paragraph 6 conform with the policies, program priori-
          ties and eligibility criteria decided by the Conference of the Parties for the purposes of
          the convention concerned;

     (i)	 appoint the CEO in accordance with paragraph 21, oversee the work of the Secretariat,
          and assign specific tasks and responsibilities to the Secretariat;

     (j)	 review and approve the administrative budget of the GEF and arrange for periodic
          financial and performance audits of the Secretariat and the Implementing Agencies
          with regard to activities undertaken for the Facility;

     (k)	 in accordance with paragraph 31, approve an annual report and keep the UN
          Commission on Sustainable Development apprised of its activities; and

     (l)	 exercise such other operational functions as may be appropriate to fulfill the purposes
          of the Facility.

Secretariat

21. 	 The GEF Secretariat shall service and report to the Assembly and the Council. The
      Secretariat, which shall be headed by the CEO/Chairperson of the Facility, shall be support-
      ed administratively by the World Bank and shall operate in a functionally independent and
      effective manner. The CEO shall be appointed to serve for four years on a full time basis by
      the Council. The CEO may be reappointed by the Council for one additional four year term.
      The CEO may be removed by the Council only for cause. The staff of the Secretariat shall
      include staff members seconded from the Implementing Agencies as well as individuals
      hired competitively on an as needed basis by one of the Implementing Agencies. The CEO
      shall be responsible for the organization, appointment and dismissal of Secretariat staff.
      The CEO shall be accountable for the performance of the Secretariat functions to the
      Council. The Secretariat shall, on behalf of the Council, exercise the following functions:

                                                         18
                     Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                   Global Environment F ac ilit y




(a)	 implement effectively the decisions of the Assembly and the Council;




                                                                                                 INSTRUMENT
(b)	 coordinate the formulation and oversee the implementation of program activities pur-
     suant to the joint work program, ensuring liaison with other bodies as required, par-
     ticularly in the context of the cooperative arrangements or agreements referred to in
     paragraph 27;

(c)	 in consultation with the Implementing Agencies, ensure the implementation of the
     operational policies adopted by the Council through the preparation of common
     guidelines on the project cycle. Such guidelines shall address project identification and
     development, including the proper and adequate review of project and work program
     proposals, consultation with and participation of local communities and other interested
     parties, monitoring of project implementation and evaluation of project results;

(d)	 review and report to the Council on the adequacy of arrangements made by the
     Implementing Agencies in accordance with the guidelines referred to in paragraph (c)
     above, and if warranted, recommend to the Council and the Implementing Agencies addi-
     tional arrangements for project preparation and execution under paragraphs 20(f) and 28;

(e)	 chair interagency group meetings to ensure the effective execution of the Council’s
     decisions and to facilitate coordination and collaboration among the Implementing
     Agencies;

(f) 	 coordinate with the Secretariats of other international bodies, in particular, the
      Secretariats of the conventions referred to in paragraph 6 and the Secretariats of the
      Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and its Multilateral
      Fund;

(g)	 report to the Assembly, the Council and other institutions as directed by the Council;

(h)	 provide the Trustee with all relevant information to enable it to carry out its responsi-
     bilities; and

(i)	 there shall be an independent evaluation office headed by a director, appointed by
     and reporting to the Council, whose responsibility it is to carry out independent evalu-
     ations consistent with decisions of the Council; and

(j)	 perform any other functions assigned to the Secretariat by the Council.




                                                    19
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




Implementing Agencies

22. 	 The Implementing Agencies of the GEF shall be UNDP, UNEP, and the World Bank. The
      Implementing Agencies shall be accountable to the Council for their GEF-financed activities,
      including the preparation and cost-effectiveness of GEF projects, and for the implementation
      of the operational policies, strategies and decisions of the Council within their respective
      areas of competence and in accordance with an interagency agreement to be concluded on
      the basis of the principles of cooperation set forth in Annex D to the present Instrument.
      The Implementing Agencies shall cooperate with the Participants, the Secretariat, parties
      receiving assistance under the GEF, and other interested parties, including local communities
      and non-governmental organizations, to promote the purposes of the Facility.

23. 	 The CEO shall periodically convene meetings with the heads of the Implementing Agencies
      to promote interagency collaboration and communication, and to review operational policy
      issues regarding the implementation of GEF-financed activities. The CEO shall transmit
      their conclusions and recommendations to the Council for its consideration.

Scientific and Technical Advisory Panel (STAP)

24. 	 UNEP shall establish, in consultation with UNDP and the World Bank and on the basis of
      guidelines and criteria established by the Council, the Scientific and Technical Advisory
      Panel (STAP) as an advisory body to the Facility. UNEP shall provide the STAP’s Secretariat
      and shall operate as the liaison between the Facility and the STAP.



                         IV . PR INC IPLE S OF DE C ISION - MA K IN G

25. 	 (a)	 Procedure

	    The Assembly and the Council shall each adopt by consensus regulations as may be nec-
     essary or appropriate to perform their respective functions transparently; in particular,
     they shall determine any aspect of their respective procedures, including the admission of
     observers and, in the case of the Council, provision for executive sessions.

	    (b)	 Consensus

	    Decisions of the Assembly and the Council shall be taken by consensus. In the case of the
     Council if, in the consideration of any matter of substance, all practicable efforts by the
     Council and its Chairperson have been made and no consensus appears attainable, any
     Member of the Council may require a formal vote.


                                                         20
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




	    (c)	 Formal Vote




                                                                                                        INSTRUMENT
         (i)	 Unless otherwise provided in this Instrument, decisions requiring a formal vote by
              the Council shall be taken by a double weighted majority; that is, an affirmative
              vote representing both a 60 percent majority of the total number of Participants
              and a 60 percent majority of the total contributions.

         (ii)	 Each Member of the Council shall cast the votes of the Participant or Participants
               he/she represents. A Member of the Council appointed by a group of Participants
               may cast separately the votes of each Participant in the constituency he/she
               represents.

         (iii)	 For the purpose of voting power, total contributions shall consist of the actual
                cumulative contributions made to the GEF Trust Fund as specified in Annex C
                (Attachment 1) and in subsequent replenishments of the GEF Trust Fund, contribu-
                tions made to the GET, and the grant equivalent of co-financing and parallel
                financing made under the GEF pilot program, or agreed with the Trustee, until the
                effective date of the GEF Trust Fund. Until the effective date of the GEF Trust Fund,
                advance contributions made under paragraph 7(c) of Annex C shall be deemed to
                be contributions to the GET.



             V. RELATIONSH IP AND C OOPER AT ION W IT H C ON VEN T ION S

26.	 The Council shall ensure the effective operation of the GEF as a source of funding activities
     under the conventions referred to in paragraph 6. The use of the GEF resources for pur-
     poses of such conventions shall be in conformity with the policies, program priorities and
     eligibility criteria decided by the Conference of the Parties of each of those conventions.

27.	 The Council shall consider and approve cooperative arrangements or agreements with the
     Conferences of the Parties to the conventions referred to in paragraph 6, including recipro-
     cal arrangements for representation in meetings. Such arrangements or agreements shall
     be in conformity with the relevant provisions of the convention concerned regarding its
     financial mechanism and shall include procedures for determining jointly the aggregate
     GEF funding requirements for the purpose of the convention. With regard to each conven-
     tion referred to in paragraph 6, until the first meeting of its Conference of the Parties, the
     Council shall consult the convention’s interim body.




                                                         21
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




                          V I. C OOPE RAT ION WIT H OT H ER BOD IES

28. 	 The Secretariat and the Implementing Agencies under the guidance of the Council shall
      cooperate with other international organizations to promote achievement of the purposes
      of the GEF. The Implementing Agencies may make arrangements for GEF project preparation
      and execution by multilateral development banks, specialized agencies and programs of
      the United Nations, other international organizations, bilateral development agencies,
      national institutions, non-governmental organizations, private sector entities and academic
      institutions, taking into account their comparative advantages in efficient and cost-effective
      project execution. Such arrangements shall be made in accordance with national priorities.
      Pursuant to paragraph 20(f), the Council may request the Secretariat to make similar
      arrangements in accordance with national priorities. In the event of disagreements among
      the Implementing Agencies or between an Implementing Agency and any entity concerning
      project preparation or execution, an Implementing Agency or any entity referred to in this
      paragraph may request the Secretariat to seek to resolve such disagreements.



                                VII. OPE RAT IONAL MODA LIT IES

29.	 The Secretariat shall coordinate the preparation of and determine the content of a joint
     work program for the GEF among the Implementing Agencies, including an indication of
     the financial resources required for the program, for approval by the Council. The work pro-
     gram shall be prepared in accordance with paragraph 4 and in cooperation with eligible
     recipients and any executing agency referred to in paragraph 28.

30. 	 GEF projects shall be subject to endorsement by the CEO before final project approval. If at
      least four Council Members request that a project be reviewed at a Council meeting
      because in their view the project is not consistent with the Instrument or GEF policies and
      procedures, the CEO shall submit the project document to the next Council meeting, and
      shall only endorse the project for final approval by the Implementing Agency if the Council
      finds that the project is consistent with the Instrument and GEF policies and procedures.



                                              V III. R EPOR T ING

31.	   The Council shall approve an annual report on the activities of the GEF. The report shall be
       prepared by the Secretariat and circulated to all Participants. It shall contain information
       on the activities carried out under the GEF, including a list of project ideas submitted for
       consideration and a review of the project activities funded by the Facility and their outcomes.
       The report shall contain all the information necessary to meet the principles of accountability
       and transparency that shall characterize the Facility as well as the requirements arising

                                                           22
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




     from the reporting arrangements agreed with each Conference of the Parties to the con-




                                                                                                     INSTRUMENT
     ventions referred to in paragraph 6. The report shall be conveyed to each of these
     Conferences of the Parties, the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development
     and any other international organization deemed appropriate by the Council.



                      I X. T RANSIT IONAL AND F INAL P ROVIS ION S

Termination of the GET

32.	 The World Bank shall be invited to terminate the existing Global Environment Trust Fund
     (GET) on the effective date of the establishment of the new GEF Trust Fund, and any funds,
     receipts, assets and liabilities held in the GET upon termination, including the administra-
     tion of any cofinancing by the Trustee in accordance with the provisions of Resolution No.
     91-5 of the Executive Directors of the World Bank, shall be transferred to the new GEF Trust
     Fund. Pending the termination of the GET under this provision, projects financed from the
     GET resources shall continue to be processed and approved subject to the rules and proce-
     dures applicable to the GET.

Interim Period

33.	 The Council may, pursuant to the provisions of this Instrument, be convened during the peri-
     od from the adoption of this Instrument and its annexes by the Implementing Agencies until
     the effective date of the establishment of the new GEF Trust Fund: (a) to appoint, by consen-
     sus, the CEO in order to enable him/her to assume the work of the Secretariat; and (b) to
     prepare the Council’s rules of procedure and the operational modalities for the Facility. The
     first meeting of the Council shall be organized by the secretariat of the GEF pilot program.
     Administrative expenses during this interim period shall be covered by the existing GET.

Amendment and Termination

34. 	 Amendment or termination of the present Instrument may be approved by consensus by
      the Assembly upon the recommendation of the Council, after taking into account the views
      of the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee, and shall become effective after adoption
      by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee in accordance with their respective rules
      and procedural requirements. This paragraph shall apply to the amendment of any annex
      to this Instrument unless the annex concerned provides otherwise.

35.	 The Trustee may at any time terminate its role as trustee in accordance with paragraph 14
     of Annex B, and an Implementing Agency may at any time terminate its role as implement-
     ing agency, after consultation with the other Implementing Agencies and after giving the
     Council six months’ notice in writing.
                                                         23
                                  Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                            ANNEX A

        N O TI FI CATI O N OF PART IC IPAT ION/T E RMINA T ION OF P A RT IC IP A T ION



The Government of ______________________ hereby notifies the Chief Executive Officer of the
Global Environment Facility (“the Facility”) that it will participate [terminate its participation] in
the Facility.



________________                         __________________________________________
(Date) 			                               (Name and Office)




NOTE: The notification is to be signed on behalf of the Government by a duly authorized representative thereof.
Participation, and termination of participation, will take effect upon deposit of the notification with the CEO. In the case
of a State contributing to the GEF Trust Fund, an instrument of commitment (Attachment 2 of Annex C) shall be deemed
to serve as a notification of participation.



                                                                 24
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                    ANNEX B




                                                                                                      INSTRUMENT
           RO LE AND FIDUC IARY RE SPONSIBILIT IES OF T H E T RU S T EE OF
                              T H E GEF T RUST F UN D

1.	   The World Bank shall be the Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund (the Fund) referred to in paragraph
      8 of the Instrument and in this capacity shall, as legal owner, hold in trust the funds,
      assets and receipts which constitute the Fund, and manage and use them only for the pur-
      pose of, and in accordance with, the provisions of the Instrument keeping them separate
      and apart from all other accounts and assets of, or administered by, the Trustee.

2.	   The Trustee shall be accountable to the Council for the performance of its fiduciary respon-
      sibilities as set forth in this Annex.

3.	   The Trustee shall administer the Fund in accordance with the applicable provisions of the
      Instrument and such decisions as the Council may take under the Instrument and shall be
      bound in the performance of its duties by the applicable provisions of the Trustee’s Articles
      of Agreement, by-laws, rules and decisions (hereinafter referred to as “the rules of the
      Trustee”).

4.	   The responsibilities of the Trustee shall include in particular:

      (a)	 the mobilization of resources for the Fund and the preparation of such studies and
           arrangements as may be required for this purpose;

      (b)	 the financial management of the Fund, including the investment of its liquid assets,
           the disbursement of funds to the implementing and other executing agencies as well
           as the preparation of the financial reports regarding the investment and use of the
           Fund’s resources;

      (c)	 the maintenance of appropriate records and accounts of the Fund, and providing for
           their audit, in accordance with the rules of the Trustee; and

      (d)	 the monitoring of the application of budgetary and project funds in accordance with
           paragraph 21(h) of the Instrument and paragraph 11 of this Annex so as to ensure that
           the resources of the Fund are being used in accordance with the Instrument and the
           decisions taken by the Council, including the regular reporting to the Council on the
           status of the Fund’s resources.




                                                          25
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




5.	    The Trustee shall exercise the same care in the discharge of its functions under this Annex
       as it exercises with respect to its own affairs and shall have no further liability in respect
       thereof. To this end, the Trustee shall apply such considerations of economy and efficiency
       as may be required for the investment and disbursement of funds from the Fund, consistent
       with the rules of the Trustee and the decisions of the Council.

6.	    All amounts in respect of which the Trustee is authorized to make commitments or dis-
       bursements under the Instrument shall be used by the Trustee on the basis of the work
       program approved by the Council for the activities of the Facility, including the reasonable
       expenses incurred by the Implementing Agencies and any executing agency in the per-
       formance of their responsibilities, in accordance with the Instrument and the decisions
       taken by the Council. All amounts in respect of which the Trustee is authorized to make
       transfers to the Implementing Agencies and any executing agency shall be transferred as
       agreed between the Trustee and the transferee.

7.	    The Trustee may enter into arrangements and agreements with any national or internation-
       al entity as may be needed in order to administer and manage financing for the purpose of,
       and on terms consistent with, the Instrument. Upon the request of the Council, the Trustee
       will, for the purposes of paragraph 27 of the Instrument, formalize the arrangements or
       agreements that have been considered and approved by the Council with the Conferences
       of the Parties of the conventions referred to in paragraph 6 of the Instrument.

8.	    Pending transfers to the Implementing Agencies or an executing agency, the Trustee may
       invest the funds held in the Fund in such form as it may decide, including pooled invest-
       ments (in which separate accounts shall be held for the funds of the Fund) with other
       funds owned, or administered, by it. The income of such investments shall be credited to
       the Fund, and the Trustee shall be reimbursed annually from the resources of the Fund for
       the reasonable expenses incurred by it for the administration of the Fund and for expenses
       incurred in administratively supporting the Secretariat. The reimbursement shall be made
       on the basis of estimated cost, subject to end of year adjustment.

9.	    The Trustee shall make all necessary arrangements to avoid commitments on behalf of the
       Fund in excess of the resources available to such Fund.

10.	   In order to enable the Trustee to carry out its functions enumerated in this Annex, the Chief
       Executive Officer of the Facility (CEO) shall cooperate fully with the Trustee and shall
       observe the rules of the Trustee specified in paragraph 3 above, in the activities of the
       Secretariat relating to the administration of the Fund under the provisions of the
       Instrument and its Annexes.




                                                           26
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




11.	   To ensure that the resources of the Fund are being used in accordance with the Instrument




                                                                                                       INSTRUMENT
       and the decisions taken by the Council, the Trustee shall work with the Implementing
       Agencies and the CEO to address and resolve any concerns it may have about inconsistencies
       between the uses of Fund resources and such Instrument and decisions. The CEO shall
       inform the Council of any concerns that the Trustee or an Implementing Agency may have
       which are not satisfactorily resolved.

12.	   Should it appear to the Council or the Trustee that there is an inconsistency between the
       decisions of the Council and the rules of the Trustee, the Council and the Trustee shall con-
       sult each other with a view to avoiding the inconsistency.

13.	   The privileges and immunities accorded to the Trustee under its Articles of Agreement shall
       apply to the property, assets, archives, income, operations and transactions of the Fund.

14.	   The provisions of this Annex may be amended by the Executive Directors of the Trustee
       only with the agreement of the Council and the other Implementing Agencies. The provisions
       of this Annex may be terminated when the Executive Directors of the Trustee so decide
       after consultation with the Council and the other Implementing Agencies and after giving
       the Council six months’ notice in writing. In case of termination, the Trustee shall take all
       necessary action for winding up its activities in an expeditious manner, in accordance with
       such decision. The decision shall also provide for meeting the commitments of the Facility
       already made for grants and transfers, and for the disposition of any remaining funds,
       receipts, assets or liabilities of the Fund upon termination.




                                                           27
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                   ANNEX C

         G EF TRUST FU ND: F INANC IAL PR OVISION S F OR REP LEN IS H MEN T




Contributions

1.	   The Bank, acting as Trustee for the GEF Trust Fund, is authorized to accept contributions to
      the Fund for the period from July 1, 1994 to June 30, 1997:

      (a)	 by way of grant from each Participant in the amount specified for each participant in
           Attachment 1; and

      (b)	 other contributions on terms consistent with the present Annex.

Instruments of Commitment

2.	   (a)	 Participants contributing to the GEF Trust Fund (Contributing Participants) shall be
      	    expected to deposit with the Trustee an instrument of commitment substantially in
           the form set out in Attachment 2 (Instrument of Commitment).

      (b)	 When a Contributing Participant agrees to pay a part of its contribution without quali-
           fication and the remainder is subject to enactment by its legislature of the necessary
           appropriation legislation, it shall deposit a qualified instrument of commitment in a form
           acceptable to the Trustee (Qualified Instrument of Commitment); such Participant
           undertakes to exercise its best efforts to obtain legislative approval for the full
           amount of its contribution by the payment dates set out in paragraph 3.

3.	   (a)	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under paragraph 1 (a) shall be paid, at the option
      	    of each Contributing Participant, in cash by November 30, 1994 or in installments.

      (b)	 Payment in cash under paragraph (a) above shall be made on terms agreed between
           the Contributing Participant and the Trustee that shall be no less favorable to the GEF
           Trust Fund than payment in installment.

      (c)	 Payment in installments that a Contributing Participant agrees to make without quali-
           fication shall be paid to the Trustee in four equal installments by November 30, 1994,
           November 30, 1995, November 30, 1996 and November 30, 1997, provided that:




                                                          28
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




          (i)	 the Trustee and each Contributing Participant may agree to earlier payment;




                                                                                                        INSTRUMENT
          (ii)	 if the GEF Trust Fund shall not have become effective by October 31, 1994, payment
                of the first such installment may be postponed by the Contributing Participant for
                not more than 30 days after the date on which this Annex becomes effective;

          (iii)	 the Trustee may agree to postpone the payment of any installment, or part thereof,
                 if the amount paid, together with any unused balance of previous payments by
                 the Contributing Participant, shall be at least equal to the amount estimated by
                 the Trustee to be required from the Contributing Participant, up to the date of the
                 next installment, for meeting commitments under the GEF Trust Fund; and

          (iv)	 if any Contributing Participant shall deposit an Instrument of Commitment with
                the Trustee after the date on which the first installment of the contributions is
                due, payment of any installment, or part thereof, shall be made to the Trustee
                within 30 days after the date of such deposit.

      (d)	 If a Contributing Participant has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment and
           thereafter notifies the Trustee that an installment, or part thereof, is unqualified after
           the date when it was due, then payment of such installment, or part thereof, shall be
           made within 30 days of such notification.

Mode of Payment in Installments

4.	   (a)	 Payments shall be made, at the option of each Contributing Participant, in cash on
      	    terms agreed between the Contributing Participant and the Trustee that shall be no
           less favorable to the GEF Trust Fund than payment in installments or by the deposit of
           notes or similar obligations issued by the government of the Contributing Participant
           or the depository designated by the Contributing Participant, which shall be non-
           negotiable, non-interest bearing and payable at their par value on demand to the
           account of the Trustee.

      (b)	 The Trustee shall encash the notes or similar obligations quarterly in equal proportions
           in terms of their unit of denomination, as needed for disbursement and transfers
           referred to in paragraph 8 and the operational and administrative requirements for li-
           quidity of the Trustee and the Implementing Agencies, as determined by the Trustee. At
           the request of a Contributing Participant that is also an eligible recipient under the GEF
           Trust Fund, the Trustee may permit postponement of encashment for up to two years in
           light of exceptionally difficult budgetary circumstances of the Contributing Participant.




                                                          29
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




      (c)	 In respect of each contribution under paragraph 1 (b), payment shall be made in
           accordance with the terms on which such contributions are accepted by the Trustee.

Currency of Denomination and Payment

5.	   (a)	 Contributing Participants shall denominate their contributions in Special Drawing
      	    Rights (SDRs) or a currency that is freely convertible as determined by the Trustee,
           except that if a Contributing Participant’s economy experienced a rate of inflation in
           excess of fifteen percent per annum on average in the period 1990 to 1992 as determined
           by the Trustee as of the date of adoption of this Annex, its contribution shall be
           denominated in SDRs.

      (b)	 Contributing Participants shall make payments in SDRs, a currency used for the valuation
           of the SDR, or with the agreement of the Trustee in another freely convertible currency,
           and the Trustee may exchange the amounts received for such currencies as it may
           decide.

      (c)	 Each Contributing Participant shall maintain, in respect of its currency paid to the
           Trustee and the currency of such Contributing Participant derived therefrom, the same
           convertibility as existed on the date of adoption of this Annex.

Effective Date

6.	   (a)	 The GEF Trust Fund shall become effective and the resources to be contributed pursuant
      	    to this Annex shall become payable to the Trustee on the date when Contributing
           Participants whose contributions aggregate not less than SDR 980.53 million shall
           have deposited with the Trustee Instruments of Commitment or Qualified Instruments
           of Commitment (the effective date), provided that this date shall not be later than
           October 31, 1994, or such later date as the Trustee may determine.

      (b)	 If the Trustee determines that the effective date is likely to be unduly delayed, it shall
           convene promptly a meeting of the Contributing Participants to review the situation
           and to consider the steps to be taken to prevent an interruption of GEF financing.

Advance Contribution

7.	   (a)	 In order to avoid an interruption in the GEF’s ability to make financing commitments
      	    pending the effectiveness of the GEF Trust Fund, and if the Trustee will have received
           Instruments of Commitment from Contributing Participants whose contributions
           aggregate not less than SDR 280.15 million, the Trustee may deem, prior to the effective


                                                          30
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




           date, one-quarter of the total amount of each contribution for which an Instrument of




                                                                                                      INSTRUMENT
           Commitment has been deposited with the Trustee as an advance contribution, unless
           the Contributing Participant specifies otherwise in its Instrument of Commitment.
           Advance contributions shall be paid to the GEF under Resolution 91-5 adopted by the
           Executive Directors of the World Bank and shall be governed by the provisions of that
           Resolution until the effective date.

      (b)	 The Trustee shall specify when advance contributions pursuant to paragraph (a)
           above are to be paid to the Trustee.

      (c)	 The terms and conditions applicable to contributions under this Annex shall apply
           also to advance contributions until the effective date, when such contributions shall
           be deemed to constitute payment towards the amount due from each Contributing
           Participant for its contribution.

Commitment or Transfer Authority

8.	   (a)	 Contributions shall become available for commitment by the Trustee, for disbursement
      	    or transfer as needed pursuant to the work program approved by the Council under
           paragraph 20(c) of the Instrument, upon receipt of payment by the Trustee, except as
           provided in subparagraph (c) below.

      (b)	 The Trustee shall promptly inform Contributing Participants if a Participant that has
           deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment and whose contribution represents
           more than 20 percent of the total amount of the resources to be contributed pursuant
           to this Annex has not unqualified at least 50 percent of the total amount of its contri-
           bution by November 30, 1995, or 30 days after the effective date, whichever is later,
           and at least 75 percent of the total amount of its contribution by November 30, 1996,
           or 30 days after the effective date, whichever is later, and the total amount thereof by
           November 30, 1997, or 30 days after the effective date, whichever is later.

      (c)	 Within 30 days of the dispatch of notice by the Trustee under paragraph (b) above, each
           other Contributing Participant may notify the Trustee in writing that the commitment by
           the Trustee of the second, third or fourth tranche, whichever is applicable, of such
           Participant’s contribution shall be deferred while, and to the extent that, any part of
           the contribution referred to in subparagraph (b) remains qualified; during such period,
           the Trustee shall make no commitments in respect of the resources to which the
           notice pertains unless the right of the Contributing Participant is waived pursuant to
           paragraph (d) below.




                                                         31
                     Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                   Global Environment F ac ilit y




(d)	 The right of a Contributing Participant under paragraph (c) above may be waived in
     writing, and it shall be deemed waived if the Trustee receives no written notice pur-
     suant to such subparagraph within the period specified therein.

(e)	 The Trustee shall consult with the Contributing Participants where, in its judgment:
     (i) there is a substantial likelihood that the total amount of the contribution referred
     to in paragraph (b) above could not be committed to the Trustee without qualification
     by June 30, 1998, or (ii) as a result of Contributing Participants exercising their rights
     under paragraph (b), the Trustee is or may shortly be precluded from entering into
     new commitments for disbursement or transfer.

(f)	 Commitment and transfer authority shall be increased by:

    (i)	 the income of investment of resources held in the GEF Trust Fund pending dis-
         bursement or transfer by the Trustee;

    (ii) 	 uncommitted resources transferred to the Trustee upon termination of the GET;

    (iii)	 the amount of undisbursed commitments that have been cancelled; and

    (iv) 	 payments received by the Trustee as repayment, interest or charges on loans
           made by the GEF Trust Fund.

(g)	 Commitment and transfer authority shall be reduced for the reimbursement of admin-
     istrative costs charged against the resources of the GEF Trust Fund, as determined by
     the Trustee on the basis of the work program and budget approved by the Council.

(h)	 The Trustee may enter into agreements to provide financing from the GEF Trust Fund,
     conditional on such financing becoming effective and binding on the GEF Trust Fund
     when resources become available for commitment by the Trustee.




                                                    32
                                  Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                            ANNEX C – ATTACHMENT 1




                                                                                                                            INSTRUMENT
                         G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D

                                           CONTRIBUTIONS (IN MILLIONS)

	                             	              National	                    	                               	    National
Contributing 	          SDR	                Currency	                     Contributing	               SDR	    Currency
Participants	        Amounts	               Amountsa	                     Participants	            Amounts	   Amountsa

Group I b c	                 	                        	 Group II b	           	
Australia	              20.84	                  42.76	  Brazil	          4.00	     §
Austria	                14.28	                 231.51	  China	           4.00	     §
Canada	                 61.78	                  111.11	 Côte d’Ivoire	   4.00	     §
Denmark	                25.08	                       §	 Egypt	           4.00	     §
Finland	                15.45	                124.00	   India	           6.00	
France	               102.26	                 806.71	   Mexico	          4.00	     §
Germany	               171.30	                394.76	   Pakistan	        4.00	
Italy	                  81.86	            159,803.25	   Turkey	          4.00	     §
Japan	                295.95	              45,698.09				
Netherlands	            50.97	                       §	 Group III b		
New Zealand	             4.00	                  10.35	  Ireland	          1.71	 1.64
Norway	                 21.93	                216.42			
Portugal	                4.00	                       §	 Other *	         6.48	
Spain	                  12.36	              2,180.10	   Unallocated **	 42.83	
Sweden	                 41.60	                450.04			
	


						
a	 Calculated by converting the SDR amount to the national currency using an average of daily exchange rates over the
    period February 1, 1993, to October 31, 1993.
b Group I consists of non-recipient donors that participated in the replenishment meetings.
    Group II consists of recipient donors that participated in the replenishment meetings.
    Group III consists of other donors.						
c	 The following table shows background information and explanations regarding the breakdown of Group I contributions
    according to contributions based on IDA10 basic shares, Supplementary Contributions towards meeting adjusted
    IDA10 shares, and additional Supplementary Contributions.
*	 Includes the enhanced value of contributions through accelerated encashments, not included in the figures above and
    new and additional contributions made to the GET and expected to be available for the GEF I.	
** 	It is expected that other donors will make contributions amounting to US$60 million (SDR 42.83 million), which repre-
    sents 3% of the original replenishment target of US$2,000 million.			
§ These countries are denominating their contributions in SDRs.				
‡ Calculated by converting the SDR amount into US$, using an average of daily exchange rates over the period February
    1, 1993, to October 31, 1993.

(Note: For updated information on contributions, please see table on page 139.)						
					
	 	


                                                                 33
                                 Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                               Global Environment F ac ilit y




Explanatory Note: Donors agreed that a core replenishment of US$2 billion (SDR 1427.52 mil-
lion) should be built on IDA10 shares. Since IDA10 basic shares of non-recipient donors partici-
pating in the replenishment meetings add up to 87.81% in order to avoid a funding gap, IDA10
basic shares were adjusted on a pro-rata basis to increase the shares of non-recipient donors
participating in the replenishment meetings to 95% with the remaining 5% set aside for non-
recipient donors not participating in the replenishment discussions, as well as for recipient
donors. Donors agreed to aim to make basic contributions to the GEF Trust Fund in accordance
with these adjusted shares. The first column shows contributions based on IDA10 basic shares.
Column 3 shows additional contributions towards reaching the adjusted IDA10 shares.


      CO NTRI B UTI O NS T O T H E GLOBAL ENVIRONMEN T F A C ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D

                                        BACKGROUND INFORMATION
		                                   	                    Supplementary
	              	                     	                      Contributions	       Additional	               	Total Contributions
Contributing 	 Contributions based on 	                 towards meeting  	 Supplementary	                      	           National
Participants	    IDA 10 Basic Shares		                 adj. IDA 10 shares 	   Contributions	              SDR 	            Currency
	              SDR m	             % a	                             SDR m	            SDR m	           millions	            millionsb
Australia	              20.84	         1.46%			                                                         20.84	           42.76
Austria	                12.85	         0.90%	  1.05	 0.37	                                              14.28	          231.51
Canada	                 57.10	         4.00%	  4.68		                                                   61.78	           111.11
Denmark	                18.56	         1.30%	  1.52	 5.00	                                              25.08	             §
Finland	                14.28	         1.00%	  1.17		                                                   15.45	          124.00
France*	               100.21	         7.02%	  2.05		                                                 102.26	           806.71
Germany	               157.03	        11.00%	 12.86	 1.41	                                             171.30	          394.76
Italy	                  75.66	         5.30%	  6.20		                                                   81.86‡	     159,803.25
Japan	                 266.95	        18.70%	 21.86	 7.14	                                            295.95	        45,698.09
Netherlands	            47.11	         3.30%	  3.86		                                                   50.97	             §
New Zealand	             1.71	         0.12%	  0.14	 2.15	                                               4.00	            10.35
Norway	                 20.27	         1.42%	  1.66		                                                   21.93	          216.42
Portugal	                1.71	         0.12%	  0.14	 2.15	                                               4.00	             §
Spain	                  11.42	         0.80%	  0.94		                                                   12.36	        2,180.10
Sweden	                 37.40	         2.62%	  3.06	 1.14	                                              41.60	          450.04
Switzerland	            24.84	         1.74%	  2.03	 5.10	                                              31.97	             §
United Kingdom	         87.79	         6.15%	  7.19	 1.06	                                              96.04	           89.55
United States	         297.78	        20.86%	  9.14		                                                 306.92	           430.00

a	 IDA10 basic shares as agreed by IDA deputies in December 1992.
b	 Calculated by converting the SDR amount of the total contribution to the national currency, using an average of daily
   exchange rates over the period February 1, 1993, to October 31, 1993.				
‡	 This SDR amount includes the effect of early encashment.
§	 These countries are denominating their contributions in SDRs.
* At the 12-month exchange rate, from November 1, 1992 – October 31, 1993, the total contribution of French francs (FF)
   806.71 million to the GEF Trust Fund is equivalent to SDR 103.58 million. The IDA10 basic share is SDR 100.50 million;
   hence the supplementary contribution is SDR 3.08 million.
Memorandum Item: In addition to the above contributions, the following countries have indicated their intention to pro-
vide cofinancing or parallel financing on grant or concessional terms in support of the GEF: Austria (SDR 6 million);
Denmark; France (FF 440 million); and Norway.
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                   ANNEX C – ATTACHMENT 2




                                                                                                      INSTRUMENT
                    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                           INST R UME NT OF C OMMIT MEN T

Reference is made to Resolution No. 94-2 of the Executive Directors of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development entitled “Global Environment Facility Trust Fund: Restructuring
and First Replenishment of the Global Environment Facility,” which was adopted on May 24,
1994 (“the Resolution”).

The Government of ___________________________ hereby notifies the Bank as Trustee of the
Global Environment Facility Trust Fund that it will participate in the Global Environment Facility
Trust Fund and pursuant to paragraph 2(a) of Annex C of the Instrument referred to in paragraph
1 of the Resolution it will make the contribution authorized for it in accordance with the terms of
the Resolution in the amount of _______________________.




________________                 __________________________________________
(Date) 			                       (Name and Office)




                                                         35
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                   ANNEX D

      PRI NCI P LES O F C OOPER AT ION AMONG T H E I MP LEMEN T IN G A G EN C IES

I. General Principles

1.	   At the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, Governments recog-
      nized that new forms of cooperation are required to achieve better integration among
      national and local government, industry, science, environmental groups and the public in
      developing and implementing effective approaches to integrating environment and devel-
      opment. The responsibility for bringing about changes lies primarily with Governments in
      consultation with national major groups and local communities, and in collaboration with
      national, regional and international organizations, including in particular UNDP, UNEP and
      the World Bank.

2.	   In this context, the GEF has a special role to play in providing new and additional grant and
      concessional funding to meet the agreed incremental costs of measures to achieve agreed
      global environmental benefits in accordance with paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Instrument.

3.	   By designating UNDP, UNEP and the World Bank as the Implementing Agencies of the GEF,
      the Participants have recognized that the three agencies have key roles to play in the
      implementation of GEF-financed activities within their respective spheres of competence,
      and in facilitating cooperation in GEF-financed activities by multilateral development
      banks, United Nations agencies and programs, other international institutions, national
      institutions and bilateral development agencies, local communities, non-governmental
      organizations, the private sector and the academic community in accordance with para-
      graph 28 of the Instrument.

4.	   For their part, the three agencies recognize the need for institutional arrangements in con-
      formity with, and providing input to the fulfillment of, GEF objectives, based on a results-
      oriented approach and in a spirit of partnership, and consistent with the principles of uni-
      versality, democracy, transparency, cost-effectiveness and accountability.

5.	   The Implementing Agencies will put these principles into practice by ensuring the develop-
      ment and implementation of programs and projects which are country-driven and based on
      national priorities designed to support sustainable development. Actions needed to attain
      global environmental benefits are strongly influenced by existing national policies and sub
      regional and regional cooperative mechanisms. GEF financing will need to be coordinated
      with appropriate national policies and strategies as well as with development financing. To
      the extent that the GEF operates a funding mechanism for global environmental conven-


                                                         36
                             Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                           Global Environment F ac ilit y




       tions, the Implementing Agencies will focus on joint programming and implementation




                                                                                                             INSTRUMENT
       with eligible countries, either directly or, where appropriate, at a sub regional or regional
       level, of the program priorities and criteria adopted by the Conference of the Parties to
       each Convention.

6.	    In developing joint work programs and in project preparation, the Implementing Agencies
       will, through country-driven initiatives, collaborate with eligible countries in the identification
       of projects for GEF funding through a jointly operated Project Preparation Assistance
       Program. Priority will be given to integrating global environmental concerns with national
       ones in the framework of national sustainable development strategies.

7.	    The Implementing Agencies will ensure the cost-effectiveness and sustainability of their
       activities in addressing the targeted global environmental issues. In this context, one
       important feature of adhering to these principles is that the least-cost sustainable means
       of meeting many global environmental objectives lie in a combination of investment, technical
       assistance, and policy actions at the national and regional level. The experience and mandate
       of each Implementing Agency will contribute to bringing to light, when assessing specific
       project interventions, the range of possible policy, technical assistance and investment
       options. In addition, each Implementing Agency will strive to promote measures to achieve
       global environmental benefits within the context of its regular work programs.

8.	    The Implementing Agencies are committed to facilitating continued effective participation,
       as appropriate, of major groups and local communities and to promoting opportunities for
       mobilizing outside resources in support of GEF activities.

9.	    Collaboration among the Implementing Agencies will be sufficiently flexible to promote
       introduction of modifications as the need arises. Within an overall cooperative framework,
       the Implementing Agencies will strive for innovative approaches to strengthening their col-
       laboration and effectiveness, in particular at the country level, and an efficient division of
       labor that maximizes the synergy among them and recognizes their terms of reference and
       comparative advantages.

II. Emphasis of Each Implementing Agency

10.	   The Implementing Agencies recognize that in carrying out their responsibilities there will
       be areas of shared interest and work effort focusing primarily on the integration of GEF
       objectives and activities with national sustainable development strategies. In addition to
       collaboration in promoting an efficient and effective response to issues of shared interest,
       the agencies’ partnership will recognize distinctive areas of emphasis.




                                                            37
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




11.	   Areas of particular emphasis for each of the Implementing Agencies will be as follows:

       (a)	 UNDP will play the primary role in ensuring the development and management of
            capacity building programs and technical assistance projects. Through its global network
            of field offices, UNDP will draw upon its experience in human resources development,
            institutional strengthening, and non-governmental and community participation to
            assist countries in promoting, designing and implementing activities consistent with
            the purpose of the GEF and national sustainable development strategies. Also drawing
            on its intercountry programming experience, UNDP will contribute to the development
            of regional and global projects within the GEF work program in cooperation with the
            other Implementing Agencies.

       (b)	 UNEP will play the primary role in catalyzing the development of scientific and technical
            analysis and in advancing environmental management in GEF-financed activities.
            UNEP will provide guidance on relating the GEF-financed activities to global, regional
            and national environmental assessments, policy frameworks and plans, and to inter-
            national environmental agreements. UNEP will also be responsible for establishing
            and supporting the Scientific and Technical Advisory Panel (STAP) as an advisory body
            to the GEF.

       (c)	 The World Bank will play the primary role in ensuring the development and management
            of investment projects. The World Bank will draw upon its investment experience in
            eligible countries to promote investment opportunities and to mobilize private sector
            resources that are consistent with GEF objectives and national sustainable development
            strategies.

III. Process of Collaboration

12.	   The Implementing Agencies will be accountable to the Council for their GEF-financed activi-
       ties in accordance with paragraph 22 of the Instrument.

13.	   Responsibility for facilitating and coordinating GEF-financed activities will be vested in the
       Secretariat in accordance with paragraph 21 of the Instrument. The Secretariat, in addition
       to servicing the Assembly and the Council, will provide a focal point for coordinating the
       GEF-financed activities of the Implementing Agencies, including interaction of the
       Implementing Agencies with the Council, coordination of the preparation of the GEF joint
       work program, oversight of the implementation of program activities pursuant to the joint
       work program, preparation and monitoring of budgets, and ensuring liaison with other
       bodies as appropriate.




                                                          38
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




14.	   In order to facilitate the collaboration between the agencies and ensure the effective




                                                                                                           INSTRUMENT
       development and execution of the GEF joint work program, an ongoing interagency
       process is essential. Such a process will be embodied in an interagency committee, which
       will function on two distinct levels:

       (a)	 As an institutionalized high-level forum focusing on strategic operational issues,
            common direction and broad guidance of the interagency collaborative process. This
            forum will consist of the heads of agency or their representatives and will be con-
            vened by the Chief Executive Officer of the Facility (CEO). It will meet regularly as
            needed, and no less than once a year.

       (b)	 As a staff level interagency group which will collaborate with the Secretariat in the
            preparation of a joint work program, focus on all pertinent issues concerning the
            operations of the Facility, its projects, communication and outreach, and other initiatives.
            This interagency group will be chaired by the Secretariat in accordance with paragraph
            21(e) of the Instrument.

Other ad hoc interagency groups may be established as deemed necessary.




                                                           39
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                   ANNEX E

                         C ONST IT UENC IE S OF T H E GEF C OU N C IL



1.	   GEF Participants shall be grouped in 32 constituencies, with 18 constituencies composed
      of recipient countries (referred to as “recipient constituencies”), and 14 constituencies
      composed principally of non-recipient countries (referred to as “non-recipient
      constituencies”).

2.	   The 18 recipient constituencies shall be distributed among the following geographic
      regions, bearing in mind the possibility of mixed constituencies:

	     Africa	                                                                    6
	     Asia and Pacific	                                                          6
	     Latin America and Caribbean	                                               4
	     Central, Eastern Europe and Former Soviet Union	                           2

3.	   For each geographic region referred to in paragraph 2, recipient constituencies shall be
      formed through a process of consultation among the GEF recipient country Participants in
      the region in accordance with their own criteria. It is expected that in this consultation
      process a number of criteria will be taken into account, including:

      (a)	 Equitable and balanced representation from within the geographic region;

      (b)	 Commonality of global, regional and sub regional environmental concerns;

      (c)	 Policies and efforts towards sustainable development;

      (d)	 Natural resource endowment and environmental vulnerability;

      (e)	 Contributions to the GEF as defined in paragraph 25(c) (iii) of the Instrument; and

      (f)	 All other relevant and environment-related factors.

4.	   The non-recipient constituencies shall be formed through a process of consultation among
      interested Participants. It is expected that grouping of non-recipient countries will be pri-
      marily guided by total contributions as defined in paragraph 25(c) (iii) of the Instrument.




                                                         40
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




5.	    Consultations to form the constituencies shall take place following the acceptance of the




                                                                                                        INSTRUMENT
       Instrument by representatives of the States participating in the GEF. The GEF Secretariat
       will provide assistance to facilitate these consultations at the regional level. The
       Secretariat shall be informed of the initial composition of each constituency no later than
       May 15, 1994.

6.	    The grouping of constituencies as communicated to the Secretariat, including any adjust-
       ments pursuant to paragraph 8 of this Annex, shall be subject to confirmation by the
       Council after the effective date of the establishment of the GEF Trust Fund, taking into
       account the instruments deposited in accordance with Annex A to the Instrument.

7.	    The Participant or Participants in each constituency shall appoint a Member and an
       Alternate to represent the constituency in the Council. The names and addresses of the
       Members and Alternates for each constituency shall be communicated to the Secretariat
       no later than two weeks prior to the first meeting of the Council pursuant to paragraph 33
       of the Instrument, and shall be subject to confirmation by the Participant or Participants in
       each constituency upon the confirmation of the constituencies by the Council under para-
       graph 6 above.

8.	    Any State that becomes a Participant in accordance with paragraph 7 of the Instrument
       after the formation of constituencies pursuant to paragraphs 3 to 6 above shall, after con-
       sultation with the Participants in the constituency concerned, notify the Secretariat as
       regards the constituency in which it wishes to be grouped and shall be grouped in that
       constituency subject to agreement by the Participants in that constituency and subsequent
       confirmation by the Council at its next meeting.

9.	    Each Council Member or Alternate shall represent the Participant or Participants in the
       constituency by which that Member or Alternate was appointed, subject to any adjustments
       pursuant to paragraph 8 above, and any termination of participation in accordance with
       paragraph 7 of the Instrument.

10.	   If the office of a Council Member or Alternate becomes vacant before the expiration of the
       term of office of the Member or Alternate, the Participant or Participants in the constituency
       concerned shall appoint a new Member or Alternate, whose name and address shall be
       communicated to the Secretariat no later than two weeks prior to the next meeting of the
       Council.

11.	   In accordance with paragraph 25(a) of the Instrument, the Council may adopt procedures
       to give effect to the provisions of this Annex.




                                                          41
Decisions by the Implementing
Agencies and the Trustee
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




         D ECI S I O NS BY T H E IMPLEME NT ING AGE N C IES A N D T H E T RU S T EE

                  THE UNIT ED NAT IONS DEV ELOPME N T P ROG RA MME

   E X ECUTI VE B O ARD OF T H E UNIT ED NAT IONS DEVELOP MEN T P ROG RA MME
                  AND T H E UNIT E D NAT IONS POPU LA T ION F U N D

                                                  DP/1994/9




                                                                                                        DECISIONS
                       REPORT OF THE SECOND REGULAR SESSION

                                         VIII. OTHER MATTERS

                 A. P ART IC IPAT ION OF UNDP IN T H E RES T RU C T U RED
                            GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT F A C ILIT Y

162. 	 In his introduction of the topic, the President of the Executive Board noted the extensive
       negotiations on the restructuring of the Global Environment Facility (GEF), which had cul-
       minated in Geneva in March 1994, when participating States accepted the Instrument for
       the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility. The UNDP Executive
       Coordinator for the GEF then presented a summary of the history of the restructuring
       process, including the results of the pilot phase and its independent evaluation. He com-
       mented on the replenishment and outlined UNDP responsibilities in the operational GEF. In
       his presentation, the Executive Coordinator explained that, throughout the restructuring
       process, the implementing agencies had been exhorted to broaden access to the GEF to a
       wide range of organizations, including NGOs. By means of improving existing procedures
       and regulations, it would be possible to provide a range of options for their participation in
       the GEF work program, including the execution of projects.

163. 	 The numerous delegations who commented all expressed their support for UNDP to serve
       as an implementing agency of the GEF and for the adoption of the Instrument in its present
       form. Appreciation was expressed for the role of UNDP in facilitating the process of negoti-
       ations leading to the acceptance of the Instrument. Delegations also expressed their
       desire that the Executive Board be regularly informed on the implementation of GEF,
       including UNDP strategies and operational plans. It was noted by a delegation that GEF
       initiatives addressed global issues and that incremental costs were a factor to be considered
       in the design of GEF projects and programs.

164. 	 The Executive Board adopted the Instrument as the basis for the participation of the
       United Nations Development Programme as an Implementing Agency of the Global
       Environment Facility.
                                                                         (Adopted May 13, 1994)
                                                          45
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




                   THE U NIT E D NAT IONS DE VE LOPMEN T P ROG RA MME

       E X ECUTI VE B O AR D OF T H E UNIT E D NAT IONS D EVELOP MEN T P ROG RA MME
                      AND T H E UNIT E D NAT IONS POPU LA T ION F U N D

                                                  DP/2003/20

                        REPORT OF THE SECOND REGULAR SESSION
                               8 TO 12 SEPTEMBER 2003

                   DECISIONS ADOPTED AT THE ANNUAL SESSION 2003

                               GLOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F A C ILIT Y

The Executive Board

1.	     Recalls the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment
        Facility;

2.	     Recalls its decision 94/10 of 13 May 1994 on the adoption of the Instrument of the
        Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility;

3.	     Notes the decision contained in the Beijing Declaration of the Second Global Environment
        Facility Assembly, held in Beijing, China, from 16 to 18 October 2002, on the amendments
        to the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility;

4.	     Decides to adopt the amendments to paragraphs 2, 3, 6 and 21 (f) of the Instrument for
        the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility, which include land
        degradation (primarily desertification and deforestation) and persistent organic pollutants
        as two new focal areas of the Global Environment Facility, as approved by the Second
        Global Environment Facility Assembly in its decision contained in the Beijing Declaration of
        18 October 2002;

5. 	    Requests that the Administrator transmit the present decision to the Chief Executive
        Officer/Chairperson of the Global Environment Facility.




                                                                                                 (Adopted June 19, 2003)


                                                           46
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




                   THE U NIT E D NAT IONS DE VE LOPMEN T P ROG RA MME

       E X ECUTI VE B O AR D OF T H E UNIT E D NAT IONS D EVELOP MEN T P ROG RA MME
                      AND T H E UNIT E D NAT IONS POPU LA T ION F U N D

                                                 DP/2007/39

            DECISIONS ADOPTED AT THE 2007 SECO ND REGULAR SESSION




                                                                                                                     DECISIONS
                              GLOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F A C ILIT Y

The Executive Board,

(1)	    Takes note of the Note by Administrator on the proposed amendment to the instrument for
        the establishment of the restructured Global Environment Facility (GEF);

(2)	    Adopts the amendments to the GEF instrument so as to provide the GEF Council with flexi-
        bility to hold its meetings outside the seat of the Secretariat, if necessary.

	                                                                                     (Adopted September 14, 2007)




                                                          47
                         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




                 THE U NIT E D NAT IONS DE VE LOPMEN T P ROG RA MME

E X E CUTI VE B O ARD OF T H E UNIT ED NAT IONS DE VELOP MEN T P ROG RA MME, T H E
 UNI T ED NATI O NS POPULAT ION F UND AND T H E U N IT ED N A T ION S OF F IC E F OR
                                 PROJ EC T SE RV IC E S

                                                DP/2011/11

             DECISIONS ADOPTED AT THE 2011 FIRST REGULAR SESSION

                            GLOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F A C ILIT Y

The Executive Board,

(1)	   Takes note of DP/2011/17 which contains two amendments of the Global Environment
       Facility (GEF) instrument;

(2)	   Adopts two amendments as presented in paragraph 8 of DP/2011/17.

                                                                                              (February 3, 2011)




                                                        48
                             Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                           Global Environment F ac ilit y




                    THE U NIT E D NAT IONS DE VE LOPMEN T P ROG RA MME

       E X ECUTI VE B O ARD OF T H E UNIT E D NAT IONS D EVELOP MEN T P ROG RA MME,
                    THE U NIT E D NAT IONS POPULAT ION F U N D A N D T H E
                     UNI TED NAT IONS OF F IC E F OR PRO JEC T S ERVIC ES

        G LO B AL ENVI RONMENT F AC ILIT Y: AMENDMEN T S T O G EF IN S T RU MEN T
                                        2 014/2 8




                                                                                                                       DECISIONS
The Executive Board,

(1)	     Takes note of the note of the Administrator concerning proposed amendments to
         the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility
         (DP/2014/23);

(2)	     Decides to adopt the amendments to the Instrument for the Establishment of the
         Restructured Global Environment Facility as approved by the Fifth Assembly of the Global
         Environment Facility held in Cancun, Mexico on 28-29 May 2014;

(3)	     Requests the Administrator to transmit the present decision to the Chief Executive Officer
         and Chairperson of the Global Environment Facility.

                                                                                                  (5 September 2014)




                                                            49
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                  THE U NIT E D NAT IONS E NV IR ONME N T P ROG RA MME

                   D ECI SION ADOPT ED BY T H E GOV ER N IN G C OU N C IL
                O F THE UNIT ED NAT IONS E NV IR ONM EN T P ROG RA MME
                            AT IT S F OUR T H SPEC IAL SES S ION

                                                    SS.IV.1

        AD O P TI O N O F T H E INST R UME NT F OR T H E E S T A BLIS H MEN T OF T H E
                   RES T R UC T URE D GLOBAL E NV IR ON MEN T F A C ILIT Y

The Governing Council,

Having taken note of the agreement reached at the Global Environment Facility Participants’
meeting held in Geneva from 14 to 16 March 1994 on the text of the Instrument for the
Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility,

Having studied the text of the Instrument transmitted to the Council by a note by the Executive
Directora and, in particular, the description of the role of the United Nations Environment
Programme as set out in annex D, section II, paragraph 11(b), of the Instrument,

1.	   Adopts the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment
      Facility, as a basis for the participation of the United Nations Environment Programme as
      an implementing agency of the Global Environment Facility;

2.	   Requests the Executive Director to consider ways of enhancing the capacity of the United
      Nations Environment Programme to fulfill its role in the Global Environment Facility;

3.	   Further requests the Executive Director to include in the provisional agenda for the eigh-
      teenth regular session of the Council an item on the participation of the United Nations
      Environment Programme in the Global Environment Facility and to present a progress
      report to the Council thereon.

							




                                                                                               (Adopted June 18, 1994)

a UNEP/GCSS.IV/2, annex



                                                         50
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                  THE U NIT E D NAT IONS E NV IR ONME N T P ROG RA MME

      T HE G O VERNI NG C OUNC IL/GLOBAL MINIST E RIA L EN VIRON MEN T F ORU M
                O F THE UNIT ED NAT IONS E NV IR ONM EN T P ROG RA MME

                                  DECISION 22/19
                       REPORT OF THE TWENTY-SECO ND MEETING




                                                                                                                      DECISIONS
      A MEND M ENTS TO T H E INST RUMENT F OR T HE ES T A BLIS H MEN T OF T H E
                REST RUC T UR ED GLOBAL ENVIRON MEN T F A C ILIT Y

The Governing Council,

Recalling the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environmental Facility
(UNEP/GCSS.IV/2),

Recalling its decision SS.IV/1 of 18 June 1994 on the adoption of the Instrument for the
Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility,

Recalling the decision of the Second Global Environment Facility Assembly, held in Beijing from
14 to 18 October 2002, on the amendment to the Instrument for the Establishment of the
Restructured Global Environment Facility,

1.	    Decides to adopt the amendments to the Instrument for the Establishment of the
       Restructured Global Environment Facility which include land degradation, primarily deser-
       tification and deforestation, and persistent organic pollutants as new focal areas of the
       Global Environment Facility, as adopted by the Second Global Environment Facility
       Assembly;

2. 	 Requests the Executive Director to transmit the present decision to the Chief Executive
     Officer/Chairperson of the Global Environment Facility.




                                                                                         (Adopted February 7, 2003)


                                                         51
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




                  THE U NIT E D NAT IONS E NV IR ONME N T P ROG RA MME

      T HE G O VERNI NG C OUNC IL/GLOBAL MINIST E RIA L EN VIRON MEN T F ORU M
                O F THE UNIT ED NAT IONS E NV IR ONM EN T P ROG RA MME

                                             DECISION 24/13

       AM END M ENT TO T H E INST R UME NT F OR T H E ES T A BLIS H MEN T OF T H E
                 REST RUC T UR ED GLOBAL ENVIRON MEN T F A C ILIT Y

The Governing Council,

Recalling its decision SS.IV/1 of 18 June 1994 on the adoption of the Instrument for the
Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility,

Recalling its decision 22/19 of 7 February 2003 on the adoption of amendments to the
Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility to include land
degradation, primarily desertification and deforestation, and persistent organic pollutants as
new focal areas of the Global Environment Facility, as approved by the Second Global
Environment Facility Assembly,

Recalling the decision of the Third Global Environment Facility Assembly, held in Cape Town,
South Africa, on 29 and 30 August 2006, on the amendment of the Instrument for the
Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility,

1.	    Decides to adopt the amendment to the Instrument for the Establishment of the
       Restructured Global Environment Facility related to the location of meetings of the Council
       of the Global Environment Facility as approved by the Third Global Environment Facility
       Assembly;

2. 	 Requests the Executive Director to transmit the present decision to the Chief Executive
     Officer or Chair of the Global Environment Facility.




                                                                                          (Adopted February 9, 2007)




                                                          52
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




                  THE U NIT E D NAT IONS E NV IR ONME N T P ROG RA MME

                    G O VER NING C OUNC IL OF T H E UN IT ED N A T ION S
                              ENVIRONMENT PR OGRA MME



                                              DECISION 26/8




                                                                                                         DECISIONS
      AM END M ENT TO T H E INST R UME NT F OR T H E ES T A BLIS H MEN T OF T H E
                REST RUC T UR ED GLOBAL ENVIRON MEN T F A C ILIT Y

The Governing Council,

Recalling its decision SS.IV/1 of 18 June 1994 on the adoption of the Instrument for the
Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility,

Recalling also its decision 22/19 of 7 February 2003 on amendments to the Instrument for the
Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility that included land degradation,
primarily desertification and deforestation, and persistent organic pollutants as new focal areas
of the Global Environment Facility,

Recalling further its decision 24/13 of 9 February 2007 on an amendment to the Instrument for
the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility relating to the location of
meetings of the Council of the Global Environment Facility,

Recalling the approval in May 2010 by the Fourth Global Environment Facility Assembly of
amendments to the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment
Facility relating to the availability of the Global Environment Facility to serve as a financial mech-
anism for the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa, and to the appoint-
ment and term of the Chief Executive Officer/Chairperson of the Global Environment Facility
under paragraph 21 of the Instrument,

1.	   Decides to adopt the amendment to the Instrument for the Establishment of the
      Restructured Global Environment Facility by which the Global Environment Facility will be
      made available to serve as a financial mechanism for the United Nations Convention to
      Combat Desertification in Those Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
      Desertification, Particularly in Africa;

2. 	 Also decides to adopt the amendment to paragraph 21 of the Instrument relating to the
     appointment and term of the Chief Executive Officer/Chairperson of the Global

                                                          53
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




      Environment Facility, by which the text “The CEO shall be appointed to serve for three
      years on a full time basis by the Council on the joint recommendation of the Implementing
      Agencies. The CEO may be reappointed by the Council. The CEO may be removed by the
      Council only for cause.” will be replaced with: “The CEO shall be appointed to serve for
      four years on a full time basis by the Council. The CEO may be reappointed by the Council
      for one additional four year term”.

3.	   Invites the Executive Director to consider ways of enhancing the capacity of the United
      Nations Environment Programme, as the principal United Nations body in the field of the
      environment, to strengthen its role as an implementing agency of the Global Environment
      Facility;

4.	   Requests the Executive Director to transmit the present decision to the Chief Executive
      Officer/Chairperson of the Global Environment Facility.



                                                                                         (Adopted February 24, 2011)




                                                         54
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                  THE U NIT E D NAT IONS E NV IR ONME N T P ROG RA MME

        RESO LUTI O NS AND DE C ISIONS ADOPT ED BY T H E U N IT ED N A T ION S
        ENVI RO NMENT ASSE MBLY OF T H E UNIT ED N A T ION S EN VIRON MEN T
                       PR OGRAMME AT IT S F IRST S ES S ION



                                  RESOLUTION NUMBER 1/17.




                                                                                                      DECISIONS
      A MEND M ENTS TO T H E INST RUMENT F OR T HE ES T A BLIS H MEN T OF T H E
                REST RUC T UR ED GLOBAL ENVIRON MEN T F A C ILIT Y

The United Nations Environment Assembly,

Recalling decision SS.IV/1 of 18 June 1994 on the adoption of the Instrument for the
Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility (hereinafter “the Instrument”),

Recalling also the approval in May 2014 by the Fifth Assembly of the Global Environment Facility
of a number of amendments to the Instrument relating to the Facility being available to oper-
ate as one of the financial mechanisms of the Minamata Convention on Mercury, to replace the
“ozone layer depletion” and “persistent organic pollutants” focal areas with a “chemicals and
waste” focal area, to update the eligibility criteria for accessing Facility funding and to reflect
the change of the name from GEF Evaluation Office to GEF Independent Evaluation Office,

Having taken note of the report of the Executive Director,1

1.	   Adopts the following amendments to the Instrument, pursuant to the decision of the
      Global Environment Facility Assembly in May 2014:

      (a)	 The amendment to paragraph 6 of the Instrument by which the Global Environment
           Facility shall serve as one of the financial mechanisms of the Minamata Convention on
           Mercury;

      (b)	 The amendment to bullets (a), (b), (c) and (d) of paragraph 6 of the Instrument in
           order to clarify, in an orderly fashion, the responsibilities of the Global Environment
           Facility under the conventions that it serves;


1	 UNEP/EA.1/9.




                                                         55
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




      (c)	 The amendment to paragraph 2 of the Instrument inviting the Global Environment
           Facility to revise its focal area structure and strategy to address the chemicals and
           waste agenda and replacing the “ozone layer depletion” and “persistent organic pol-
           lutants” focal areas with the “chemicals and waste” focal area;

      (d)	 The amendment to paragraph 9 of the Instrument, by which the eligibility criteria for
           access to Global Environment Facility funding is updated to accommodate updates
           to eligibility criteria in the World Bank on financing and in the United Nations
           Development Programme on technical assistance;

      (e)	 The amendment to paragraph 11 of the Instrument, by which the Global Environment
           Facility shall have an assembly, a council and a secretariat, including an independent
           evaluation office;

      (f)	 The amendments to paragraph 21 of the Instrument, by which the functions of the
           independent evaluation office are further clarified;

2.	   Requests the Executive Director to consider ways of enhancing the capacity of the
      United Nations Environment Programme, as the principal United Nations body in
      the field of the environment, to strengthen its role as implementing agency of the
      Global Environment Facility;

3.	   Also requests the Executive Director to transmit the present resolution to the
      Chief Executive Officer and Chairperson of the Global Environment Facility.




                                                         56
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




        I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T

                     EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS’ RESOLUTION NO. 94-2

  GL O BAL ENVI RO NMENT F AC ILIT Y T R UST F UND: RES T RU C T U RIN G A N D F IRS T
           REP L ENI SH ME NT OF T H E GLOBAL ENVI RON MEN T F A C ILIT Y

WHEREAS:




                                                                                                         DECISIONS
(A) 	 The Global Environment Facility (GEF or the Facility) was established in the International
      Bank for Reconstruction and Development (World Bank) as a pilot program in order to
      assist in the protection of the global environment and promote thereby environmentally
      sound and sustainable economic development, by Resolution No. 91-5, March 14, 1991, of
      the Executive Directors of the World Bank and related interagency arrangements for coop-
      eration between the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations
      Environment Programme (UNEP), and the World Bank that became effective on October 28,
      1991;

(B) 	 In April 1992, Participants in the GEF agreed that its structure and modalities should be
      modified. Agenda 21 (the action plan of the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment
      and Development), the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
      Convention on Biological Diversity subsequently called for the restructuring of the Facility;

(C) 	 Representatives of 73 States participating in the pilot phase of the GEF or wishing to par-
      ticipate in the restructured Facility have accepted the Instrument for the Establishment of
      the Restructured Global Environment Facility (Instrument) in Attachment A at their meeting
      in Geneva, Switzerland from March 14 to 16, 1994, “in order to take account of these devel-
      opments, to establish the GEF as one of the principal mechanisms for global environment
      funding, to ensure a governance that is transparent and democratic in nature, to promote
      universality in its participation and to provide for full cooperation in its implementation
      among UNDP, UNEP and the World Bank... and to benefit from the evaluation of experience
      with the operation of the Facility since its establishment”;

(D) 	 It is necessary to replenish the resources for these purposes under a restructured Facility
      on the basis of this Instrument, which provides for a new Global Environment Facility Trust
      Fund (GEF Trust Fund);

(E) 	 It is desirable to terminate the existing Global Environment Trust (GET) Fund and to transfer
      any funds, receipts, assets, and liabilities, held in it upon termination to the GEF Trust Fund;




                                                          57
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




(F) 	 It is desirable to make arrangements for cooperation under Article V, Section 2 (b)(v) of the
      Articles of Agreement of the World Bank among UNDP, UNEP and the World Bank, with the
      governing bodies of global environmental conventions and with other international organi-
      zations in order to promote achievement of the purposes of the World Bank and the
      Facility, and the Executive Directors of the World Bank are recommending to the Board of
      Governors to adopt a resolution to make arrangements for such cooperation;

NOW THEREFORE it is hereby resolved that, subject to adoption by the Board of Governors of the
proposed resolution referred to in paragraph (F) above:

1. 	   The World Bank adopts the Instrument and agrees in accordance with its Articles of
       Agreement to accept and fulfill the responsibilities set out for it in the Instrument as
       Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund in accordance with paragraph 8 and Annexes B and C of the
       Instrument and as Implementing Agency in accordance with paragraph 22 and Annex D of
       the Instrument.

2. 	   The GEF Trust Fund is hereby established and will become effective in accordance with
       Annex C, paragraph 6 (a) of the Instrument. The GET, existing under Resolution No. 91-5 of
       the Executive Directors of the Bank, will terminate on the effective date of the GEF Trust
       Fund in accordance with paragraph 32 of the Instrument, provided that, subject to the
       acceptance of this responsibility by the Council, pending termination the reference to “the
       Participants” in paragraph 7 of that Resolution is amended to read: “the Council under
       paragraph 33 of the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global
       Environment Facility.”

3. 	   The World Bank agrees to support the GEF Secretariat administratively in accordance with
       paragraph 21 and the provisions of Annex B of the Instrument.

4. 	   The Executive Directors recommend that the Board of Governors adopt the draft resolution
       attached as Attachment B to this report, under Article V, Section 2 (b) (v) of the Articles of
       Agreement of the World Bank, in order to make arrangements to cooperate with UNDP and
       UNEP pursuant to paragraph 22 and Annex D of the Instrument; with the Conference of
       the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the
       Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity pursuant to paragraphs
       6 and 27 of the Instrument, and paragraph 7 of its Annex B; and with any other international
       organization as appropriate to promote achievement of the purposes of the GEF pursuant
       to paragraph 28 of the Instrument.



                                                                                                (Adopted May 24, 1994)


                                                          58
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




        I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T
                             BOAR D OF GOVE RNORS

                                        RESOLUTION NO. 487

                      P R OT E C T ION OF T H E GLOBAL EN VIRON MEN T

RESOLVED:




                                                                                                                        DECISIONS
1.	   THAT the Report of the Executive Directors, dated May 24, 1994, on “Protection of the
      Global Environment” is noted with approval;

2.	   THAT, acting under Article V, Section 2 (b) (v) of the Articles of Agreement of the Bank, the
      Board of Governors approves cooperation by the Bank with the United Nations
      Development Programme, the United Nations Environment Programme, the Conference of
      the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity, the Executive Committee of the
      Multilateral Fund for the Implementation of the Montreal Protocol on Substances that
      Deplete the Ozone Layer, and with any other international organization as appropriate to
      achieve the purposes of the Global Environment Facility and the Ozone Projects Trust Fund,
      on the basis of arrangements consistent with Resolutions No. 94-2 and No. 94-3 of the
      Executive Directors, dated May 24, 1994, and the Instrument for the Establishment of the
      Restructured Global Environment Facility, the text of which is set out in the Annex to
      Attachment A-I.




                                                                                               (Adopted July 7, 1994)


                                                         59
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




        I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T

                 EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS’ RESOLUTION NO. 2002-0006

        AM END M ENTS T O T H E INST R UME NT F OR T H E ES T A BLIS H MEN T OF
             THE REST R UC T URE D GLOBAL E NV IR ON MEN T F A C ILIT Y

WHEREAS:

(A) 	 Pursuant to the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment
      Facility (the Instrument), approved by Resolution No. 94-2 of the Executive Directors of the
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) dated May 24,
      1994, the World Bank serves as trustee of the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund (GEF
      Trust Fund) (the Trustee);

(B) 	 Pursuant to Paragraph 22 of the Instrument, the World Bank acts as an Implementing
      Agency of the Global Environment Facility (GEF);

(C) 	 Pursuant to Paragraph 34 of the Instrument, amendments to the Instrument are to be
      approved by consensus by the Assembly upon the recommendation of the Council after
      taking into account the views of the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee and shall
      become effective after adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee in accor-
      dance with their respective rules and procedures;

(D) 	 The Council of the GEF recommended certain amendments to the Instrument for the
      approval of the Assembly of the GEF at the Second Assembly of the GEF (Beijing, October
      16-18, 2002), the text of which is set out in the Appendix to the Beijing Declaration of the
      Second GEF Assembly;

(E) 	 Such amendments having been approved by the Second Assembly of the GEF and, in
      accordance with Paragraph 34 of the Instrument, the Second Assembly of the GEF having
      invited the CEO/Chairman of the GEF to submit such amendments to the Implementing
      Agencies and the Trustee for adoption;

(F) 	 The CEO/Chairman having now submitted such amendments to the World Bank in its
      capacity as Implementing Agency of the GEF and in its capacity as Trustee, for adoption;




                                                         60
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED AS FOLLOWS:

1.	   The World Bank in its capacity as Implementing Agency of the GEF and in its capacity as
      Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund adopts the amendments to the Instrument, as approved by
      the Second Assembly of the GEF and as set out in the Appendix to the Beijing Declaration
      of the Second Assembly of the GEF, the text of which amendments is set forth below:

      (a)	 Paragraph 2 of the Instrument is amended by adding two new subparagraphs (e) and




                                                                                                     DECISIONS
           (f), which read:

      	   “(e) Land degradation, primarily desertification and deforestation; and

      	    (f) Persistent organic pollutants.”

      (b) 	 Paragraph 3 of the Instrument is amended to read:
      	     “The agreed incremental costs of activities to achieve global environmental benefits
            concerning chemicals management as they relate to the above focal areas shall be eli-
            gible for funding. The agreed incremental costs of other relevant activities under
            Agenda 21 that may be agreed by the Council shall also be eligible for funding insofar
            as they achieve global environmental benefits by protecting the global environment in
            the focal areas.”

      (c) 	 A new sentence is inserted before the penultimate sentence of Paragraph 6 of the
            Instrument, which new sentence reads:

      	    “The GEF shall also be available to serve as an entity entrusted with the operation of
           the financial mechanism of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic
           Pollutants.”

      (d) 	 The penultimate sentence of Paragraph 6 of the Instrument is amended to read:

      	    “In such respects, the GEF shall function under the guidance of, and be accountable
           to, the Conferences of the Parties which shall decide on policies, program priorities
           and eligibility criteria for the purposes of the conventions.”

      (e) 	 Paragraph 21(f) of the Instrument is amended to read:

      	    “Coordinate with the Secretariats of other relevant international bodies, in particular
           the Secretariats of the conventions referred to in paragraph 6, the Secretariats of the




                                                          61
                         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




      	   Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer and its Multilateral
          Fund and the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Countries
          Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in Africa.”

2.	   Upon adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee of the amendments to the
      Instrument approved by the Second Assembly of the GEF, all references to the Instrument
      in Resolution No. 94-2 shall be deemed to refer to the Instrument as amended in accor-
      dance with this resolution.




                                                                                     (Adopted December 19, 2002)


                                                        62
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




         I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T

                 EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS’ RESOLUTION NO. 2006-0009

       AM END M ENT TO T H E INST R UME NT F OR T H E ES T A BLIS H MEN T OF T H E
                 REST RUC T UR ED GLOBAL ENVIRON MEN T F A C ILIT Y

WHEREAS:




                                                                                                    DECISIONS
(A)	   The Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility (the
       Instrument) was approved by Resolution No. 94-2 of the Executive Directors of the
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) dated May 24, 1994,

(B)	 Pursuant to Paragraph 8 of the Instrument, the World Bank serves as trustee of the Global
     Environment Facility Trust Fund (GEF Trust Fund) (the Trustee);

(C)	   Pursuant to Paragraph 22 of the Instrument, the World Bank acts as an Implementing
       Agency of the Global Environment Facility (GEF);

(D)	 Pursuant to Paragraph 34 of the Instrument, amendments to the Instrument are to be
     approved by consensus by the Assembly upon the recommendation of the Council, after
     taking into account the views of the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee, and shall
     become effective after adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee in accor-
     dance with their respective rules and procedures;

(E)	   Certain amendments to the Instrument were approved at the Second Assembly of the	
       GEF (Beijng, October 16-18, 2002) and became effective on June 19, 2003, after adoption
       by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee.

(F)	   On behalf of the World Bank as Implementing Agency and as the Trustee, such amend-
       ments were adopted by the Resolution No. 2002-0006 of the Executive Directors of the
       World Bank;

(G)	 The Council of the GEF recommended a further amendment to the Instrument for the
     approval of the Assembly of the GEF at the Third Assembly of the GEF (Cape Town, August
     29-30, 2006), the text of which is set out in the Decision of the Assembly on amendment to
     the GEF Instrument (the Assembly Decision);




                                                         63
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




(H)	 Such amendment having been approved by the Third Assembly of the GEF and, in accor-
     dance with Paragraph 34 of the Instrument, the Third Assembly of the GEF having invited
     the CEO/Chairperson of the GEF to submit such amendment to the Implementing Agencies
     and the Trustee for adoption;

(I)	   The CEO/Chairperson having now submitted such amendment to the World Bank in its
       capacity as Implementing Agency of the GEF and in its capacity as Trustee, for adoption;

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED AS FOLLOWS:

1.	    The World Bank in its capacity as Implementing Agency of the GEF and in its capacity	
       as Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund adopts the amendment to the Instrument, as approved by
       the	Third Assembly of the GEF and as set out in the Assembly Decision. The text of such
       amendment is set forth below:

	      Paragraph 17 of the Instrument should be amended to read:

	      “The Council shall meet semi-annually or as frequently as necessary to enable it to dis-
       charge its responsibilities. The Council shall meet at the seat of the Secretariat unless the
       Council decides otherwise. Two-thirds of the Members of the Council shall constitute a
       quorum.”

2.	    Upon adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee of the amendment to the
       Instrument approved by the Third Assembly of the GEF, all references to the Instrument in
       Resolution No. 94-2, as amended by Resolution No. 2002-0006, shall be deemed to refer
       to the Instrument as amended in accordance with this resolution.




                                                                                          (Adopted October 19, 2006)




                                                          64
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




         I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T

                 EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS’ RESOLUTION NO. 2010-0005

       AM END M ENT TO T H E INST R UME NT F OR T H E ES T A BLIS H MEN T OF T H E
                 REST RUC T UR ED GLOBAL ENVIRON MEN T F A C ILIT Y

WHEREAS:




                                                                                                    DECISIONS
(A)	   The Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility (the
       Instrument) was approved by Resolution No. 94-2 of the Executive Directors of the
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) dated May 24, 1994,

(B)	 Pursuant to Paragraph 8 of the Instrument, the World Bank serves as trustee of the Global
     Environment Facility Trust Fund (GEF Trust Fund) (the Trustee);

(C)	   Pursuant to Paragraph 22 of the Instrument, the World Bank acts as an Implementing
       Agency of the Global Environment Facility (GEF);

(D)	 Pursuant to Paragraph 34 of the Instrument, amendments to the Instrument are to be
     approved by consensus by the Assembly upon the recommendation of the Council, after
     taking into account the views of the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee, and shall
     become effective after adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee in accor-
     dance with their respective rules and procedures;

(E)	   Certain amendments to the Instrument were approved at the Second Assembly of the	
       GEF (Beijng, October 16-18, 2002) and became effective on June 19, 2003, after adoption
       by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee.

(F)	   On behalf of the World Bank as Implementing Agency and as the Trustee, such amend-
       ments were adopted by the Resolution No. 2002-0006 of the Executive Directors of the
       World Bank;

(G)	 Certain amendments to the Instrument were approved at the Third Assembly of the GEF
	    (Cape Town, South Africa, August 29-30, 2006) and became effective on September 14,
     2007 after adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee.

(H)	 On behalf of the World Bank as Implementing Agency and the Trustee, such amendments
     were adopted by the Resolution No. 2006-0009 of the Executive Directors of the World
     Bank.


                                                         65
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




(I)	   The Council of the GEF recommended further amendments to the Instrument for the
	      approval of the Assembly of the GEF at the Fourth Assembly of the GEF (Punta del Este,
       Uruguay, May 25-26, 2010), the text of which is set out in the Decision of the Assembly
	      on amendment to the GEF Instrument (the Assembly Decision);

(J)	   Such amendments having been approved by the Fourth Assembly of the GEF and, in
	      accordance with Paragraph 34 of the Instrument, the Fourth Assembly of the GEF having
	      invited the CEO/Chairperson of the GEF to submit such amendments to the Implementing
       Agencies and the Trustee for adoption;

(K)	   The CEO/Chairperson having now submitted such amendments, together with the
       necessary conforming change to paragraph 21(f) of the GEF Instrument, to the World
       Bank in its capacity as Implementing Agency of the GEF and in its capacity as Trustee,
       for adoption;

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED AS FOLLOWS:

1.	    The World Bank in its capacity as Implementing Agency of the GEF and in its capacity
       as Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund adopts the amendments to the Instrument, as approved
       by the Fourth Assembly of the GEF and as set out in the Assembly Decision, together
       with the necessary conforming change to paragraph 21(f) of the GEF Instrument noted by
       the CEO/Chairperson. The text of such amendments is set forth below:

	      (a)	 Paragraph 21 of the Instrument shall be amended to read: “21. The GEF Secretariat
            shall service and report to the Assembly and the Council. The Secretariat, which shall
            be headed by the CEO/Chairperson of the Facility, shall be supported administratively
            by the World Bank and shall operate in a functionally independent and effective man-
            ner. The CEO shall be appointed to serve for four years on a full time basis by the
            Council. The CEO may be reappointed by the Council for one additional four year
            term. The CEO may be removed by the Council only for cause. The staff of the
            Secretariat shall include staff members seconded from the Implementing Agencies as
            well as individuals hired competitively on an as needed basis by one of the
            Implementing Agencies. The CEO shall be responsible for the organization, appoint-
            ment and dismissal of Secretariat staff. The CEO shall be accountable for the perform-
            ance of the Secretariat functions to the Council. The Secretariat shall, on behalf of the
            Council, exercise the following functions:…”

	      (b)	 Paragraph 21(f) of the Instrument shall be amended to read: “coordinate with the
            Secretariats of other international bodies, in particular, the Secretariats of the con-




                                                          66
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




           ventions referred to in paragraph 6 and the Secretariats of the Montreal Protocol on
           Substances that deplete the Ozone Layer and its Multilateral Fund;”
	
	     (c)	 A new sub-paragraph (b) shall be inserted in paragraph 6 of the Instrument and the
           present paragraph 6 shall be re-numbered as 6(a) with the new paragraph 6 (b) read-
           ing as follows: “The GEF shall be available to serve as a financial mechanism of the
           United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Countries Experiencing
           Serious Drought and/or Desertification, particularly in Africa (UNCCD), pursuant to




                                                                                                                         DECISIONS
           Article 20, paragraph 2(b), and Article 21 of the Convention. The Council shall consider
           and approve arrangements to facilitate collaboration between the GEF and the UNCCD
           and among countries with respect to affected countries, particularly Africa”.

2.	   Upon adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee of the amendments to the
      Instrument approved by the Fourth Assembly of the GEF, all references to the Instrument in
      Resolution No. 94-2, as amended by Resolution No. 2002-0006 and Resolution No. 2006-
      2009, shall be deemed to refer to the Instrument as amended in accordance with this reso-
      lution.




                                                                                               (Adopted July 19, 2010)




                                                         67
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




         I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T

                EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS’ RESOLUTION NO. 2014 - 0004

       A MEND M ENTS TO T H E INST RUMENT F OR T HE ES T A BLIS H MEN T OF T H E
                 REST RUC T UR ED GLOBAL ENVIRON MEN T F A C ILIT Y


WHEREAS:

(A) 	 The Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global Environment Facility
      (the Instrument) was approved by Resolution No. 94-2 of the Executive Directors of the
      International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank) dated May 24, 1994,

(B)	 Pursuant to Paragraph 8 of the Instrument, the World Bank serves as trustee of the
     Global Environment Facility Trust Fund (GEF Trust Fund) (the Trustee);

(C) 	 Pursuant to Paragraph 22 of the Instrument, the World Bank acts as an Implementing
      Agency of the Global Environment Facility (GEF);

(D) 	 Pursuant to Paragraph 34 of the Instrument, amendments to the Instrument are to be
      approved by consensus by the Assembly upon the recommendation of the Council after
      taking into account the views of the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee and shall
      become effective after adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee in accor-
      dance with their respective rules and procedures;

(E) 	 Certain amendments to the Instrument were approved at the Second Assembly of the GEF
      (Beijing, October 16-18, 2002) and became effective on June 19, 2003, after adoption by
      the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee.

(F) 	 On behalf of the World Bank as Implementing Agency and as the Trustee, such amendments
      were adopted by the Resolution No. 2002-0006 of the Executive Directors of the World Bank;

(G) 	 Certain amendments to the Instrument were approved at the Third Assembly of the GEF
      (Cape Town, South Africa, August 29-30, 2006) and became effective on September 14,
      2007 after adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee.

(H) 	 On behalf of the World Bank as Implementing Agency and the Trustee, such amendments
      were adopted by the Resolution No. 2006-0009 of the Executive Directors of the World Bank.

(I)	   Certain amendments to the Instrument were approved at the Fourth Assembly of the GEF
       (Punta del Este, Uruguay, May 25-26, 2010) and became effective on February 24, 2011

                                                         68
                             Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                           Global Environment F ac ilit y




        after adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee.

(J) 	   On behalf of the World Bank as Implementing Agency and the Trustee, such amendments
        were adopted by the Resolution No. 2010-0005 of the Executive Directors of the World Bank.

(K) 	 The Council of the GEF recommended further amendments to the Instrument for the
      approval of the Assembly of the GEF at the Fifth Assembly of the GEF (Cancun, Mexico, May
      28-29, 2014), the text of which is set out in the Decision of the Assembly on amendment to




                                                                                                        DECISIONS
      the GEF Instrument (the Assembly Decision);

(L) 	 Such amendments having been approved by the Fifth Assembly of the GEF and, in
      accordance with Paragraph 34 of the Instrument, the Fifth Assembly of the GEF having
      invited the CEO/Chairperson of the GEF to submit such amendments to the Implementing
      Agencies and the Trustee for adoption;

(M) 	 The CEO/Chairperson having now submitted such amendments to the World Bank in its
      capacity as Implementing Agency of the GEF and in its capacity as Trustee, for adoption;

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED AS FOLLOWS:

1. 	    The World Bank in its capacity as Implementing Agency of the GEF and in its capacity as
        Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund adopts the amendments to the Instrument, as approved by
        the Fifth Assembly of the GEF and as set out in the Assembly Decision, the text of which
        amendments is set forth below:

	       To delete current paragraph 6 and replace it with a new paragraph 6 that would read:

	       6. In partial fulfillment of its purposes, the GEF shall:

        (a)	    Operate the financial mechanism for the implementation of the United Nations
                Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), on an interim basis, in accor-
                dance with such cooperative arrangements or agreements as may be made pursu-
                ant to paragraphs 27 and 31 of this Instrument. The GEF shall also be available to
                meet the agreed full costs of activities described in Article 12, paragraph 1, of the
                UNFCCC. The GEF shall be available to continue to serve for the purposes of the
                financial mechanism for the implementation of the UNFCCC if it is requested to do
                so by the Conference of the Parties pursuant to its Article 11, paragraph 4. In such
                respects, the GEF shall function under the guidance of, and be accountable to, the
                Conference of the Parties which shall decide on policies, program priorities and
                eligibility criteria related to the UNFCCC pursuant to its Article 11, paragraph 1;


                                                            69
                        Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                      Global Environment F ac ilit y




    (b) 	   Be, on an interim basis, the institutional structure which carries out the operation
            of the financial mechanism for the implementation of the Convention on Biological
            Diversity (CBD), in accordance with such cooperative arrangements or agreements
            as may be made pursuant to paragraphs 27 and 31 of this Instrument. The GEF
            shall be available to continue to serve for the purposes of the financial mechanism
            for the implementation of the CBD if it is requested to do so by the Conference of
            the Parties pursuant to its Article 21, paragraph 3. In such respects the GEF shall
            function under the guidance of, and be accountable to, the Conference of the
            Parties which shall decide on policies, program priorities and eligibility criteria for
            the purposes of the CBD pursuant to its Article 21, paragraph 1;

    (c)	    Be available to serve as an entity entrusted with the operation of the financial
            mechanism of the Stockholm Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. In
            such respects the GEF shall function under the guidance of, and be accountable
            to, Conference of the Parties which shall decide on policies, strategy, program
            priorities and eligibility criteria for the purposes of this Convention pursuant to its
            Article 13, paragraph 7(a);

    (d)	    Be available to serve as a financial mechanism of the United Nations Convention
            to Combat Desertification in Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/
            or Desertification, particularly in Africa (UNCCD), pursuant to Article 20, para-
            graph 2(b), and Article 21 of the UNCCD. The Council shall consider and approve
            arrangements to facilitate collaboration between the GEF and the UNCCD and
            among countries with respect to affected countries, particularly Africa; and

    (e) 	   Operate as one of the entities comprising the financial mechanism of the Minamata
            Convention on Mercury, pursuant to its Article 13, paragraphs 5, 6 and 8. In such
            respects, the GEF shall operate under the guidance of, and be accountable to the
            Conference of the Parties, which shall provide guidance on overall strategies,
            policies, program priorities and eligibility for access to and utilization of financial
            resources. In addition, the GEF shall receive guidance from the Conference of the
            Parties on an indicative list of categories of activities that could receive support;
            and shall provide resources to meet the agreed incremental costs of global envi-
            ronmental benefits and the agreed full costs of some enabling activities, pursuant
            to Article 13, paragraph 7, of the Minamata Convention on Mercury.

	   To delete sub-paragraphs (e) and (f) of paragraph 2 of the Instrument and replace them
    with a new sub-paragraph (e) that would read:

    (e)	    chemicals and waste.


                                                       70
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




	      To delete sub-paragraph (b) of Paragraph 9 and replace it with a new sub-paragraph (b)
       that would read:

       	       (b) 	 All other GEF grants shall be made available to eligible recipient countries
               and, where appropriate, for other activities promoting the purposes of the Facility
               in accordance with this paragraph and any additional eligibility criteria determined
               by the Council. A country shall be an eligible recipient of GEF grants if it is eligible
               to receive World Bank (IBRD and/or IDA) financing or if it is an eligible recipient of




                                                                                                          DECISIONS
               UNDP technical assistance through its target for resource assignments from the
               core (specifically TRAC-1 and/or TRAC-2). GEF grants for activities within a focal
               area addressed by a convention referred to in paragraph 6 but outside the frame-
               work of the financial mechanism of the convention, shall only be made available to
               eligible recipient countries that are party to the convention concerned.

	      To delete paragraph 11 and replace it with a new paragraph 11 that would read:

       11. 	   The GEF shall have an Assembly, a Council, and a Secretariat including an inde-
               pendent evaluation office. In accordance with paragraph 24, a Scientific and
               Technical Advisory Panel (STAP) shall provide appropriate advice.

	      To expand paragraph 21 to include the GEF’s independent evaluation office in a new
       subparagraph (i) that would read:

       21. 	   (i) there shall be an independent evaluation office headed by a director, appointed
               by and reporting to the Council, whose responsibility it is to carry out independent
               evaluations consistent with decisions of the Council; and

	      The current sub-paragraph (i) of paragraph 21 would become a new subparagraph (j) that
       would read:

       	       (j)	   perform any other functions assigned to the Secretariat by the Council.

2. 	   Upon adoption by the Implementing Agencies and the Trustee of the amendments to the
       Instrument approved by the Fifth Assembly of the GEF, all references to the Instrument in
       Resolution No. 94-2, as previously amended, shall be deemed to refer to the Instrument
       as amended in accordance with this resolution.




                                                           71
Replenishment Resolutions
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




        I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T

                     EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS’ RESOLUTION NO.98-2

                    G L O BAL ENVIRONMENT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D :
                        SEC OND R EPLE NISH ME NT OF RES OU RC ES

WHEREAS:

(A) 	 The participants contributing to the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund (“the GEF Trust
      Fund”) (jointly, “the Contributing Participants,” each “a Contributing Participant”), having
      considered the prospective financial requirements of the GEF Trust Fund, have concluded
      that additional resources should be made available to the GEF Trust Fund for new financing




                                                                                                     REPLENISHMENT
      commitments for the period from July 1, 1998 to June 30, 2002 (the “Second Replenishment”)
      and have agreed to ask their legislatures, where necessary, to authorize and approve the
      allocation of additional resources to the GEF Trust Fund in the amounts set out in
      Attachment 1 and according to the provisions set forth herein, and

(B)	 The Council of the Global Environment Facility (the “Council”), having considered the
     Summary of The Negotiations on the Second Replenishment, including the policy recom-
     mendations made on the basis of the Overall Performance Study of the Global Environment
     Facility’s first replenishment period, has requested the Executive Directors of the World
     Bank to authorize the World Bank as Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund to hold in trust and
     manage the resources made available for the Second Replenishment;

(C) 	 It is desirable to administer any remaining funds from the first replenishment of the GEF
      Trust Fund authorized by the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global
      Environment Facility (the “Instrument”) and established by Resolution No. 94-2 of the
      Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the
      “World Bank”), adopted on May 24, 1994, as part of this Second Replenishment;

(D)	 The World Bank, as provided for in Paragraph 8 and Annex B of the Instrument (adopted
     pursuant to Resolution No. 94-2 of the Executive Directors), is Trustee of the GEF Trust
     Fund and, in that capacity, will hold in trust and manage the resources made available for
     the Second Replenishment.

NOW THEREFORE the Executive Directors of the World Bank hereby note with approval the
replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund in the amounts and on the basis set forth herein and
authorize the World Bank as Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund (the “Trustee”) to manage the
resources made available for the Second Replenishment as follows:


                                                         75
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




Contributions

1. 	   The Trustee is authorized to accept contributions to the GEF Trust Fund for the period from
       July 1, 1998 to June 30, 2002:

       (a) 	 By way of grant from each Contributing Participant in the GEF Trust Fund in the
             amount specified for each Contributing Participant in Attachment 1; and

       (b) 	 Otherwise as provided herein.

Instruments of Commitment

2.	    (a) 	 Contributing Participants to the Second Replenishment shall be expected to deposit
       	     with the Trustee an instrument of commitment substantially in the form set out in
             Attachment 2 (“Instrument of Commitment”).

       (b) 	 When a Contributing Participant agrees to pay a part of its contribution without quali-
             fication and the remainder is subject to enactment by its legislature of the necessary
             appropriation legislation, it shall deposit a qualified instrument of commitment in
             a form acceptable to the Trustee (“Qualified Instrument of Commitment”); such
             Contributing Participant undertakes to exercise its best efforts to obtain legislative
             approval for the full amount of its contribution by the payment dates set out in para-
             graph 3.

3. 	   (a) 	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph 1(a) shall be paid, at the
       	     option of each Contributing Participant, in cash by November 30, 1998, or in cash
             installments or through the deposit of notes or similar obligations in installments.

       (b) 	 Payment in cash under sub-paragraph (a) above shall be made on terms agreed
             between the Contributing Participant and the Trustee that shall be no less favorable
             to the GEF Trust Fund than payment in installments.

       (c) 	 Payments in installments that a Contributing Participant agrees to make without qual-
             ification shall be paid to the Trustee in four equal installments by November 30, 1998,
             November 30, 1999, November 30, 2000 and November 30, 2001, provided that:

           (i) 	 The Trustee and each Contributing Participant may agree to earlier payment;

           (ii) 	 If the Second Replenishment shall not have become effective (as described in
                  paragraph 6 below) by October 31, 1998, payment of the first such installment


                                                          76
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




                may be postponed by the Contributing Participant for not more than 30 days after
                the date on which the Second Replenishment becomes effective;

           (iii) 	 The Trustee may agree to postpone the payment of any installment, or part there-
                   of, if the amount paid, together with any unused balance of previous payments by
                   the Contributing Participant, shall be at least equal to the amount estimated by
                   the Trustee to be required from the Contributing Participant, up to the date of the
                   next installment, for meeting commitments under the GEF Trust Fund; and

           (iv) 	 If any Contributing Participant shall deposit an Instrument of Commitment with
                  the Trustee after the date on which the first installment of the contribution is due,
                  payment of any installment, or part thereof, shall be made to the Trustee within
                  30 days after the date of such deposit.




                                                                                                          REPLENISHMENT
       (d) 	 If a Contributing Participant has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment and
             thereafter notifies the Trustee that an installment, or part thereof, is unqualified after
             the date when it was due, then payment of such installment, or part thereof, shall be
             made within 30 days of such notification.

Mode of Payment in Installments

4. 	   (a) 	 Payments shall be made, at the option of each Contributing Participant, in cash on
       	     terms agreed between the Contributing Participant and the Trustee that shall be no
             less favorable to the GEF Trust Fund than payment in installments through the deposit
             of notes or similar obligations issued by the government of the Contributing
             Participant or the depository designated by the Contributing Participant, which shall
             be non-negotiable, non-interest bearing, and payable at their par value on demand to
             the account of the Trustee.

       (b) 	 The Trustee shall encash the notes or similar obligations on an approximately pro rata
             basis among donors, at reasonable intervals as needed for disbursement and trans-
             fers referred to in paragraph 8, as determined by the Trustee. At the request of a
             Contributing Participant that is also an eligible recipient under the GEF Trust Fund, the
             Trustee may permit postponement of encashment for up to two years in light of
             exceptionally difficult budgetary circumstances of the Contributing Participant.

       (c) 	 In respect of each contribution under paragraph 1(b), payment shall be made in accor-
             dance with the terms on which such contributions are accepted by the Trustee.




                                                           77
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




Currency of Denomination and Payment

5. 	   (a) 	 Contributing Participants shall denominate their contributions in Special Drawing
       	     Rights (“SDRs”) or in a currency that is freely convertible as determined by the
             Trustee, except that if a Contributing Participant’s economy experienced a rate of
             inflation in excess of 10 percent per annum on average in the period 1994 to 1996 as
             determined by the Trustee as of the date this Resolution is adopted, its contribution
             shall be denominated in SDRs.

       (b) 	 Contributing Participants shall make payments in SDRs, a currency used for the valua-
             tion of the SDR, or, with the agreement of the Trustee, in another freely convertible
             currency. The Trustee may, in its discretion, freely exchange contributions received for
             any such currencies.

       (c) 	 Each Contributing Participant shall maintain, with respect to its currency paid to the
             Trustee and the currency of such Contributing Participant derived therefrom, the same
             convertibility as existed on the date on which this Resolution is adopted.

Effective Date

6. 	   (a) 	 The Second Replenishment shall become effective and the resources to be contributed
       	     pursuant thereto shall become payable to the Trustee on the date when Contributing
             Participants whose contributions aggregate not less than SDR 1,160 million shall have
             deposited with the Trustee Instruments of Commitment or Qualified Instruments of
             Commitment (the “Effective Date”), provided that this date shall not be later than
             October 31, 1998, or such later date as the Trustee may determine.

       (b) 	 If the Trustee determines that the Effective Date is likely to be unduly delayed, it shall
             promptly convene a meeting of the Contributing Participants to review the situation
             and to consider the steps to be taken to prevent any interruption of GEF financing.

Advance Contributions

7. 	   (a) 	 In order to avoid an interruption in the GEF’s ability to make financing commitments
       	     pending the effectiveness of the Second Replenishment, and if the Trustee will have
             received Instruments of Commitment from Contributing Participants whose contributions
             aggregate not less than SDR 290 million, the Trustee may deem, prior to the Effective
             Date, one quarter of the total amount of each contribution for which an Instrument of
             Commitment has been deposited with the Trustee as an advance contribution, unless
             the Contributing Participant specifies otherwise in its Instrument of Commitment.


                                                           78
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




      (b) 	 The Trustee shall specify when advance contributions pursuant to paragraph (a) above
            are to be paid to the Trustee.

      (c)	 The terms and conditions applicable to contributions under this Resolution shall
           apply also to advance contributions until the Effective Date, when such contributions
           shall be deemed to constitute payment towards the amount due from each
           Contributing Participant for its contribution.

Commitment or Transfer Authority

8.	   (a) 	 Contributions shall become available for commitment by the Trustee, for disbursement
      	     or transfer as needed pursuant to the work programs approved by the Council under
            paragraph 20(c) of the Instrument and the administrative budget of the GEF approved




                                                                                                         REPLENISHMENT
            by the Council under paragraph 20(j) upon receipt of payment by the Trustee of the
            contributions set out in sub-paragraphs I(a) and (b) except as provided in sub-paragraph
            (c) below.

      (b) 	 The Trustee shall promptly inform all Contributing Participants if a Contributing
            Participant that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment and whose con-
            tribution represents more than 20 percent of the total amount of the resources to be
            contributed pursuant to the Second Replenishment has not unqualified at least 50
            percent of the total amount of its contribution by November 30, 1999, or 30 days after
            the effective date, whichever is later, and at least 75 percent of the total amount of its
            contribution by November 30, 2000, or 30 days after the Effective Date, whichever is
            later, and the total amount thereof by November 30, 2001, or 30 days after the
            Effective Date, whichever is later.

      (c) 	 Within 30 days of the dispatch of notice by the Trustee under paragraph (b) above, each
            other Contributing Participant may notify the Trustee in writing that the commitment by
            the Trustee, of the second, third or fourth tranche, whichever is applicable, of such
            Contributing Participant’s contribution shall be deferred while, and to the extent that,
            any part of the contribution referred to in sub-paragraph (b) remains qualified; during
            such period, the Trustee shall make no commitments in respect of the resources to
            which the notice pertains unless the right of the Contributing Participant is waived
            pursuant to paragraph (d) below.

      (d) 	 The right of a Contributing Participant under sub-paragraph (c) above may be waived
            in writing, and it shall be deemed waived if the Trustee receives no written notice pur-
            suant to such sub-paragraph within the period specified therein.




                                                          79
                    Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                  Global Environment F ac ilit y




(e) 	 The Trustee shall consult with the Contributing Participants where, in its judgment: (i)
      there is a substantial likelihood that the total amount of the contributions referred to
      in sub-paragraph (b) above shall not be committed to the Trustee without qualifica-
      tion by June 30, 2002, or (ii) as a result of Contributing Participants exercising their
      rights under sub-paragraph (c), the Trustee is or may shortly be precluded from enter-
      ing into new commitments for disbursement or transfer.

(f) 	 Commitment and transfer authority shall be increased by:

    (i) 	 The income or investment of resources held in the GEF Trust Fund pending dis-
          bursement or transfer by the Trustee;

    (ii) 	 The amount of undisbursed commitments that have been cancelled; and

    (iii) 	 Payments received by the Trustee as repayment, interest or charges on loans
            made by the GEF Trust Fund.

(g) 	 Commitment and transfer authority shall be reduced for the reimbursement of admin-
      istrative costs charged against the resources of the GEF Trust Fund, as determined by
      the Trustee on the basis of the work program and budget approved by the Council.

(h)	 The Trustee may enter into agreements to provide financing from the GEF Trust Fund,
     conditional on such financing becoming effective and binding on the GEF Trust Fund
     when resources become available for commitment by the Trustee.




                                                                                         (Adopted July 14, 1998)


                                                   80
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                              ATTACHMENT 1

     CO NTRI B UTI O NS T O T H E GLOBAL ENVIRONMEN T F A C ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                        SE C OND RE PLENISH MENT (“ G EF - 2”)

                                               (IN MILLIONS)

	                  	            	        Adjustment	    Additional	   	       	
Contributing	 GEF-1 Basic	 GEF-2 Basic	 Towards Full	 Supplementary	 	 GEF-2 Total	      GEF-2 Actual
Participants	   Share a	 Contributions	 Funding b	 Contributions	 C   	 ontributions	       Shares
	                  	          SDR	          SDR	           SDR	     SDR	           LC c	  Based on
Non-Recipients	   (1)	         (2)	          (3)	           (4)	     (5)	          (6)	    (2) + (3)

Australia	        1.46%	       21.95	    1.52		           23.47	         43.27	                  1.56%
Austria	          0.90%	       13.53	    0.94 0	 0.23 0	 14.70	         231.14	                  0.96%




                                                                                                         REPLENISHMENT
Belgium	          1.55%	       23.30	    1.62		           24.92	     1,248.29	                   1.66%
Canada	           4.00%	       60.13	    4.17		           64.30	        122.09	                  4.28%
Denmark	          1.30%	       19.54 	   1.36		           20.90	        193.16	                  1.39%
Finland	          1.00%	       15.03	    1.04		           16.07	        116.70	                  1.07%
France e	         7.02%	      105.54	    o.00 f		        105.54	       862.60	                   7.02%
Germany e	       11.00%	      160.32 d	  o.00 f		        160.32	       389.20	                  10.66%
Greece i	         0.05%	        0.75	    0.05	   3.20	     4.00	      1,531.70	                  0.05%
Ireland i	        0.11%	        1.65	    0.12	   2.23	     4.00	          3.69	                  0.12%
Italy e	          5.30%	       65.97 d 			                65.97 n	 143,000.00	                   4.39%
Japan	           18.70%	      281.13	   19.54		          300.67	    48,754.33	                  20.00%
Korea i	          0.23%	        3.46	    0.24	   0.30	     4.00	     4,933.67	                   0.25%
Luxembourg i	     0.05%	        0.75	    0.05	   3.20	     4.00	       200.37	                   0.05%
Netherlands	      3.30%	       49.61	    3.44	   0.00 g	 53.05	         144.94	                  3.53%
New Zealand i	    0.12%	        1.80	    0.13 	  2.07	     4.00	          8.31	                  0.13%
Norway	           1.42%	       21.35	    1.48		           22.83	       228.32	                   1.52%
Portugal i	       0.12%	        1.80	    0.13	   2.07	     4.00	       982.76	                   0.13%
Spain e	          0.80%	       12.03			                   12.03	     2,463.66	                   0.80%
Sweden	           2.62%	       39.39	    2.73		           42.12	       448.07	                   2.80%
Switzerland	      1.74%	       26.16	    1.81	   4.00	    31.97	         64.38	                  1.86%
United Kingdom	 6.15%	         92.46	    6.40	   2.37 h	 101.23	         85.25	                  6.58%
United States e	 20.86%	      313.35 d	    		            313.35	       430.00	                  20.84%




                                                          81
                                 Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                               Global Environment F ac ilit y




	               	 GEF-2 Basic Recipient	 	 Additional Recipient	                                      	
	               	    Contributions	      	    Contributions	 	                                        	
Recipients i	   	        SDRm	           	        SDRm	
	               	           	            	           	         	
Argentina m		              4.00			                           4.00	                                          5.49	
Brazil		                   4.00			                           4.00	                                          *	
China j m		                4.00		                  2.00	     6.00	                                          *	
Côte d’Ivoire		            4.00			                           4.00	                                          *	
Czech Republic		           4.00 			                          4.00	                                        180.71	
Egypt m		                  4.00			                           4.00	                                          *	
India j m		                4.00		                  2.56	     6.56	                                        323.83	
Nigeria m		                4.00			                           4.00	                                          *	
Mexico m		                 4.00			                           4.00	                                          *	
Pakistan m		               4.00			                           4.00	                                          *	
Russia m		                 4.00 			                          4.00	                                          *	
Slovenia k		               1.00			                           1.00	                                          *	
Turkey		                   4.00			                           4.00	                                          *	
			 Total Contributions SDR	                                                         1,450.99
			 Total Contributions(US$)	                                                        1,991.14
			         Carry-over (US$)	                                                          687.00
			          Sub-total (US$)	                                                        2,678.14
			                                                 Unallocated (US$)	                 71.85 l
			                                                       Total (US$)	               2,750.00
	                      	                 	                     Total SDR	            2,003.98

a	 The percentage amounts contributed to the first replenishment of the Global Environment Facility Trust (“GEF-1”).
b	 The amounts shown in this column would make it possible to come closer to the full funding level.
c	 Based on average exchange rates for the period May 1 – October 31, 1997.
d	 Current pledges for these Participants are below their GEF-1 basic shares; GEF-2 basic contributions reflect a share of
   10.66% for Germany, 4.39% for Italy, and 20.84% for the United States.
e	 Additional efforts will be needed by those Participants who have not contributed the share required to meet the full
   funding of the Replenishment at this time. Such Participants have indicated their intention to make their best efforts to
   increase their contributions during the period of the second replenishment. Potential new Participants are also urged
   to make their best efforts to contribute towards filling the gap.
f	 Germany is prepared to increase its share by an amount equivalent to SDR 11.56 million subject to Parliamentary
   approval, as well as to clearance of all GEF-1 arrears by the major Participants and adequate participation of the major
   Participants towards closing the funding gap. France is prepared to increase its contribution by an amount equivalent
   to SDR 4.16 million on the same conditions.
g	 As soon as the conditions in footnote f have been met, The Netherlands is prepared to give an additional, supplementary
   contribution of SDR 1 million.
h	 The supplement will be increased by GBP 4.25 million (SDR 5.05 million) once the conditions in footnote e have been met.
i	 These Participants have agreed to adjust their contributions upward to the minimum contribution level of SDR 4 million.
j	 China and India have agreed to contribute more than the minimum contribution level of SDR 4 million.
k	 Solvenia did not participate in the replenishment discussions, but did, however, pledge SDR 1 million.
l	 Equivalent to SDR 52.36 million (2.61% of the total replenishment).
m	 Confirmation of these pledges is expected shortly.
n	 This amount is the SDR equivalent of ITL 143,000 million resulting from encashing the GEF-2 contribution on a five-
   year, rather than 10-year schedule.
o	 The Adjustment to Full Funding and Additional Supplementary Contribution are the result of encashing ATS 231.14
   million on a five-year, rather than 10-year schedule.
*	 Participants with average inflation rates exceeding 10% for the three-year period covering 1994 through 1996 will
                                                               82
   denominate their contributions in SDRs.
(NOTE: For updated information on contributions, see table on page 141.)
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                             ATTACHMENT 2

                    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                              SEC OND R EPLE NISH M EN T

                               INSTRUMENT OF COMMITMENT

Reference is made to Resolution No. 98-2 of the Executive Directors of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development (“the World Bank”) entitled “Global Environment Facility Trust
Fund: Second Replenishment of Resources,” which was adopted on July 14, 1998 (the
“Resolution”).

The Government of ________________hereby notifies the World Bank as Trustee of the Global




                                                                                                    REPLENISHMENT
Environment Facility Trust Fund, pursuant to paragraph 2 of the Resolution, that it will make the
contribution authorized for it in Attachment I of the Resolution, in accordance with the terms of
the Resolution, in the amount of_________________.



________________              __________________________________________
(Date) 			                      (Name and Office)




                                                         83
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




        I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T

                 EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS’ RESOLUTION NO. 2002-0005

                    G L O BAL ENVIRONMENT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D :
                         TH IR D R EPLE NISH ME NT OF R ES OU RC ES

WHEREAS:

(A) 	 The participants contributing to the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund (“the GEF Trust
      Fund”) (jointly, “the Contributing Participants,” each “a Contributing Participant”), having
      considered the prospective financial requirements of the GEF Trust Fund, have concluded
      that additional resources should be made available to the GEF Trust Fund for new financing
      commitments for the period from July 1, 2002 to June 30, 2006 (the “Third Replenishment”)
      and have agreed to ask their legislatures, where necessary, to authorize and approve the
      allocation of additional resources to the GEF Trust Fund in the amounts set out in
      Attachment 1 and according to the provisions set forth herein;

(B) 	 The Council of the Global Environment Facility (the “GEF” or “Facility”) (the “Council”) having
      considered the Summary of the Negotiations on the Third Replenishment, including the
      policy recommendations made on the basis of the Second Overall Performance Study of
      the GEF, other reports emanating from the GEF monitoring and evaluation program during
      the prior replenishment period, and the views and proposals of the Participants, has
      requested the Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
      Development (the “World Bank”) to authorize the World Bank as Trustee of the GEF Trust
      Fund to hold in trust and manage the resources made available for the Third
      Replenishment;

(C) 	 It is desirable to administer any remaining funds from the second replenishment of the
      GEF Trust Fund authorized by the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured
      Global Environment Facility (the “Instrument”) and approved by Resolution No. 98-2 of the
      World Bank, adopted on July 14, 1998 (the “Second Replenishment”), as part of this Third
      Replenishment;

(D) 	 The World Bank, as provided for in Paragraph 8 and Annex B of the Instrument (adopted on
      May 24, 1994, pursuant to Resolution No. 94-2 of the Executive Directors of the World
      Bank), is Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund and, in that capacity, will hold in trust and manage
      the resources made available for the Third Replenishment.




                                                          84
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




NOW THEREFORE the Executive Directors of the World Bank hereby note with approval the
replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund in the amounts and on the basis set forth herein and
authorize the World Bank as Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund (the “Trustee”) to manage the
resources made available for the Third Replenishment as follows:

Contributions

1. 	   The Trustee is authorized to accept contributions to the GEF Trust Fund; (a) by way of grant
       from each Contributing Participant in the GEF Trust Fund in the amount specified for each
       Contributing Participant in Attachment 1 ; and (b) otherwise as provided herein.

Instruments of Commitment




                                                                                                       REPLENISHMENT
2. 	   (a)	 Contributing Participants to the Third Replenishment shall deposit with the Trustee an
       	    instrument of commitment substantially in the form set out in Attachment 2
            (“Instrument of Commitment”), subject to sub-paragraph 2(b).

       (b) 	 When a Contributing Participant agrees to pay a part of its contribution without quali-
             fication and the remainder is subject to enactment by its legislature of the necessary
             appropriation legislation, it shall deposit a qualified instrument of commitment in a
             form acceptable to the Trustee (“Qualified Instrument of Commitment”); such
             Contributing Participant undertakes to exercise its best efforts to obtain legislative
             approval for the installment amounts of its contribution by the payment dates set out
             in sub-paragraph 3(a) below.

       (c) 	 At every Council meeting, the Trustee will inform the Council of the status of
             Instruments of Commitment and Qualified Instruments of Commitment deposited with
             the Trustee.

Payments

3. 	   (a) 	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph l(a) that a Contributing
       	     Participant agrees to pay without qualification shall be paid to the Trustee in four
             equal installments by November 30, 2002, November 30, 2003, November 30, 2004 and
             November 30, 2005, except as indicated in footnote f to Attachment 1, provided that:

           (i) 	 The Trustee and a Contributing Participant may agree to earlier payment;

           (ii) 	 If the Third Replenishment shall not have become effective (as described in sub-
                  paragraph 6(a) below) by October 31, 2002, payment of any installment which


                                                          85
                     Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                   Global Environment F ac ilit y




         would otherwise have been due prior to the Effective Date (as defined in sub-
         paragraph 6(a) below) shall become due thirty (30) days after the Effective Date;

    (iii) 	 Upon the written request of a Contributing Participant, the Trustee may agree to
            allow such Contributing Participant to postpone the payment of any installment,
            or part thereof, up to, but not beyond, June 30 of the calendar year following the
            year in which such installment is due. Payments made pursuant to any such
            agreement with the Trustee shall constitute timely payments; and

    (iv) 	 If any Contributing Participant shall deposit an Instrument of Commitment with
           the Trustee after the date on which any installment of the contribution is due,
           payment of any such installment(s) shall be made to the Trustee within thirty (30)
           days after the date of deposit of such Instrument.

(b) 	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph l(a) that a Contributing
      Participant agrees to make pursuant to a Qualified Instrument of Commitment shall
      be paid to the Trustee as follows:

    (i) 	 If any Contributing Participant deposits a Qualified Instrument of Commitment
          with the Trustee after the date on which any installment of the contribution would
          have been due under sub-paragraph 3(a) if the Contributing Participant had
          deposited an unqualified Instrument of Commitment, payment of any such install-
          ment(s), or part thereof, shall be made to the Trustee within thirty (30) days after
          the date of deposit of such Instrument to the extent that such Instrument has
          been unqualified.

    (ii) 	 If any Contributing Participant that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of
           Commitment, thereafter notifies the Trustee that an installment, or part thereof, is
           unqualified after the date when such installment would have been due under sub-
           paragraph 3(a) if the Contributing Participant had deposited an unqualified
           Instrument of Commitment, payment of such installment, or part thereof, shall be
           made within thirty (30) days of such notification.

(c) 	 Payments under sub-paragraph l(a) shall be made, at the option of each Contributing
      Participant, i) in cash or ii) through the deposit of notes or similar obligations (such
      as letters of credit) issued by the government of the Contributing Participant or the
      depository designated by the Contributing Participant, which shall be non-negotiable,
      non-interest bearing, and payable at their par value on demand to the account of the
      Trustee on the following terms:




                                                    86
                     Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                   Global Environment F ac ilit y




    (i) 	 Subject to sub-paragraph 3(a)(iii), payment in cash may be made on terms agreed
          between the Contributing Participant and the Trustee that shall be no less favorable
          to the GEF Trust Fund than payment made through the deposit of notes or similar
          obligations pursuant to sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii).

    (ii) 	 The Trustee shall encash notes or similar obligations on an approximately pro rata
           basis among Contributing Participants, at reasonable intervals as needed for dis-
           bursement and transfers referred to in paragraph 8, as determined by the Trustee.
           An indicative encashment schedule is set out in Attachment 3. At the written
           request of a Contributing Participant experiencing exceptionally difficult budgetary
           circumstances, the Trustee may permit postponement of encashment for i) up to
           two years in respect of a Contributing Participant that is also an eligible recipient
           under the GEF Trust Fund, and ii) up to forty-five (45) days in respect of all other




                                                                                                   REPLENISHMENT
           Contributing Participants.

    (iii) 	 At the request of a Contributing Participant, the Trustee may agree to encash
            notes or similar obligations on a basis other than a pro rata basis; provided that,
            subject to sub-paragraph 3(c)(iv), the schedule of encashment agreed for such
            notes or obligations shall be no less favorable to the GEF Trust Fund than the
            schedule that would apply according to the pro rata basis provided for under sub-
            paragraph 3(c)(ii).

    (iv) 	 If the sum total of a Contributing Participant’s notes or similar obligations
           deposited with the Trustee is insufficient to meet the indicative encashment
           schedule referred to in sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii) (as such schedule may be amended
           from time to time), such Contributing Participant shall exercise its best efforts,
           subject to its domestic budgetary and legislative practices and requirements and
           any conditions indicated in footnote f to Attachment 1, to meet a schedule of
           encashment for the notes or similar obligations it thereafter deposits with the
           Trustee that would be no less favorable to the GEF Trust Fund than the schedule
           that would otherwise have applied according to the pro rata basis provided for
           under sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii).

(d) 	 Sub-paragraph 3(c) does not apply to, or affect, the schedule for the payment of
      installments set out in sub-paragraph 3(a) or, in the case of a Contributing Participant
      that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment, the obligations undertaken
      pursuant to sub-paragraph 2(b). Further, nothing in sub-paragraph 3(c) authorizes the
      Trustee to increase a Contributing Participant’s contribution or to impose financial
      penalties for any reason.




                                                    87
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




       (e) 	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph l(b) shall be paid in accor-
             dance with the terms on which such contributions are accepted by the Trustee.

       (f) 	 The Trustee shall make regular reports to the Council on the status of Contributing
             Participants’ contributions.

Timely Availability of Resources

4. 	   (a) 	 If (i) a Contributing Participant does not make payment in accordance with sub-
       	     paragraph 3(a) or 3(b); or (ii) a Contributing Participant that has deposited a Qualified
             Instrument of Commitment, is unable, despite its best efforts undertaken in accor-
             dance with sub-paragraph 2(b), to obtain legislative approval to unqualify a sufficient
             amount of its contribution to meet the payment dates set out in sub-paragraph 3(a),
             and such delay continues for thirty (30) days, the Trustee shall notify the Contributing
             Participant of the delay. In doing so, the Trustee shall request the Contributing
             Participant to make payment promptly, or, as appropriate, to exercise its best efforts
             to obtain legislative approval to unqualify sufficient funds to make payment promptly.
             The Trustee shall also remind the Contributing Participant of the obligations it will
             incur under the further requirements of this sub-paragraph if the delay persists. If
             payment has not been made thirty (30) days before the date of the Council meeting
             following the date on which the delay was incurred, the responsible Minister of the
             Contributing Participant concerned shall provide the Chief Executive Officer/
             Chairperson of the Facility (the “CEO”) with a written communication stating the rea-
             sons for the delay and the measures being taken to address it. The CEO shall forward
             any such communication to the Council, with a copy to the Trustee.

       (b) 	 As provided in sub-paragraph 25(c) of the Instrument, for the purpose of determining
             voting power in the event of a formal vote by the Council, a Contributing Participant’s
             total contributions shall consist of the actual cumulative contributions made by a
             Contributing Participant to the GEF Trust Fund, including actual contributions made to
             the Third Replenishment, contributions made to the GET, and the grant equivalent of
             co-financing and parallel financing made under the GEF pilot program, or agreed with
             the Trustee before the effective date of the GEF Trust Fund.

Currency of Denomination and Payment

5. 	   (a) 	 Contributing Participants shall denominate their contributions in Special Drawing
       	     Rights (“SDR”), or in a currency that is freely convertible, as determined by the
             Trustee, except that if a Contributing Participant’s economy experienced a rate of
             inflation in excess of 10 percent per annum on average in the period 1998 to 2000 as


                                                           88
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




            determined by the Trustee as of the date this Resolution is adopted, its contribution
            shall be denominated in SDR.

       (b) 	 Contributing Participants shall make payments in SDR, a currency used for the valuation
             of the SDR, or with the agreement of the Trustee, in another freely convertible currency.
             The Trustee may, in its discretion, freely exchange contributions received for any such
             currencies.

       (c) 	 Each Contributing Participant shall maintain, with respect to its currency paid to the
             Trustee and the currency of such Contributing Participant derived therefrom, the same
             convertibility as existed on the date on which this Resolution is adopted.

Effective Date




                                                                                                         REPLENISHMENT
6. 	   (a) 	 The Third Replenishment shall become effective on the date when Contributing
       	     Participants whose contributions aggregate not less than SDR 1,086 million shall
             have deposited with the Trustee Instruments of Commitment or Qualified Instruments
             of Commitment (the “Effective Date”).

       (b) 	 The Trustee shall promptly notify all Contributing Participants when the Third
             Replenishment becomes effective.

       (c) 	 If the Third Replenishment does not become effective by March 31, 2003, the Trustee
             shall so inform the Contributing Participants and consult with them on possible steps
             to be taken to prevent any interruption of GEF financing. The Trustee, in collaboration
             with the CEO, will inform the Council of the results of such consultations, and seek
             the Council’s guidance on the steps to be taken, including as may be necessary, the
             convening of a meeting of the Contributing Participants.

Advance Contributions

7. 	   (a)	 In order to avoid an interruption in the GEF’s ability to make financing
       	    commitments pending the effectiveness of the Third Replenishment, and if the
            Trustee shall have received Instruments of Commitment or Qualified Instruments of
            Commitment from Contributing Participants whose contributions aggregate not less
            than SDR 362 million, the Trustee may deem, prior to the Effective Date, one quarter
            of the total amount of each contribution for which an Instrument of Commitment or
            Qualified Instrument of Commitment has been deposited with the Trustee as an
            advance contribution, unless the Contributing Participant specifies otherwise in its
            Instrument of Commitment or Qualified Instrument of Commitment.


                                                           89
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




       (b) 	 The Trustee shall specify when advance contributions pursuant to sub-paragraph 7(a)
             above are to be paid to the Trustee.

       (c)	 The terms and conditions applicable to contributions to the Third Replenishment shall
            apply also to advance contributions until the Effective Date, when such contributions
            shall be deemed to constitute payment towards the amount due from each
            Contributing Participant for its contribution.

Commitment or Transfer Authority

8. 	   (a) 	 Contributions shall become available for commitment by the Trustee, for
       	     disbursement or transfer as needed to cover the work program, the administrative
             budget of the GEF, and any other expenses approved by the Council under the
             Instrument, upon receipt of payment by the Trustee of the contributions set out in
             sub-paragraphs l(a) and (b) except as provided in sub-paragraph 8(c) below.

       (b) 	 The Trustee shall promptly inform all Contributing Participants if a Contributing
             Participant that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment and whose
             contribution represents more than twenty (20) percent of the total amount of the
             resources to be contributed pursuant to the Third Replenishment has not unqualified
             at least forty-three (43) percent of the total amount of its contribution by November
             30, 2003, or thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, whichever is later, and at least
             sixty-four and a half (64.5) percent of the total amount of its contribution by November
             30, 2004, or thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, whichever is later, and the total
             amount thereof by November 30, 2005, or thirty (30) days after the Effective Date,
             whichever is later. Further, the Trustee shall promptly inform all Contributing Participants
             if the conditions indicated in footnote f to Attachment 1 have not been met by
             November 30, 2005, or thirty (30) days after the Effective Date, whichever is later.

       (c) 	 Within forty-five (45) days of the dispatch of notice by the Trustee under sub-para-
             graph 8(b) above, each Contributing Participant receiving such notice may notify the
             Trustee in writing that the commitment by the Trustee, of the second, third or fourth
             installment, whichever is applicable, of such Contributing Participant’s contribution
             shall be deferred while, and to the extent that, any part of the contribution referred to
             in sub-paragraph 8(b) remains qualified or subject to the conditions indicated in foot-
             note f to Attachment 1; during such period, the Trustee shall make no commitments
             in respect of the resources to which the notice pertains unless the right of the
             Contributing Participant is waived pursuant to sub-paragraph 8(d) below.




                                                           90
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




       (d) 	 The right of a Contributing Participant under sub-paragraph 8(c) above may be waived
             in writing, and it shall be deemed waived if the Trustee does not receive, within the
             period specified in sub-paragraph 8(c), a written notice informing the Trustee pursuant
             to such sub-paragraph that the Contributing Participant has decided to defer a portion
             of its contribution.

       (e) 	 The Trustee, in collaboration with the CEO, shall consult with the Contributing
             Participants and seek the Council’s advice on possible steps to be taken where, in its
             judgment: (i) there is a substantial likelihood that the total amount of the contributions
             referred to in sub-paragraph 8(b) above shall not be committed to the Trustee without
             qualification by June 30, 2006, or (ii) as a result of Contributing Participants exercising
             their rights under sub-paragraph 8(c), the Trustee is, or may shortly be, precluded
             from entering into new commitments for disbursement or transfer.




                                                                                                                      REPLENISHMENT
       (f) 	 Commitment and transfer authority shall be increased by:

            (i) 	   The income earned on the investment of resources held in the GEF Trust Fund
                    pending disbursement or transfer by the Trustee; and

            (ii) 	 Payments received by the Trustee as repayment, interest or charges on loans
                   made by the GEF Trust Fund.

       (g) 	 The Trustee may enter into agreements to provide financing from the GEF Trust Fund,
             conditional on the commitment of such financing becoming effective and binding on
             the GEF Trust Fund when resources become available for commitment by the Trustee.

Administration of the Second Replenishment Fund

9. 	   As of the Effective Date, any funds, receipts, assets and liabilities held by the Trustee
       under the Second Replenishment will be administered under the Third Replenishment.




                                                                                        (Adopted December 19, 2002)


                                                           91
                        Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                      Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                           ATTACHMENT 1

                   G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                      TH IRD RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES

                             CONTRIBUTIONS (IN MILLIONS)

	                         Calculated	           	     Supplemental
	                    Basic Contributions	       	     Contributions	              GEF-3 Total Contributions
Contributing	           	           	           	        	        	                 	          	      National
Participants	         (%)	        SDR	          	      SDR	       	                %	       SDR	      Currency	     g

Australia	            1.46%	      27.60				                                     1.46%	        27.60 	     68.16
Austria	              0.90%	      17.01		    0.69	   a	                         0.94%	        17.70	      24.38
Belgium	              1.55%	      29.30		    3.67	   a	                         1.74%	        32.97	      41.98
Canada	               4.28%	      80.91				                                     4.28%	        80.91	    158.94
China	                –	           4.00	 b	  4.44	 a d	                         0.45%	         8.44	      78.71
Côte d’Ivoire	        –	           4.00	 b			                                   0.21%	         4.00	 3,758.86
Czech Republic 	      –	           4.00	 b	  0.50	   a	                         0.24%	         4.50	    194.36
Denmark	              1.30%	      24.58 		   3.37		                             1.48%	        27.95	    298.18	    a
Finland	              1.00%	      18.91		    2.03		                             1.11%	        20.94	      30.00	   a
France	               6.81%	     128.84	 a			                                   6.81%	       128.84	    164.00
Germany	             11.00%	     207.96				                                    11.00%	       207.96	    297.92
Greece	               0.05%	       0.95		    3.55	 a c	                         0.24%	         4.50	       5.73
India	                –	           4.00	 b	  3.99	 a d	                         0.42%	         7.99	    426.39
Ireland	              0.11%	       2.08		    2.42	 a c	                         0.24%	         4.50	       5.73
Italy	                4.39%	      82.99 			          h	                         4.39%	        82.99	    118.90
Japan	               17.63%	     333.41	 a			                                  17.63%	       333.41	 48,754.33
Korea	                0.23%	       4.35				                                     0.23%	         4.35	 7,142.95	     a
Luxembourg	           0.05%	       0.95		    3.05	   c	                         0.21%	         4.00	       5.73
Mexico	               –	           4.00	 b			                                   0.21%	         4.00	       4.00	   a
Netherlands	          3.30%	      62.39				                                     3.30%	        62.39	      89.38	   k
New Zealand	          0.12%	       2.27		    1.73 	  c	                         0.21%	         4.00	      12.13
Nigeria 	             –	           4.00	 b	  0.50	   a	                         0.24%	         4.50	       4.00
Norway	               1.06%	      19.96				                                     1.06%	        19.96	    228.32
Pakistan	             –	           4.00	 b			                                   0.21%	         4.00	    320.63
Portugal	             0.12%	       2.27		    1.73	   c	                         0.21%	         4.00	       5.73
Slovenia	             –	           1.00		    0.13	   a	                         0.06%	         1.13	    313.94
Spain	                0.80%	      15.12				                                     0.80%	        15.12	      21.67
Sweden	               2.62%	      49.53		    7.45		                             3.01%	        56.98	    764.67
Switzerland	          2.43%	      45.94				                                     2.43%	        45.94	      99.07
Turkey	               –	           4.00	 b			                                   0.21%	         4.00	       4.00
United Kingdom	       6.92%	     130.82	 a	 19.09	   a	                         7.93%	       149.91	     117.83
United States	       20.86%	     394.36				                                    20.86%	       394.36	    500.00	     f


                                                                                                    continued next page




                                                       92
                                 Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                               Global Environment F ac ilit y




	                                 Calculated	            	     Supplemental
	                            Basic Contributions	        	     Contributions	              GEF-3 Total Contributions
Contributing	                   	           	            	        	        	                 	          	      National
Participants	                 (%)	        SDR	           	      SDR	       	                %	       SDR	      Currency	   g

1. New Funding
from Donors	            88.99% *	 1,715.50		  58.34		     93.82% 	1,773.84
2. Supplemental
Contributions including
Credits 				                                  12.50	 a k	  0.66%	    12.50
3. Investment Income e 							                                      105.00
4. Carryover of GEF
Resources j 							                                                 450.00
5. Total Projected Resources
to Cover GEF-3 Work Program
( 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 )	         	           	    	      	    	   	     2,341.34




                                                                                                                                REPLENISHMENT
*	 GEF basic shares, which are originally derived from the GEF-1 and were largely maintained in the GEF-2, do not add up
   to 100%.
a	 Contributing Participants have the option of taking a discount or credit for acceleration of encashment and; (i) including
   such credit as part of their basic share; (ii) counting such credit as a supplemental contribution; or (iii) taking such
   discount against the national currency contribution. France and Japan have opted to include the credit for accelerated
   encashment in their basic share. The United Kingdom has chosen to accelerate encashment of its basic and supplemental
   contributions. A credit for accelerated encashment is thus included in its basic share and its supplemental contribution.
   Austria, Belgium, China, Czech Republic, Greece, India, Ireland, Nigeria, and Slovenia have opted to include the credit
   for accelerated encashment as a supplemental contribution. Denmark, Finland, Korea, and Mexico have opted to take
   a discount against their national currency contribution. Canada chose to acclerate encashment of its contribution but
   not to take either a discount or a credit.
b	 Represents the agreed minimum contribution level to the GEF-3.
c	 These Contributing Participants have agreed to adjust their contributions upward to the agreed minimum contribution
   level of SDR 4 million.
d	 China and India have indicated that they would contribute more than the agreed minimum contribution level of SDR 4
   million.
e	 Represents projected investment income expected to be earned on resources projected to be held in the GEF Trust
   Fund over the GEF-3 commitment period (FY03 through FY06).
f	 In addition to four annual installments of USD 107.5 million, the United States will provide USD 70 million in the final
   year of the replenishment upon achievement of the performance measures outlined in Schedule 1 to this Table. The
   achievement of such measures will be determined by the Council on the basis of verification by the Independent
   Monitoring and Evaluation Unit, and taking into account any unforeseen events or circumstances that may prevent
   their achievement.
g	 Calculated by converting the SDR amount to the national currency using an average daily exchange rate over the period
   from May 15, 2001 to Nov 15, 2001, as agreed by the Contributing Participants at the May 7, 2001, GEF-3 replenishment
   meeting.
h	 For this Contributing Participant, acceleration of encashment is under consideration.
j	 Represents the amount carried over to the GEF-3 pursuant to paragraph 9 of Resolution No. ____, valued on the basis
   of June 30, 2002 exchange rates.
k	 Represents a credit from acceleration from Canada in the amount of SDR 10.13 million and a supplemental contribution
   from The Netherlands in the amount of SDR 2.37 million, bringing The Netherlands’ total national currency contribution
   to EUR 92.76 million.
(NOTE: For updated information on contributions see table on page 143.)


                                                                93
                         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




                              SCHEDULE 1 TO ATTACHMENT 1

Performance measures to be achieved by Fall 2004 (as determined by the Council on the basis of
verification by the Independent Monitoring and Evaluation Unit, and taking into account any
unforeseen events or circumstances that may prevent their achievement):

     Performance-Based Allocation System: The GEF will have in place an operational perform-
     ance-based allocation system, as agreed in the GEF-3 replenishment report.

     Persistent Organic Pollutants: No less than 50 countries will be provided assistance to
     prepare national implementation plans that include an inventory of POPs stockpiles and
     set out an action plan for their reduction.

     Biodiversity: Projects projected to place at least 17 million additional hectares of land
     under improved management for conservation or protection will be approved. In addition,
     projects will be approved to place under conservation no less than 7 million additional
     hectares of “productive” landscapes, including land around protected areas that are under
     productive use, but support habitats and ecosystems.

     Climate Change: Projects projected to avoid or sequester at least 200 million tons of
     greenhouse gas (carbon dioxide equivalent) emissions will be approved. International
     Waters: Projects will be approved to establish management frameworks (focused on envi-
     ronmental priorities) in riparian countries for no fewer than 2 new transboundary water-
     bodies.

     Ozone Depletion: Projects projected to phase out no fewer than 50 tons of Methyl Bromide
     and Hydrochloroflurocarbons (HCFCs) will be approved.

     Land Degradation: Projects will be approved to protect no less than 3 million additional
     hectares of land area from degradation.




                                                        94
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                             ATTACHMENT 2

                    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                       TH IRD RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES

                               INST R UME NT OF C OMMIT MEN T

Reference is made to Resolution No. 2002-0005 of the Executive Directors of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the “World Bank”) entitled “Global Environment
Facility Trust Fund: Third Replenishment of Resources,” which was adopted on December 19,
2002 (the “Resolution”).

The Government of________________ hereby notifies the World Bank as Trustee of the Global




                                                                                                    REPLENISHMENT
Environment Facility Trust Fund, pursuant to paragraph 2 of the Resolution, that it will make the
contribution authorized for it in Attachment 1 of the Resolution, in accordance with the terms of
the Resolution, in the amount of ____________________.




________________                 __________________________________________
(Date) 			                       (Name, Title and Office)




                                                         95
         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




                            ATTACHMENT 3

    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
       TH IRD RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES

         INDIC AT IVE E NC ASH MENT SC H ED U LE



	                   Fiscal	                    Percentage of
	                    Year	                     Total Pledge
	                   2003	                            7.5
	                   2004	                           10.0
	                   2005	                           13.5
	                   2006	                           12.5
	                   2007	                           12.5
	                   2008	                           12.0
	                   2009	                           11.0
	                   2010	                            9.0
	                   2011	                            8.0
	                   2012	                            4.0

	                    Total	                         100.0




                                        96
                            Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                          Global Environment F ac ilit y




         I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T

                  EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS’ RESOLUTION NO. 2006-0008

                      G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                         FOURT H RE PLENISH MENT OF R ES OU RC ES

WHEREAS:

(A)	   The participants contributing to the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund (“the GEF Trust
       Fund”), (jointly, “the Contributing Participants”, each “a Contributing Participant”) having
       considered the prospective financial requirements of the GEF Trust Fund, have concluded
       that additional resources should be made available to the GEF Trust Fund for new financing




                                                                                                         REPLENISHMENT
       commitments for the period from July 1, 2006 to June 30, 2010 (the “Fourth
       Replenishment”) and have agreed to ask their legislatures, where necessary, to authorize
       and approve the allocation of additional resources to the GEF Trust Fund in the amounts
       set out in Attachment 1 and according to the provisions set forth herein;

(B)	   The Council of the Global Environment Facility (the “GEF” or “Facility”) (the “Council”) having
       considered the Summary of The Negotiations on the Fourth Replenishment, including the
       policy recommendations made on the basis of the Third Overall Performance Study of the
       GEF, other reports emanating from the GEF monitoring and evaluation program during the
       prior replenishment period, and the views and proposals of the Participants, has requested
       the Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the
       “World Bank”) to authorize the World Bank as Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund to hold in trust
       and manage the resources made available for the Fourth Replenishment;

(C)	   It is desirable to administer any remaining funds from the third replenishment of the GEF
       Trust Fund authorized by the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global
       Environment Facility, as amended (the “Instrument”), and approved by Resolution No.
       2002-0005 of the World Bank, adopted on December 19, 2002 (the “Third
       Replenishment”), as part of this Fourth Replenishment;

(D)	 The World Bank, as provided for in Paragraph 8 and Annex B of the Instrument (adopted on
     May 24, 1994, pursuant to Resolution No. 94-2 of the Executive Directors of the World
     Bank), is Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund and, in that capacity, will hold in trust and manage
     the resources made available for the Fourth Replenishment.

NOW THEREFORE the Executive Directors of the World Bank hereby note with approval the
replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund in the amounts and on the basis set forth herein and


                                                           97
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




authorize the World Bank as Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund (the “Trustee”) to manage the
resources made available for the Fourth Replenishment as follows:

Contributions

1.	   The Trustee is authorized to accept contributions to the GEF Trust Fund; (a) by way of a
      grant from each Contributing Participant in the GEF Trust Fund in the amount specified for
      each Contributing Participant in Attachment 1; and (b) otherwise as provided herein.

Instruments of Commitment

2.	 (a) 	Contributing Participants to the Fourth Replenishment shall deposit with the
		 Trustee an instrument of commitment substantially in the form set out in Attachment 2 	
    	 (“Instrument of Commitment”), subject to sub-paragraph 2(b).

	 (b)	 When a Contributing Participant agrees to pay a part of its contribution without
		 qualification and the remainder is subject to enactment by its legislature of the
		 necessary appropriation legislation, it shall deposit a qualified instrument of
		 commitment in a form acceptable to the Trustee (“Qualified Instrument of
		 Commitment”); such Contributing Participant undertakes to exercise its best efforts to 	
  	 obtain legislative approval for the installment amounts of its contribution by the
		 payment dates set out in sub-paragraph 3(a) below.

	 (c)	 At every Council meeting, the Trustee will inform the Council of the status of
		 Instruments of Commitment and Qualified Instruments of Commitment deposited with 	
  	 the Trustee.

Payments

3.	 (a)	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph 1(a) that a Contributing
		 Participant agrees to pay without qualification shall be paid to the Trustee in four 	
    	 equal installments by November 30, 2006, November 30, 2007, November 30, 2008 	
    	 and November 30, 2009, provided that:

         (i)	 The Trustee and a Contributing Participant may agree to earlier payment;

         (ii)	 If the Fourth Replenishment shall not have become effective (as described in sub-
               paragraph 6(a) below) by October 31, 2006, payment of any installment which
               would otherwise have been due prior to the Effective Date (as defined in sub-
               paragraph 6(a) below) shall become due 30 days after the Effective Date;


                                                         98
                             Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                           Global Environment F ac ilit y




            (iii)	 Upon the written request of a Contributing Participant, the Trustee may agree to
                   allow such Contributing Participant to postpone the payment of any installment,
                   or part thereof, up to, but not beyond, June 30 of the calendar year following the
                   year in which such installment is due. Payments made pursuant to any such
                   agreement with the Trustee shall constitute timely payments; and

            (iv)	 If any Contributing Participant shall deposit an Instrument of Commitment with
                  the Trustee after the date on which any installment of the contribution is due,
                  payment of any such installment(s) shall be made to the Trustee within 30 days
                  after the date of deposit of such Instrument.

	 (b)	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph 1(a) that a Contributing
		 Participant agrees to make pursuant to a Qualified Instrument of Commitment shall




                                                                                                           REPLENISHMENT
		 be paid to the Trustee as follows:

            (i) 	 If any Contributing Participant deposits a Qualified Instrument of Commitment with
                  the Trustee after the date on which any installment of the contribution would have
                  been due under sub-paragraph 3(a) if the Contributing Participant had deposited
                  an unqualified Instrument of Commitment, payment of any such installment(s), or
                  part thereof, shall be made to the Trustee within 30 days after the date of deposit
                  of such Instrument to the extent that such Instrument has been unqualified.

            (ii) 	 If any Contributing Participant that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of
                   Commitment, thereafter notifies the Trustee that an installment, or part thereof, is
                   unqualified after the date when such installment would have been due under sub-
                   paragraph 3(a) if the Contributing Participant had deposited an unqualified
                   Instrument of Commitment, payment of such installment, or part thereof, shall be
                   made within 30 days of such notification.

	    (c)	   Payments under sub-paragraph 1(a) shall be made, at the option of each Contributing 	
     	      Participant, (i) in cash or (ii) through the deposit of notes or similar obligations (such 	
     	      as letters of credit) issued by the government of the Contributing Participant or the 	
     	      depository designated by the Contributing Participant, which shall be non-negotiable, 	
     	      non-interest bearing, and payable at their par value on demand to the account of the 	
     	      Trustee on the following terms:

            (i)	 Subject to sub-paragraph 3(a)(iii), payment in cash may be made on terms agreed
                 between the Contributing Participant and the Trustee that shall be no less
                 favorable to the GEF Trust Fund than payment made through the deposit of notes
                 or similar obligations pursuant to sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii).


                                                            99
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




         (ii) 	 The Trustee shall encash notes or similar obligations on an approximately pro
                rata basis among Contributing Participants, at reasonable intervals as needed for
                disbursement and transfers referred to in paragraph 8, as determined by the
                Trustee. An indicative encashment schedule is set out in Attachment 3. At the
                written request of a Contributing Participant experiencing exceptionally difficult
                budgetary circumstances, the Trustee may permit postponement of encashment
                for (i) up to two years in respect of a Contributing Participant that is also an eligi-
                ble recipient under the GEF Trust Fund, and (ii) up to 45 days in respect of all
                other Contributing Participants.

         (iii)	 At the request of a Contributing Participant, the Trustee may agree to encash
                notes or similar obligations on a basis other than a pro rata basis; provided that,
                subject to sub-paragraph 3(c)(iv), the schedule of encashment agreed for such
                notes or obligations shall be no less favorable to the GEF Trust Fund than the
                schedule that would apply according to the pro rata basis provided for under sub-
                paragraph 3(c)(ii).

         (iv)	 If the sum total of a Contributing Participant’s notes or similar obligttions
               deposited with the Trustee is insufficient to meet the indicative encashment
               schedule referred to in sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii) (as such schedule may be amended
               from time to time), such Contributing Participant shall exercise its best efforts,
               subject to its domestic budgetary and legislative practices and requirements, to
               meet a schedule of encashment for the notes or similar obligations it thereafter
               deposits with the Trustee that would be no less favorable to the GEF Trust Fund
               than the schedule that would otherwise have applied according to the pro rata
               basis provided for under sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii).

	    (d)	 Sub-paragraph 3(c) does not apply to, or affect, the schedule for the payment of 	
     	 installments set out in sub-paragraph 3(a) or, in the case of a Contributing Participant 	
     	 that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment, the obligations undertaken 	
     	 pursuant to sub-paragraph 2(b). Further, nothing in sub-paragraph 3(c) authorizes the 	
     	 Trustee to increase a Contributing Participant’s contribution or to impose financial 	
     	 penalties for any reason.

	 (e)	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph 1(b) shall be paid in
		 accordance with the terms on which such contributions are accepted by the Trustee.

	 (f)	 The Trustee shall make regular reports to the Council on the status of Contributing
		 Participants’ contributions.




                                                        100
                         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




Timely Availability of Resources

4.	 (a)	 If (i) a Contributing Participant does not make payment in accordance with sub-
		 paragraph 3(a) or 3(b); or (ii) a Contributing Participant that has deposited a Qualified 	
    	 Instrument of Commitment, is unable, despite its best efforts undertaken in accordance 	
    	 with sub-paragraph 2(b), to obtain legislative approval to unqualify a sufficient amount 	
    	 of its contribution to meet the payment dates set out in sub-paragraph 3(a), and such 	
    	 delay continues for 30 days, the Trustee shall notify the Contributing Participant of the 	
    	 delay. In doing so, the Trustee shall request the Contributing Participant to make
		 payment promptly, or, as appropriate, to exercise its best efforts to obtain legislative 	
    	 approval to unqualify sufficient funds to make payment promptly. The Trustee shall 	
    	 also remind the Contributing Participant of the obligations it will incur under the
		 further requirements of this sub-paragraph if the delay persists. If payment has not 	




                                                                                                    REPLENISHMENT
    	 been made 30 days before the date of the Council meeting following the date on which 	
    	 the delay was incurred, the responsible Minister of the Contributing Participant
		 concerned shall provide the Chief Executive Officer/Chairperson of the Facility (the 	
    	 “CEO”) with a written communication stating the reasons for the delay and the
		 measures being taken to address it. The CEO shall forward any such communication to 	
    	 the Council, with a copy to the Trustee.

	 (b)	 As provided in sub-paragraph 25(c) of the Instrument, for the purpose of determining 	
  	 voting power in the event of a formal vote by the Council, a Contributing Participant’s 	
  	 total contributions shall consist of the actual cumulative contributions made by a
		 Contributing Participant to the GEF Trust Fund, including actual contributions made to 	
  	 the Fourth Replenishment, contributions made to the Global Environment Trust Fund 	
  	 (the “GET”), and the grant equivalent of co-financing and parallel financing made 	
  	 under the GEF pilot program, or agreed with the Trustee before the effective date of 	
  	 the GEF Trust Fund.

Currency of Denomination and Payment

  (a)	 Contributing Participants shall denominate their contributions in Special Drawing 	
5.	
  	 Rights (“SDR”), or in a currency that is freely convertible, as determined by the
		 Trustee, except that if a Contributing Participant’s economy experienced a rate of
		 inflation in excess of ten percent per annum on average in the period 2002 to 2004 as 	
  	 determined by the Trustee as of the date this Resolution is adopted, its contribution 	
  	 shall be denominated in SDR.

	 (b)	 Contributing Participants shall make payments in SDR, a currency used for the
		 valuation of the SDR, or with the agreement of the Trustee, in another freely


                                                       101
                                  Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                Global Environment F ac ilit y




		          convertible currency. The Trustee may, in its discretion, freely exchange contributions 	
  	         received for any such currencies.

	      (c)	 Each Contributing Participant shall maintain, with respect to its currency paid to the 	
       	 Trustee and the currency of such Contributing Participant derived therefrom, the same 	
       	 convertibility as existed on the date on which this Resolution is adopted.

Effective Date

6.	 (a)	 The Fourth Replenishment shall become effective on the date when Contributing
		 Participants whose contributions aggregate not less than SDR 929 million1 shall have 	
    	 deposited with the Trustee Instruments of Commitment or Qualified Instruments of 	
    	 Commitment (the “Effective Date”).

	 (b)	 The Trustee shall promptly notify all Contributing Participants when the Fourth
		 Replenishment becomes effective.

	 (c)	      If the Fourth Replenishment does not become effective by March 31, 2007, the Trustee 	
  	         shall so inform the Contributing Participants and consult with them on possible steps 	
  	         to be taken to prevent any interruption of GEF financing. The Trustee, in collaboration 	
  	         with the CEO, will inform the Council of the results of such consultations, and seek the 	
  	         Council’s guidance on the steps to be taken, including as may be necessary, the
		          convening of a meeting of the Contributing Participants.

Advance Contributions

  (a)	 In order to avoid an interruption in the GEF’s ability to make financing commitments 	
7.	
  	 pending the effectiveness of the Fourth Replenishment, and if the Trustee shall
		 have received Instruments of Commitment or Qualified Instruments of Commitment 	
  	 from Contributing Participants whose contributions aggregate not less than SDR 310 	
  	 million2, the Trustee may deem, prior to the Effective Date, one quarter of the total 	
  	 amount of each contribution for which an Instrument of Commitment or Qualified 	
  	 Instrument of Commitment has been deposited with the Trustee as an advance
		 contribution, unless the Contributing Participant specifies otherwise in its Instrument 	
  	 of Commitment or Qualified Instrument of Commitment.




1	 Sixty percent of the total contributions of all Contributing Participants, as set out in Attachment 1

2	 Twenty percent of the total contributions of all Contributing Participants, as set out in Attachment 1	




                                                                102
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




	     (b)	 The Trustee shall specify when advance contributions pursuant to sub-paragraph 7(a) 	
      	 above are to be paid to the Trustee.

	 (c)	    The terms and conditions applicable to contributions to the Fourth Replenishment 	
  	       shall apply also to advance contributions until the Effective Date, when such
		        contributions shall be deemed to constitute payment towards the amount due from 	
  	       each Contributing Participant for its contribution.

Commitment or Transfer Authority

8.	   (a) 	Contributions shall become available for commitment by the Trustee, for disbursement 	
           or transfer as needed to cover the work program, the administrative budget of the GEF, 	
           and any other expenses approved by the Council under the Instrument, upon receipt of 	




                                                                                                        REPLENISHMENT
           payment by the Trustee of the contributions set out in sub-paragraphs 1(a) and (b) 	
           	except as provided in sub-paragraph 8(c) below.

	     (b)	 The Trustee shall promptly inform all Contributing Participants if a Contributing
           Participant that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment and whose
           contribution represents more than 20 percent of the total amount of the resources to
           be contributed pursuant to the Fourth Replenishment has not unqualified at least 50
           percent of the total amount of its contribution by November 30, 2007, or 30 days after
           the Effective Date, whichever is later, and at least 75 percent of the total amount of its
           contribution by November 30, 2008, or 30 days after the Effective Date, whichever is
           later, and the total amount thereof by November 30, 2009, or 30 days after the
           Effective Date, whichever is later.

	     (c)	 Within 45 days of the dispatch of notice by the Trustee under sub-paragraph 8(b)
           above, each Contributing Participant receiving such notice may notify the Trustee in
           writing that (i) the commitment by the Trustee of the second, third or fourth
           installment, whichever is applicable, of such Contributing Participant’s contribution
           shall be deferred while, and to the extent that, any part of the contribution referred to
           in sub-paragraph 8(b) remains qualified; or (ii) it wishes to extend the decision period
           for the right to defer commitment of its Contribution from 45 days to 120 days. The
           Trustee shall make no commitments in respect of the resources to which the notice
           pertains unless the right of the Contributing Participant is waived pursuant to sub-
           paragraph 8(d) below.

	     (d)	 The right of a Contributing Participant under sub-paragraph 8(c) above may be waived
           in writing, and it shall be deemed waived if the Trustee does not receive, within the 45-
           day period or 120-day period specified in sub-paragraph 8(c), as appropriate, a written


                                                         103
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




          notice informing the Trustee pursuant to such sub-paragraph that the Contributing
          Participant has decided to defer commitment of a portion of its contribution.

	     (e)	 The Trustee, in collaboration with the CEO, shall consult with the Contributing
           Participants and seek the Council’s advice on possible steps to be taken where, in its
           judgment: (i) there is a substantial likelihood that the total amount of the contributions
           referred to in sub-paragraph 8(b) above shall not be committed to the Trustee without
           qualification by June 30, 2010, or (ii) as a result of Contributing Participants exercising
           their rights under sub-paragraph 8(c), the Trustee is, or may shortly be, precluded from
           entering into new commitments for disbursement or transfer.

	     (f)	 Commitment and transfer authority shall be increased by:

          (i)	 The income earned on the investment of resources held in the GEF Trust Fund
               pending disbursement or transfer by the Trustee; and

          (ii)	 Payments received by the Trustee as repayment, interest or charges on loans
                made by the GEF Trust Fund.
	
	     (g)	 The Trustee may enter into agreements to provide financing from the GEF Trust Fund,
           conditional on the commitment of such financing becoming effective and binding on
           the GEF Trust Fund when resources become available for commitment by the Trustee.

Administration of the Third Replenishment Fund

9.	   Funds, receipts, assets and liabilities held by the Trustee under the Third Replenishment,
      including the full carryover reflected in Attachment 1 hereto, will be administered under
      the Fourth Replenishment.




                                                                                          (Adopted October 19, 2006)




                                                         104
                                Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                              Global Environment F ac ilit y




                            ATTACHMENT 1 TO RESOLUTION NO. 2006-0008

                        G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                           FOURT H RE PLENISH MENT OF R ES OU RC ES
                                  T ABLE OF C ONT RIBUT ION S

                                     CONTRIBUTIONS (IN MILLIONS)

	                                     	                	 Adjustment
	                   GEF-4 Shares and	 Supplemental	 Towards Full
	                 Basic Contributionsa	   Contributions	    Funding	                                Total Contributions
Contributing	                  	          	     	        	     	                             	        	
Participants	            (%)	      SDR	 	          SDR	 	        SDR	                        SDR	 	 Currencyb	 Currency	

Australia	            1.46%	      24.43		                 6.61		                   -	 31.04		      59.80	         AUD




                                                                                                                           REPLENISHMENT
Austria	              0.90%	      15.06		                 7.26	 c	                 -	 22.32		      24.38	         EUR
Belgium	              1.55%	      25.94		                12.83	 c	              3.51	 42.28		      46.18	         EUR
Canada	               4.28%	      71.62		                17.57		                   -	 89.20		     158.94	 c	      CAD
China	                     -	      4.00	 d	               3.10	 c	                 -	    7.10		      9.51	        USD
Czech Republic	            -	      4.00	 d	               0.68	 c	                 -	   4.68		    142.89	          CZK
Denmark	              1.30%	      21.75		                11.68		                1.32	 34.75		     310.00	         DKK
Finland	              1.00%	      16.73		                10.82	 c	              0.94	 28.50		       31.12	        EUR
France	               6.81%	      71.28	 f	              57.42		                   -	 128.70		    188.71	 c	      USD
Germany	             11.00%	     115.05	 f	              86.08	 e	                 -	 201.14		    295.00	         USD
Greece	               0.05%	       0.84		                 4.41	 c	                 -	   5.25		       5.73	        EUR
India	                     -	      4.00	 d	               2.72	 c	                 -	   6.72		       9.00	        USD
Ireland	              0.11%	       1.84		                 3.41	 c	                 -	   5.25		       5.73	        EUR
Italy	                4.39%	      73.46		                    -		                   -	 73.46		      87.91	         EUR
Japan	               17.63%	     184.40	 f	              23.56		                   -	 207.96		 33,687.97	           JPY
Korea	                0.23%	       3.85		                 0.62	 c	                 -	   4.47		 6,142.97	          KRW
Luxembourg	           0.05%	       0.84		                 3.16		                   -	   4.00		       4.79	        EUR
Mexico	                    -	      4.00	 d	                  -		                   -	   4.00		     63.38	         MXN
Netherlands	          3.30%	      55.22		                19.47		                   -	 74.70		      89.38	         EUR
New Zealand	          0.12%	       2.01		                 1.99		                   -	   4.00		      8.40	         NZD
Nigeria	                   -	      4.00	 d	                  -		                   -	   4.00		       4.00	        SDR	 g
Norway	               1.44%	      24.11		                    -		                   -	  24.11		    228.32	         NOK
Pakistan	                  -	      4.00	 d	                  -		                   -	   4.00		    350.01	         PKR
Portugal	             0.12%	       2.01		                 2.78		                   -	   4.79		       5.73	        EUR
Slovenia	             0.03%	       0.50		                 3.88	 c	                 -	   4.38		 1,146.20	            SIT
South Africa	              -	      4.00	 d	                  -		                   -	   4.00		     38.27	          ZAR
Spain	                1.00%	      16.73		                 1.37		                   -	   18.11		    21.67	         EUR




                                                              105
                                 Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                               Global Environment F ac ilit y




	                                     	                	 Adjustment
	                   GEF-4 Shares and	 Supplemental	 Towards Full
	                 Basic Contributionsa	   Contributions	    Funding	                                     Total Contributions
Contributing	                  	          	     	        	     	                              	            	
Participants	            (%)	      SDR	 	          SDR	 	        SDR	                             SDR	 	 Currencyb	 Currency	

Sweden	          2.62%	             43.84		               24.70		                7.66	        76.20		      850.00	      SEK
Switzerland	     2.26%	             37.82		                   -		                9.67	        47.49		       88.00	      CHF
Turkey	               -	             4.00	 d	                 -		                   -	         4.00		        4.00	      SDR	 g
United Kingdom	 6.92%	             115.80		               56.08		                   -	       171.88		      140.00	      GBP
United States	  20.86%	            218.18		                   -		                   -	       218.18		      320.00	      USD

New Funding	     89.43%	 1,175.34		  362.22		 23.10	 1,560.66
from Donors
Projected							                                       250.91	 h
Investment Income
Projected							 325.67	 i
Carryover of
GEF Resources
Total Projected	        	        	 	       		      	 2,137.23	 j
Resources to
Cover GEF-4 Work Program




a	 The GEF-4 basic shares reflect those of the GEF-3 except for Switzerland, Spain, Norway and Slovenia.
b	 As agreed by the Contributing Participants at the June 9-10, 2005 GEF-4 replenishment meeting, the reference
   exchange rate to convert the SDR amount to the national currency will be the average daily exchange rate over the peri-
   od from May 1, 2005 to October 31, 2005.
c	 Contributing Participants have the option of taking a discount or credit for acceleration of encashment and; (i) including
   such credit as part of their basic share; (ii) counting such credit as a supplemental contribution; (iii) including such
   credit as an adjustment to full funding or (iv) taking such discount against the national currency contribution. Austria,
   Belgium, China, Czech Republic, Finland, Greece, India, Ireland, Korea and Slovenia have opted to take the credit for
   accelerated encashment as a supplemental contribution. Canada and France have chosen to take a discount against
   their contribution.
d	 For those Contributing Participants that do not have a basic share, this represents the agreed minimum contribution of
   SDR 4 million.
e	 Germany will provide this supplemental contribution of SDR 86.08 million under the terms of the GEF-4 replenishment
   resolution. This contribution will be made in order to strengthen the GEF’s ability to meet funding objectives and policy
   commitments of the GEF-4 agreement. Progress towards meeting these commitments will be assessed in the GEF-4
   midterm reviews and taken into account by Germany.
f	 These contributions are calculated to reflect a replenishment share based on the contributions of several major donors.
g	 As agreed by Contributing Participants in the June 9-10, 2005 GEF-4 replenishment meeting, Contributing Participants
   experiencing an average annual inflation rate in their economies exceeding 10% over the years 2002-2004 will denomi-
   nate their GEF-4 contributions in SDR.
h	 Investment income is projected using a USD 2 billion average cash balance and investment return of 4.6% per annum.
i	 This amount comprises arrears, deferred contributions, and paid-in but unallocated resources.
j	 This amount is equivalent to USD 3.13 billion using the agreed GEF-4 reference exchange rates.
(NOTE: For updated information on contributions see table on page 145.)



                                                               106
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                        ATTACHMENT 2 TO RESOLUTION NO. 2006-0008

                    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                       FOURT H RE PLENISH MENT OF R ES OU RC ES



                               INST R UME NT OF C OMMIT MEN T




Reference is made to Resolution No. 2006-0008 of the Executive Directors of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the “World Bank”) entitled “Global Environment
Facility Trust Fund: Fourth Replenishment of Resources,” which was adopted on October 19,




                                                                                                    REPLENISHMENT
2006 (the “Resolution”).

The Government of _________________ hereby notifies the World Bank as Trustee of the Global
Environment Facility Trust Fund, pursuant to paragraph 2 of the Resolution, that it will make the
contribution authorized for it in Attachment 1 of the Resolution, in accordance with the terms of
the Resolution, in the amount of ________________________.




_______________________			                                  _________________________
(Date)					                                                (Name, Title and Office)




                                                        107
         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




    ATTACHMENT 3 TO RESOLUTION NO. 2006-0008

    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
       FOURT H RE PLENISH MENT OF R ES OU RC ES

         INDIC AT IVE E NC ASH MENT SC H ED U LE




	                   Fiscal	                    Percentage of
	                    Year	                     Total Pledge
	                   2007	                            9.0
	                   2008	                           12.0
	                   2009	                           14.5
	                   2010	                           14.5
	                   2011	                           14.5
	                   2012	                           14.0
	                   2013	                            9.0
	                   2014	                            7.0
	                   2015	                            3.0
	                   2016	                            2.5
	                   Total	                         100.0




                                       108
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




        I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T

                EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS’ RESOLUTION NO. 2010-0004

                    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                        F IF T H RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES




WHEREAS:
(A)	 The participants contributing to the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund (“the GEF Trust
     Fund”), (jointly, “the Contributing Participants”, each “a Contributing Participant”) having
     considered the prospective financial requirements of the GEF Trust Fund, have concluded




                                                                                                     REPLENISHMENT
     that additional resources should be made available to the GEF Trust Fund for new financing
     commitments for the period from July 1, 2010 to June 30, 2014 (the “Fifth Replenishment”)
     and have agreed to ask their legislatures, where necessary, to authorize and approve the
     allocation of additional resources to the GEF Trust Fund in the amounts set out in
     Attachment 1, as such amount may be revised in accordance with Attachment 4, and
     according to the provisions set forth herein;

(B)	 The Council of the Global Environment Facility (the “GEF” or “Facility”) (the “Council”) hav-
     ing considered the Summary of The Negotiations on the Fifth Replenishment, including the
     policy recommendations made on the basis of the Fourth Overall Performance Study of the
     GEF, other reports emanating from the GEF monitoring and evaluation program during the
     prior replenishment period, and the views and proposals of the Participants, has requested
     the Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the
     “World Bank”) to authorize the World Bank as Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund to hold in trust
     and manage the resources made available for the Fifth Replenishment;

(C)	 It is desirable to administer any remaining funds from the fourth replenishment of the GEF
     Trust Fund authorized by the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global
     Environment Facility, as amended (the “Instrument”), and approved by Resolution No.
     2006-0008 of the World Bank, adopted on October 19, 2006 (the “Fourth Replenishment”),
     as part of this Fifth Replenishment;

(D)	 The World Bank, as provided for in Paragraph 8 and Annex B of the Instrument (adopted
     on May 24, 1994, pursuant to Resolution No. 94-2 of the Executive Directors of the World
     Bank), is Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund and, in that capacity, will hold in trust and manage
     the resources made available for the Fifth Replenishment.




                                                        109
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




NOW THEREFORE the Executive Directors of the World Bank hereby note with approval the
replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund in the amounts and on the basis set forth herein and
authorize the World Bank as Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund (the “Trustee”) to manage the
resources made available for the Fifth Replenishment as follows:

Contributions

1.	   The Trustee is authorized to accept contributions to the GEF Trust Fund; (a) by way of a
      grant from each Contributing Participant in the GEF Trust Fund in the amount specified for
      each Contributing Participant in Attachment 1, as such amount may be revised in accor-
      dance with Attachment 4; and (b) otherwise as provided herein.

Instruments of Commitment

2.	   (a)	 Contributing Participants to the Fifth Replenishment shall deposit with the Trustee an
           instrument of commitment substantially in the form set out in Attachment 2
           (“Instrument of Commitment’’), subject to sub-paragraph 2(b).

	     (b)	 When a Contributing Participant agrees to pay a part of its contribution without qualifi-
           cation and the remainder is subject to enactment by its legislature of the necessary
           appropriation legislation, it shall deposit a qualified instrument of commitment in a
           form acceptable to the Trustee (“Qualified Instrument of Commitment”); such
           Contributing Participant undertakes to exercise its best efforts to obtain legislative
           approval for the installment amounts of its contribution by the payment dates set out
           in sub-paragraph 3(a) below.

	     (c)	 At every Council meeting, the Trustee will inform the Council of the status of
           Instruments of Commitment and Qualified Instruments of Commitment deposited with
           the Trustee.

Payments

3.	   (a)	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph 1(a) that a Contributing
           Participant agrees to pay without qualification shall be paid to the Trustee in four
           equal installments by November 30, 2010, November 30, 2011, November 30, 2012 and
           November 30, 2013, provided that:

		        (i)	   The Trustee and a Contributing Participant may agree to earlier payment;




                                                         110
                         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




		      (ii)	 If the Fifth Replenishment shall not have become effective (as described in sub-
               paragraph 6(a) below) by October 31, 2010, payment of any installment which
               would otherwise have been due prior to the Effective Date (as defined in sub-
               paragraph 6(a) below) shall become due 30 days after the Effective Date;
		      (iii)	 Upon the written request of a Contributing Participant, the Trustee may agree to
               allow such Contributing Participant to postpone the payment of any installment,
               or part thereof, up to, but not beyond, June 30 of the calendar year following the
               year in which such installment is due. Payments made pursuant to any such
               agreement with the Trustee shall constitute timely payments; and

		      (iv)	 If any Contributing Participant shall deposit an Instrument of Commitment with
              the Trustee after the date on which any installment of the contribution is due,
              payment of any such installment(s) shall be made to the Trustee within 30 days




                                                                                                      REPLENISHMENT
              after the date of deposit of such Instrument.

	   (b)	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph 1(a) that a Contributing
         Participant agrees to make pursuant to a Qualified Instrument of Commitment shall be
         paid to the Trustee as follows:

		      (i)	 If any Contributing Participant deposits a Qualified Instrument of Commitment
             with the Trustee after the date on which any installment of the contribution would
             have been due under sub-paragraph 3(a) if the Contributing Participant had
             deposited an unqualified Instrument of Commitment, payment of any such install-
             ment(s), or part thereof, shall be made to the Trustee within 30 days after the
             date of deposit of such Instrument to the extent that such Instrument has been
             unqualified.

		      (ii) 	 any Contributing Participant that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of
               Commitment thereafter notifies the Trustee that an installment, or part thereof, is
               unqualified after the date when such installment would have been due under sub-
               paragraph 3(a) if the Contributing Participant had deposited an unqualified
               Instrument of Commitment, payment of such installment, or part thereof, shall be
               made within 30 days of such notification.

	   (c)	 Payments under sub-paragraph 1(a) shall be made, at the option of each Contributing
         Participant, (i) in cash or (ii) through the deposit of notes or similar obligations (such
         as letters of credit) issued by the government of the Contributing Participant or the
         depository designated by the Contributing Participant, which shall be non-negotiable,
         non-interest bearing, and payable at their par value on demand to the account of the
         Trustee on the following terms:


                                                       111
                         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




		      (i)	 Subject to sub-paragraph 3(a)(iii), payment in cash may be made on terms agreed
             between the Contributing Participant and the Trustee that shall be no less favor-
             able to the GEF Trust Fund than payment made through the deposit of notes or
             similar obligations pursuant to sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii).

		      (ii)	 The Trustee shall encash notes or similar obligations on an approximately pro rata
              basis among Contributing Participants, at reasonable intervals as needed for dis-
              bursement and transfers referred to in paragraph 8, as determined by the Trustee.
              An indicative encashment schedule is set out in Attachment 3. At the written
              request of a Contributing Participant experiencing exceptionally difficult budget-
              ary circumstances, the Trustee may permit postponement of encashment for (i) up
              to two years in respect of a Contributing Participant that is also an eligible recipi-
              ent under the GEF Trust Fund, and (ii) up to 45 days in respect of all other
              Contributing Participants.

		      (iii)	 At the request of a Contributing Participant, the Trustee may agree to encash
               notes or similar obligations on a basis other than a pro rata basis; provided that,
               subject to sub-paragraph 3(c)(iv), the schedule of encashment agreed for such
               notes or obligations shall be no less favorable to the GEF Trust Fund than the
               schedule that would apply according to the pro rata basis provided for under sub-
               paragraph 3(c)(ii).

		      (iv)	 If the sum total of a Contributing Participant’s notes or similar obligations
              deposited with the Trustee is insufficient to meet the indicative encashment
              schedule referred to in sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii) (as such schedule may be amended
              from time to time), such Contributing Participant shall exercise its best efforts,
              subject to its domestic budgetary and legislative practices and requirements, to
              meet a schedule of encashment for the notes or similar obligations it thereafter
              deposits with the Trustee that would be no less favorable to the GEF Trust Fund
              than the schedule that would otherwise have applied according to the pro rata
              basis provided for under subparagraph 3(c)(ii).

	   (d)	 Sub-paragraph 3(c) does not apply to, or affect, the schedule for the payment of
         installments set out in sub-paragraph 3(a) or, in the case of a Contributing Participant
         that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment, the obligations undertaken
         pursuant to subparagraph 2(b). Further, nothing in sub-paragraph 3(c) authorizes the
         Trustee to increase a Contributing Participant’s contribution or to impose financial
         penalties for any reason.




                                                       112
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




	     (e)	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph 1(b) shall be paid in accor-
           dance with the terms on which such contributions are accepted by the Trustee.

	     (f)	 The Trustee shall make regular reports to the Council on the status of Contributing
           Participants’ contributions.

Timely Availability of Resources

4.	   (a)	 If (i) a Contributing Participant does not make payment in accordance with subpara-
           graph 3(a) or 3(b); or (ii) a Contributing Participant that has deposited a Qualified
           Instrument of Commitment, is unable, despite its best efforts undertaken in accor-
           dance with sub-paragraph 2(b), to obtain legislative approval to unqualify a sufficient
           amount of its contribution to meet the payment dates set out in sub-paragraph 3(a),




                                                                                                        REPLENISHMENT
           and such delay continues for 30 days, the Trustee shall notify the Contributing
           Participant of the delay. In doing so, the Trustee shall request the Contributing
           Participant to make payment promptly, or, as appropriate, to exercise its best efforts to
           obtain legislative approval to unqualify sufficient funds to make payment promptly.
           The Trustee shall also remind the Contributing Participant of the obligation it will incur
           under the further requirements of this sub-paragraph if the delay persists. If payment
           has not been made 30 days before the date of the Council meeting following the date
           on which the delay was incurred, the responsible Minister of the Contributing
           Participant concerned shall provide the Chief Executive Officer/Chairperson of the
           Facility (the “CEO”) with a written communicationstating the reasons for the delay and
           the measures being taken to address it. The CEO shall forward any such communica-
           tion to the Council, with a copy to the Trustee.

	     (b)	 As provided in sub-paragraph 25(c) of the Instrument, for the purpose of determining
           voting power in the event of a formal vote by the Council, a Contributing Participant’s
           total contributions shall consist of the actual cumulative contributions made by a
           Contributing Participant to the GEF Trust Fund, including actual contributions made to
           the Fifth Replenishment, contributions made to the Global Environment Trust Fund
           (the “GET”), and the grant equivalent of co-financing and parallel financing made
           under the GEF pilot program, or agreed with the Trustee before the effective date of
           the GEF Trust Fund.




                                                         113
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




Currency of Denomination and Payment

5.	   (a)	 Contributing Participants shall denominate their contributions in Special Drawing
           Rights (“SDR”), or in a currency that is freely convertible, as determined by the
           Trustee, except that if a Contributing Participant’s economy experienced a rate of infla-
           tion in excess of ten percent per annum on average in the period 2006 to 2008 as
           determined by the Trustee as of the date this Resolution is adopted, its contribution
           shall be denominated in SDR.

	     (b)	 Contributing Participants shall make payments in SDR, a currency used for the valua-
           tion of the SDR, or with the agreement of the Trustee, in another freely convertible cur-
           rency. The Trustee may, in its discretion, freely exchange contributions received for any
           such currencies.

	     (c)	 Each Contributing Participant shall maintain, with respect to its currency paid to the
           Trustee and the currency of such Contributing Participant derived therefrom, the same
           convertibility as existed on the date on which this Resolution is adopted.

Effective Date

6.	   (a)	 The Fifth Replenishment shall become effective on the date when Contributing
           Participants whose contributions aggregate not less than sixty percent (60%) of the
           total contributions of all Contributing Participants, as set out in Attachment 1 shall
           have deposited with the Trustee Instruments of Commitment or Qualified Instruments
           of Commitment (the “Effective Date”).

	     (b)	 The Trustee shall promptly notify all Contributing Participants when the Fifth
           Replenishment becomes effective.

	     (c)	 If the Fifth Replenishment does not become effective by March 31, 2011, the Trustee
           shall so inform the Contributing Participants and consult with them on possible steps
           to be taken to prevent any interruption of GEF financing. The Trustee, in collaboration
           with the CEO, will inform the Council of the results of such consultations, and seek the
           Council’s guidance on the steps to be taken, including, as may be necessary, the con-
           vening of a meeting of the Contributing Participants.




                                                        114
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




Advance Contributions

7. 	   (a)	 In order to avoid an interruption in the Trustee’s ability to make financing commitments
            pending the effectiveness of the Fifth Replenishment, and if the Trustee shall have
            received Instruments of Commitment or Qualified Instruments of Commitment from
            Contributing Participants whose contributions aggregate not less than twenty percent
            (20%) of the total contributions of all Contributing Participants, as set out in
            Attachment 1, the Trustee may deem, prior to the Effective Date, one quarter of the
            total amount of each contribution for which an Instrument of Commitment or Qualified
            Instrument of Commitment has been deposited with the Trustee as an advance contri-
            bution, unless the Contributing Participant specifies otherwise in its Instrument of
            Commitment or Qualified Instrument of Commitment.




                                                                                                       REPLENISHMENT
	      (b)	 The Trustee shall specify when advance contributions pursuant to sub-paragraph 7(a)
            above are to be paid to the Trustee.

	      (c)	 The terms and conditions applicable to contributions to the Fifth Replenishment shall
            apply also to advance contributions until the Effective Date, when such contributions
            shall be deemed to constitute payment towards the amount due from each
            Contributing Participant for its contribution.

Commitment or Transfer Authority

8.	    (a)	 Contributions shall become available for commitment by the Trustee, for disbursement
            or transfer as needed to cover the work program, the administrative budget of the GEF,
            and any other expenses approved by the Council under the Instrument, upon receipt of
            payment by the Trustee of the contributions set out in sub-paragraphs 1(a) and (b)
            except as provided in sub-paragraph 8(c) below. Paid in but unallocated resources
            included in the carryover reflected in Attachment 1 hereto (excluding any amount for
            which commitment by the Trustee is deferred under any prior replenishment of the GEF
            Trust Fund) and investment income shall become available for commitment by the
            Trustee, for disbursement or transfer as needed to cover the work program, the admin-
            istrative budget of the GEF, and any other expenses approved by the Council under the
            Instrument, upon adoption of the resolution by the Executive Directors of the World
            Bank.




                                                         115
                         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




	   (b)	 The Trustee shall promptly inform all Contributing Participants if a Contributing
         Participant that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment and whose con-
         tribution represents more than 5 percent of the total amount of the resources to be
         contributed pursuant to the Fifth Replenishment has not unqualified at least 50 per-
         cent of the total amount of its contribution by November 30, 2011, or 30 days after the
         Effective Date, whichever is later, and at least 75 percent of the total amount of its con-
         tribution by November 30, 2012, or 30 days after the Effective Date, whichever is later,
         and the total amount thereof by November 30, 2013, or 30 days after the Effective
         Date, whichever is later.

	   (c)	 Within 45 days of the dispatch of notice by the Trustee under sub-paragraph 8(b)
         above, each Contributing Participant receiving such notice may notify the Trustee in
         writing that (i) the commitment by the Trustee of the second, third or fourth install-
         ment, whichever is applicable, of such Contributing Participant’s contribution shall be
         deferred while, and to the extent that, any part of the contribution referred to in sub-
         paragraph 8(b) remains qualified; or (ii) it wishes to extend the decision period for the
         right to defer commitment of its contribution from 45 days to 120 days. The Trustee
         shall make no commitments in respect of the resources to which the notice pertains
         unless the right of the Contributing Participant is waived pursuant to sub-paragraph
         8(d) below.

	   (d)	 The right of a Contributing Participant under sub-paragraph 8(c) above may be waived
         in writing, and it shall be deemed waived if the Trustee does not receive, within the 45-
         day period or 120-day period specified in sub-paragraph 8(c), as appropriate, a written
         notice informing the Trustee pursuant to such sub-paragraph that the Contributing
         Participant has decided to defer commitment of a portion of its contribution.

	   (e)	 The Trustee, in collaboration with the CEO, shall consult with the Contributing
         Participants and seek the Council’s advice on possible steps to be taken where, in its
         judgment: (i) there is a substantial likelihood that the total amount of the contribu-
         tions referred to in sub-paragraph 8(b) above shall not be committed to the Trustee
         without qualification by June 30, 2014, or (ii) as a result of Contributing Participants
         exercising their rights under subparagraph 8(c), the Trustee is, or may shortly be, pre-
         cluded from entering into new commitments for disbursement or transfer.

	   (f)	 Commitment and transfer authority shall be increased by:

		      (i)	 The income earned on the investment of resources held in the GEF Trust Fund
             pending disbursement or transfer by the Trustee; and




                                                       116
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




		        (ii)	 Payments received by the Trustee as repayment, interest or charges on loans
                made by the GEF Trust Fund.

	     (g)	 The Trustee may enter into agreements to provide financing from the GEF Trust Fund,
           conditional on the commitment of such financing becoming effective and binding on
           the GEF Trust Fund when resources become available for commitment by the Trustee.

Administration of the Fourth Replenishment

9.	   Funds, receipts, assets and liabilities held by the Trustee under the Fourth Replenishment,
      including the full carryover reflected in Attachment 1 hereto, will be administered under
      the Fifth Replenishment.




                                                                                                                         REPLENISHMENT
                                                                                               (Adopted July 19, 2010)




                                                        117
                                  Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                       ATTACHMENT 1

                          G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                              F IF T H RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES
                                      T ABLE OF C ONT RIBUT IO N S * *

                                       CONTRIBUTIONS (IN MILLIONS)

	                                    	                        	 Adjustment	 GEF-5
	                  GEF-5 Shares and	             Supplemental	 Towards Full	 Actual	
	                Basic Contributionsa	           Contributions	    Funding	 Shares	     Total Contributions
Contributing	                 	                  	     	        	     	          	        	
Participants	          (%)	      SDR	                     SDR	       SDR	      %	    SDR	    Currencyb	
Currency	
	
Australia	              1.46%	      41.92		                 10.96		        -	 2.29%	                 52.88	      105.00		        AUD
Austria	                 1.21%	     34.66	 c	                5.50		        -	 1.74%	                 40.15	       42.60	 e	      EUR
Belgium	                1.55%	      44.51		                 32.55	 c	      -	 3.33%	                 77.05	       78.00	    f	   EUR
Brazil	                 0.00%	       4.00	 d	                4.00		        -	 0.35%	                  8.00	       12.26		        USD
Canada	                 4.28%	     122.89		                 12.28		        -	 5.85%	                135.17	      238.40	 c	      CAD
China	                  0.00% 	      4.00 	 d	               5.79		        -	 0.42%	                  9.79	       15.00	   c	    USD
Czech Republic	         0.00%	       4.00	 d	                0.60	 c	      -	 0.20%	                  4.60	      116.91		        CZK
Denmark 	               1.30%	      37.33		                 11.07		        -	 2.09%	                 48.40	      400.00		        DKK
Finland 	               1.00%	      28.71		                 27.48	 c	      -	 2.43%	                 56.20	       57.30		        EUR
France 	                6.76%	     194.16 		                    -		        -	 8.40%	               194.16 	      215.50	 c f	    EUR
Germany 	              10.89%	     312.64 		                    -		        - 	 13.53% 	            312.64 	      347.00 		       EUR
Greece 	                0.05%	       1.44 		                 2.92	 c	      -	 0.19%	                  4.35	        4.44		  g	    EUR
India 	                 0.00%	       4.00	 d	                2.39	 c	      -	 0.28%	                  6.39	        9.00			       USD
Ireland 	                0.11%	      3.16		                  2.46	 c 	     -	 0.24%	                  5.62	        5.73			       EUR
Italy 	                 2.89%	      82.89		                     -		        -	 3.59%	                 82.89 	      92.00		        EUR
Japan 	                11.48%	     329.55 		                    - 	 		 14.26%	                     329.55	     48,377.08		        JPY
Korea 	                 0.17%	       4.89		                  0.43	 c	      -	 0.23%	                  5.33	        7.50			       USD
Luxembourg 	            0.05%	       1.44		                  2.56		        -	 0.17%	                  4.00	        4.44			       EUR
Mexico 	                0.00%	       4.00	 d	                2.53	 c	      -	 0.28%	                  6.53	      124.30		        MXN
Netherlands 	           2.60%	      74.69		                     -		        -	 3.23%	                 74.69	      82.90	    c	    EUR
New Zealand 	           0.12%	       3.45		                  0.55		        -	 0.17%	                  4.00	        9.92			       NZD
Nigeria 	               0.00%	       4.00	 d	                   -		        -	 0.17%	                  4.00	      921.93		        NGN
Norway 	                1.34%	      38.47		                     -		        -	 1.66%	                 38.47	      376.00		        NOK
Pakistan 	              0.00%	       4.00	 d	                   -		        -	 0.17%	                  4.00 	     499.64		        PKR
Portugal 	              0.12%	       3.45		                  0.55		        -	 0.17%	                  4.00	        4.44		  g	    EUR
Russian Federation 	    0.00%	       6.53		                  0.58	 c	      -	 0.31%	                  7.10	       10.00	   g	    USD
Slovenia 	              0.03%	       0.86		                  3.85	 c	      -	 0.20% 	                 4.71 	       4.80 		       EUR
South Africa 	          0.00%	       4.00	 d	                0.35	 c	      -	 0.19%	                  4.35 	      51.56		        ZAR
Spain 	                 0.97%	      27.76		                     -		        -	 1.20%	                 27.76 	      30.81		        EUR
Sweden 	                2.29%	      65.65		                 19.78		        -	 3.70%	                 85.43 	    1,015.00	 e f	   SEK
Switzerland 	           2.10%	      60.30		                  1.10	 c	  14.01	 3.26%	                 75.41	      124.93		        CHF
Turkey 	                0.00%	       4.00	 d	                   -		        -	 0.17%	                  4.00 	       9.57		  g	    TRY
United Kingdom 	        6.93%	     199.12		                 15.32		        -	 9.28%	               214.43	       210.00	 h	      GBP
United States 	        13.07%	     375.23 		                    -		        -	 16.23%	              375.23 	      575.00		        USD

                                                                118
                                   Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                 Global Environment F ac ilit y




	                                      	                      	 Adjustment
	                    GEF-5 Shares and	           Supplemental	 Towards Full
	                  Basic Contributionsa	         Contributions	    Funding	                                Total Contributions
Contributing	                   	                	     	        	     	                        	             	
Participants	            (%)	      SDR	                   SDR	       SDR	                     %	        SDR	    Currencyb	
                                                                                                                         Currency

1. New Funding	 72.76%	 2,131.67	            165.61 	     14.01	100.00% 	2,311.29
from Contributing
Participants					
2. Projected Investment Income					 73.13	 i		
3. Projected Carryover of GEF Resources				 448.27	
Paid-in Unallocated Resources					 102.67	 j
Paid-in Deferred Contributions					 151.64
Unpaid Resources						 193.97	 k			




                                                                                                                                         REPLENISHMENT
4. Total Projected Resources to Cover GEF-5 Work Program	      	       2,832.69 	
                                                                       	          l

** All pledges are subject to Parliamentary/Congressional approval.

a	 The GEF-5 basic shares reflect those of the GEF-4 except for Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, The
   Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
b	 As agreed by the Contributing Participants at the October 14-15, 2009 GEF-5 replenishment meeting, the reference
   exchange rates to convert between the SDR amounts and the national currency amounts will be the average daily
   exchange rates over the period from March 1, 2009 to September 30, 2009.
c	 Contributing Participants have the option of taking a discount or credit for accelerating their payment/encashment sched-
   ule and: (i) including such credit as part of their basic share; (ii) counting such credit as a supplemental contribution; or (iii)
   taking such discount against the national currency contribution. Austria has opted to include such credit as part of its basic
   share. Belgium, Czech Republic, Finland, Greece, India, Ireland, Korea, Mexico, the Russian Federation, Slovenia, South
   Africa and Switzerland have opted to take the credit for accelerated encashment as a supplemental contribution. Canada,
   China, France and The Netherlands have opted to take a discount against the national currency contribution.
d	 For those Contributing Participants that do not have a basic share, this represents the agreed minimum contribution of
   SDR 4 million.
e	 The Governments of Austria and Sweden wish to note that their contribution amounts include, respectively, EUR 6.1 mil-
   lion and SEK 235 million in recognition of their commitments to support Fast-Start Climate Financing.
f	 The Governments of Belgium, France and Sweden wish to note that their contribution amounts include, respectively, EUR 10
   million, EUR 75 million and SEK 100 million to support Fast-Start Climate Financing for Sustainable Forest Management.
g	 The pledges from these Contributing Participants are subject to confirmation.
h	 Of the total amount of this pledge, GBP 15 million is conditional upon completion of the following four proposals
   included in the Policy Recommendations for the Fifth Replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund: (i) approval by the Council
   by June 2010 and implementation by the Secretariat by December 2010 of the proposal to reform the country support
   program; (ii) approval by the Council by June 2010 and implementation by the Secretariat by December 2010 of the pro-
   posal to refine programmatic approaches; (iii) approval by the Council by June 2010 and implementation by the
   Secretariat by December 2010 of the proposal to streamline the project cycle; and (iv) approval by the Council by
   November 2010 and implementation by the Secretariat by June 2011 of the work plan to implement the GEF results-
   based management framework.
i	 This represents projected investment income to be earned over the GEF-5 period (FY11- FY14). Investment income is
   projected using a USD 2 billion average cash balance and estimated investment return of 1.4% per annum.
j	 This amount represents GEF-4 paid-in but unallocated resources (excluding amounts for which commitment by the
   Trustee is deferred under any prior replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund) and investment income.
k	 This amount comprises Instruments of Commitments not yet deposited plus arrears (late payments under deposited
   Instruments of Commitments or Qualified Instruments of Commitment).
l	 This SDR amount is equivalent to USD 4,340 million using the agreed GEF-5 reference exchange rates.

(NOTE: For updated information on contributions see table on page 147)
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                               ATTACHMENT 2

                    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                        F IF T H RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES



                               INST R UME NT OF C OMMIT MEN T




Reference is made to Resolution No. 2010-0004 of the Executive Directors of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the “World Bank”) entitled “Global Environment
Facility Trust Fund: Fifth Replenishment of Resources” which was adopted on July 19, 2010 (the
“Resolution”).

The Government of _________________ hereby notifies the World Bank as Trustee of
the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund, pursuant to paragraph 2 of the Resolution, that it
will make the contribution authorized for it in Attachment 1 of the Resolution, in accordance
with the terms of the Resolution, in the amount of ________________________.




_______________________			                                  _________________________
(Date)					                                                (Name, Title and Office)




                                                        120
         Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                       Global Environment F ac ilit y




                            ATTACHMENT 3

    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
        F IF T H RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES

         INDIC AT IVE E NC ASH MENT SC H ED U LE




	                   Fiscal	                    Percentage of
	                    Year	                     Total Pledge
	                   2011 	                           8.0
	                   2012 	                          11.0




                                                                              REPLENISHMENT
	                   2013 	                          14.0
	                   2014 	                          14.5
	                   2015 	                          14.0
	                   2016 	                          12.0
	                   2017 	                          10.0
	                   2018 	                           8.0
	                   2019 	                           5.0
	                   2020 	                           3.5
	                   Total	                        100.0




                                       121
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                               ATTACHMENT 4

                    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                        F IF T H RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES



                           RE VISE D C ONT RIBUT ION A MOU N T S



	
1.	   Each Contributing Participant for which the Trustee has included an indicative contribution
      amount (the “Indicative Contribution Amount”) in Attachment 1 shall confirm the amount
      of its contribution to the Trustee in writing by September 30, 2010. The Trustee shall
      promptly inform in writing all Contributing Participants of such confirmed amount (the
      “Confirmed Contribution Amount”).

2.	   If the Confirmed Contribution Amount of a Contributing Participant for which the Trustee
      has included an Indicative Contribution Amount is less than 90 percent of its Indicative
      Contribution Amount, the Trustee shall (a) calculate the revised percentage of actual
      shares of all Contributing Participants (the “Revised Share Percentage”) and (b) notify the
      Contributing Participants of their Revised Share Percentage.

3.	   Within 20 business days of the dispatch of notice by the Trustee under paragraph 2 above,
      each Contributing Participant receiving such notice may notify the Trustee in writing that it
      wishes to reduce the amount of its contribution specified in Attachment 1 (the “Original
      Contribution Amount”) to maintain its actual share percentage specified in Attachment 1
      (the “Original Share Percentage”).

4.	   Within 5 business days of the dispatch of notice by a Contributing Participant under para-
      graph 3 above, the Trustee shall notify in writing such Contributing Participant of the
      amount by which the Original Contribution Amount of such Contributing Participant would
      need to be reduced in order to maintain its Original Share Percentage (the “Maximum
      Reduction Amount”).

5.	   Within 20 business days of the dispatch of notice by the Trustee under paragraph 4 above,
      the corresponding Contributing Participant shall notify the Trustee in writing of the amount
      by which such Contributing Participant wishes to reduce its Original Contribution Amount.
      Such amount shall not exceed the Maximum Reduction Amount (the revised contribution
      amount of such Contributing Participant, the “Revised Contribution Amount”).




                                                        122
                  Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                Global Environment F ac ilit y




6.	   The right of a Contributing Participant under paragraph 3 above shall be
      deemed waived if the Trustee does not receive, within the 20-business day
      period specified in paragraph 3 above, a written notice informing the Trustee
      that such Contributing Participant has decided to reduce its Original
      Contribution Amount.

7.	   Once the Revised Contribution Amounts of all the corresponding
      Contributing Participants have been determined, the Trustee shall:

	     (a)	 Update Annex 1 to reflect the Revised Contribution Amounts and provide
           a copy of such updated Annex to all Contributing Participants; and

	     (b)	 If a Contributing Participant exercising its right to reduce its Original




                                                                                       REPLENISHMENT
           Contribution Amount has prior to that time provided an Instrument of
           Commitment or a Qualified Instrument of Commitment to the Trustee for
           an amount equal to its Original Contribution Amount (the “Original
           Contribution Amount Instrument”), such Contributing Participant shall
           provide to the Trustee a new Instrument of Commitment or Qualified
           Instrument of Commitment for an amount equal to the Revised
           Contribution Amount (the “Revised Contribution Amount Instrument”).
           Upon receipt of the Revised Contribution Amount Instrument, the Trustee
           shall return to the Contributing Participant the Original Contribution
           Amount Instrument.




                                                123
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




         I NTERNATI O N AL BANK F OR RE C ONST RUC T ION A N D D EVELOP MEN T

             EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR’S RESOLUTION NO. IBRD 2014 - 0002

                     G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                        SIXT H RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES


WHEREAS:

(A)	   The participants contributing to the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund (“the GEF
       Trust Fund”), (jointly, “the Contributing Participants”, each “a Contributing Participant”)
       having considered the prospective financial requirements of the GEF Trust Fund, have
       concluded that additional resources should be made available to the GEF Trust Fund for
       new financing commitments for the period from July 1, 2014 to June 30, 2018 (the “Sixth
       Replenishment”) and have agreed to ask their legislatures, where necessary, to authorize
       and approve the allocation of additional resources to the GEF Trust Fund in the amounts
       set out in Attachment 1, and according to the provisions set forth herein;

(B)	 The Council of the Global Environment Facility (the “GEF” or “Facility”) (the “Council”),
     having considered the Summary of The Negotiations on the Sixth Replenishment, includ-
     ing the policy recommendations made on the basis of the Fifth Overall Performance Study
     of the GEF, other reports emanating from the GEF monitoring and evaluation program
     during the prior replenishment period, and the views and proposals of the Participants,
     has requested the Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction
     and Development (the “World Bank”) to authorize the World Bank as Trustee of the
     GEF Trust Fund to hold in trust and manage the resources made available for the Sixth
     Replenishment;

(C)	   It is desirable to administer any remaining funds from the fifth replenishment of the GEF
       Trust Fund authorized by the Instrument for the Establishment of the Restructured Global
       Environment Facility, as amended (the “Instrument”), and approved by Resolution No.
       2010-0004 of the World Bank, adopted on July 19, 2010 (the “Fifth Replenishment”), as
       part of this Sixth Replenishment;

(D)	 The World Bank, as provided for in Paragraph 8 and Annex B of the Instrument (adopted
     on May 24, 1994, pursuant to Resolution No. 94-2 of the Executive Directors of the World
     Bank), is Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund and, in that capacity, will hold in trust and manage
     the resources made available for the Sixth Replenishment.




                                                         124
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




NOW THEREFORE the Executive Directors of the World Bank hereby note with approval the
replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund in the amounts and on the basis set forth herein and
authorize the World Bank as Trustee of the GEF Trust Fund (the “Trustee”) to manage the
resources made available for the Sixth Replenishment as follows:

Contributions

1.	   The Trustee is authorized to accept contributions to the GEF Trust Fund; (a) by way of a
      grant from each Contributing Participant in the GEF Trust Fund in the amount specified for
      each Contributing Participant in Attachment 1, and (b) otherwise as provided herein.

Instruments of Commitment




                                                                                                        REPLENISHMENT
2.	   (a)	 Contributing Participants to the Sixth Replenishment shall deposit with the Trustee
           an instrument of commitment substantially in the form set out in Attachment 2
           (“Instrument of Commitment”), subject to sub-paragraph 2(b).

      (b)	 When a Contributing Participant agrees to pay a part of its contribution without
           qualification and the remainder is subject to enactment by its legislature of the neces-
           sary appropriation legislation, it shall deposit a qualified instrument of commitment
           in a form acceptable to the Trustee (“Qualified Instrument of Commitment”); such
           Contributing Participant undertakes to exercise its best efforts to obtain legislative
           approval for the installment amounts of its contribution by the payment dates set out
           in sub-paragraph 3(a) below.

      (c)	 At every Council meeting, the Trustee will inform the Council of the status of Instruments
           of Commitment and Qualified Instruments of Commitment deposited with the Trustee.

Payments

3.	   (a)	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph 1(a) that a Contributing
           Participant agrees to pay without qualification shall be paid to the Trustee in four
           equal installments by November 30, 2014, November 30, 2015, November 30, 2016 and
           November 30, 2017, provided that:

          (i)	 The Trustee and a Contributing Participant may agree to earlier payment;

          (ii)	 If the Sixth Replenishment shall not have become effective (as described in sub-
                paragraph 6(a) below) by October 31, 2014, payment of any installment which
                would otherwise have been due prior to the Effective Date (as defined in sub­
                paragraph 6(a) below) shall become due 30 days after the Effective Date;

                                                         125
                     Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                   Global Environment F ac ilit y




    (iii)	 Upon the written request of a Contributing Participant, the Trustee may agree to
           allow such Contributing Participant to postpone the payment of any installment,
           or part thereof, up to, but not beyond, June 30 of the calendar year following
           the year in which such installment is due. Payments made pursuant to any such
           agreement with the Trustee shall constitute timely payments; and

    (iv)	 If any Contributing Participant shall deposit an Instrument of Commitment with
          the Trustee after the date on which any installment of the contribution is due,
          payment of any such installment(s) shall be made to the Trustee within 30 days
          after the date of deposit of such Instrument.

(b)	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph 1(a) that a Contributing
     Participant agrees to make pursuant to a Qualified Instrument of Commitment shall
     be paid to the Trustee as follows:

    (i)	 If any Contributing Participant deposits a Qualified Instrument of Commitment with
         the Trustee after the date on which any installment of the contribution would have
         been due under sub-paragraph 3(a) if the Contributing Participant had deposited
         an unqualified Instrument of Commitment, payment of any such installment(s), or
         part thereof, shall be made to the Trustee within 30 days after the date of deposit of
         such Instrument to the extent that such Instrument has been unqualified.

    (ii)	 If any Contributing Participant that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of
          Commitment thereafter notifies the Trustee that an installment, or part thereof,
          is unqualified after the date when such installment would have been due under
          sub­paragraph 3(a) if the Contributing Participant had deposited an unqualified
          Instrument of Commitment, payment of such installment, or part thereof, shall be
          made within 30 days of such notification.

(c)	 Payments under sub-paragraph 1(a) shall be made, at the option of each Contributing
     Participant, (i) in cash or (ii) through the deposit of notes or similar obligations (such
     as letters of credit) issued by the government of the Contributing Participant or the
     depository designated by the Contributing Participant, which shall be non-negotiable,
     non-interest bearing, and payable at their par value on demand to the account of the
     Trustee on the following terms:

    (i)	 Subject to sub-paragraph 3(a)(iii), payment in cash may be made on terms agreed
         between the Contributing Participant and the Trustee that shall be no less favor-
         able to the GEF Trust Fund than payment made through the deposit of notes or
         similar obligations pursuant to sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii).


                                                   126
                     Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                   Global Environment F ac ilit y




   (ii)	 The Trustee shall encash notes or similar obligations on an approximately pro
         rata basis among Contributing Participants, at reasonable intervals as needed
         for disbursement and transfers referred to in paragraph 8, as determined by the
         Trustee. An indicative encashment schedule is set out in Attachment 3. At the
         written request of a Contributing Participant experiencing exceptionally difficult
         budgetary circumstances, the Trustee may permit postponement of encashment
         for (i) up to two years in respect of a Contributing Participant that is also an eli-
         gible recipient under the GEF Trust Fund, and (ii) up to 45 days in respect of all
         other Contributing Participants.

   (iii)	 At the request of a Contributing Participant, the Trustee may agree to encash notes
          or similar obligations on a basis other than a pro rata basis; provided that, subject to
          sub-paragraph 3(c)(iv), the schedule of encashment agreed for such notes or obliga-




                                                                                                     REPLENISHMENT
          tions shall be no less favorable to the GEF Trust Fund than the schedule that would
          apply according to the pro rata basis provided for under sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii).

   (iv)	 If the sum total of a Contributing Participant’s notes or similar obligations depos-
         ited with the Trustee is insufficient to meet the indicative encashment schedule
         referred to in sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii) (as such schedule may be amended from time
         to time), such Contributing Participant shall exercise its best efforts, subject to its
         domestic budgetary and legislative practices and requirements, to meet a schedule
         of encashment for the notes or similar obligations it thereafter deposits with the
         Trustee that would be no less favorable to the GEF Trust Fund than the schedule
         that would otherwise have applied according to the pro rata basis provided for
         under sub-paragraph 3(c)(ii).

(d)	 Sub-paragraph 3(c) does not apply to, or affect, the schedule for the payment of
     installments set out in sub-paragraph 3(a) or, in the case of a Contributing Participant
     that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment, the obligations undertaken
     pursuant to sub-paragraph 2(b). Further, nothing in sub-paragraph 3(c) authorizes
     the Trustee to increase a Contributing Participant’s contribution or to impose financial
     penalties for any reason.

(e)	 Contributions to the GEF Trust Fund under sub-paragraph 1(b) shall be paid in accor-
     dance with the terms on which such contributions are accepted by the Trustee.

(f)	 The Trustee shall make regular reports to the Council on the status of Contributing
     Participants’ contributions.




                                                   127
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




Timely Availability of Resources

4.	   (a)	 If (i) a Contributing Participant does not make payment in accordance with sub-
           paragraph 3(a) or 3(b); or (ii) a Contributing Participant that has deposited a Qualified
           Instrument of Commitment, is unable, despite its best efforts undertaken in accor-
           dance with sub-paragraph 2(b), to obtain legislative approval to unqualify a suffi-
           cient amount of its contribution to meet the payment dates set out in sub-paragraph
           3(a), and such delay continues for 30 days, the Trustee shall notify the Contributing
           Participant of the delay. In doing so, the Trustee shall request the Contributing
           Participant to make payment promptly, or, as appropriate, to exercise its best efforts
           to obtain legislative approval to unqualify sufficient funds to make payment promptly.
           The Trustee shall also remind the Contributing Participant of the obligation it will
           incur under the further requirements of this sub-paragraph if the delay persists. If
           payment has not been made 30 days before the date of the Council meeting following
           the date on which the delay was incurred, the responsible Minister of the Contributing
           Participant concerned shall provide the Chief Executive Officer/Chairperson of the
           Facility (the “CEO”) with a written communication stating the reasons for the delay and
           the measures being taken to address it. The CEO shall forward any such communica-
           tion to the Council, with a copy to the Trustee.

      (b)	 As provided in sub-paragraph 25(c) of the Instrument, for the purpose of determining vot-
           ing power in the event of a formal vote by the Council, a Contributing Participant’s total
           contributions shall consist of the actual cumulative contributions made by a Contributing
           Participant to the GEF Trust Fund, including actual contributions made to the Sixth
           Replenishment, contributions made to the Global Environment Trust Fund (the “GET”),
           and the grant equivalent of co-financing and parallel financing made under the GEF pilot
           program, or agreed with the Trustee before the effective date of the GEF Trust Fund.

Currency of Denomination and Payment

5.	   (a)	 Contributing Participants shall denominate their contributions in Special Drawing
           Rights (“SDR”), or in a currency that is freely convertible, as determined by the
           Trustee, except that if a Contributing Participant’s economy experienced a rate of
           inflation in excess of ten percent per annum on average in the period 2009 to 2011 as
           determined by the Trustee as of the date this Resolution is adopted, its contribution
           shall be denominated in SDR or United States Dollars.

      (b)	 Contributing Participants shall make payments in SDR, a currency used for the valu-
           ation of the SDR, or with the agreement of the Trustee, in another freely convertible
           currency. The Trustee may, in its discretion, freely exchange contributions received
           for any such currencies.

                                                         128
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




      (c)	 Each Contributing Participant shall maintain, with respect to its currency paid to the
           Trustee and the currency of such Contributing Participant derived therefrom, the same
           convertibility as existed on the date on which this Resolution is adopted.

Effective Date

6.	   (a)	 The Sixth Replenishment shall become effective on the date when Contributing
           Participants whose contributions aggregate not less than sixty percent (60%) of the
           total contributions of all Contributing Participants, as set out in Attachment 1 shall
           have deposited with the Trustee Instruments of Commitment or Qualified Instruments
           of Commitment (the “Effective Date”).

      (b)	 The Trustee shall promptly notify all Contributing Participants when the Sixth




                                                                                                      REPLENISHMENT
           Replenishment becomes effective.

      (c)	 If the Sixth Replenishment does not become effective by March 31, 2015, the Trustee
           shall so inform the Contributing Participants and consult with them on possible steps
           to be taken to prevent any interruption of GEF financing. The Trustee, in collaboration
           with the CEO, will inform the Council of the results of such consultations, and seek the
           Council’s guidance on the steps to be taken, including, as may be necessary, the con-
           vening of a meeting of the Contributing Participants.

Advance Contributions

7.	   (a)	 In order to avoid an interruption in the Trustee’s ability to make financing commit-
           ments pending the effectiveness of the Sixth Replenishment, and if the Trustee shall
           have received Instruments of Commitment or Qualified Instruments of Commitment
           from Contributing Participants whose contributions aggregate not less than twenty
           percent (20%) of the total contributions of all Contributing Participants, as set out in
           Attachment 1, the Trustee may deem, prior to the Effective Date, one quarter of the
           total amount of each contribution for which an Instrument of Commitment or Qualified
           Instrument of Commitment has been deposited with the Trustee as an advance con-
           tribution, unless the Contributing Participant specifies otherwise in its Instrument of
           Commitment or Qualified Instrument of Commitment.

      (b)	 The Trustee shall specify when advance contributions pursuant to sub-paragraph 7(a)
           above are to be paid to the Trustee.

      (c)	 The terms and conditions applicable to contributions to the Sixth Replenishment
           shall apply also to advance contributions until the Effective Date, when such contri-


                                                        129
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




          butions shall be deemed to constitute payment towards the amount due from each
          Contributing Participant for its contribution.

Commitment or Transfer Authority

8.	   (a)	 Contributions shall become available for commitment by the Trustee, for disburse-
           ment or transfer as needed to cover the work program, the administrative budget
           of the GEF, and any other expenses approved by the Council under the Instrument,
           upon receipt of payment by the Trustee of the contributions set out in sub-para-
           graphs 1(a) and (b) except as provided in sub-paragraph 8(c) below. Paid in but unal-
           located resources included in the carryover reflected in Attachment 1 hereto (exclud-
           ing any amount for which commitment by the Trustee is deferred under any prior
           replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund) and investment income shall become available
           for commitment by the Trustee, for disbursement or transfer as needed to cover
           the work program, the administrative budget of the GEF, and any other expenses
           approved by the Council under the Instrument, upon adoption of the resolution by
           the Executive Directors of the World Bank.

      (b)	 The Trustee shall promptly inform all Contributing Participants if a Contributing
           Participant that has deposited a Qualified Instrument of Commitment and whose
           contribution represents more than 5 percent of the total amount of the resources
           to be contributed pursuant to the Sixth Replenishment has not unqualified at least
           50 percent of the total amount of its contribution by November 30, 2015, or 30
           days after the Effective Date, whichever is later, and at least 75 percent of the total
           amount of its contribution by November 30, 2016, or 30 days after the Effective
           Date, whichever is later, and the total amount thereof by November 30, 2017, or 30
           days after the Effective Date, whichever is later.

      (c)	 Within 45 days of the dispatch of notice by the Trustee under sub-paragraph 8(b)
           above, each Contributing Participant receiving such notice may notify the Trustee in
           writing that (i) the commitment by the Trustee of the second, third or fourth install-
           ment, whichever is applicable, of such Contributing Participant’s contribution shall
           be deferred while, and to the extent that, any part of the contribution referred to in
           sub-paragraph 8(b) remains qualified; or (ii) it wishes to extend the decision period
           for the right to defer commitment of its contribution from 45 days to 120 days. The
           Trustee shall make no commitments in respect of the resources to which the notice
           pertains unless the right of the Contributing Participant is waived pursuant to sub-
           paragraph 8(d) below.




                                                        130
                           Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                         Global Environment F ac ilit y




      (d)	 The right of a Contributing Participant under sub-paragraph 8(c) above may be waived
           in writing, and it shall be deemed waived if the Trustee does not receive, within the
           45-day period or 120-day period specified in sub-paragraph 8(c), as appropriate, a writ-
           ten notice informing the Trustee pursuant to such sub-paragraph that the Contributing
           Participant has decided to defer commitment of a portion of its contribution.

      (e)	 The Trustee, in collaboration with the CEO, shall consult with the Contributing Participants
           and seek the Council’s advice on possible steps to be taken where, in its judgment: (i)
           there is a substantial likelihood that the total amount of the contributions referred to in
           sub-paragraph 8(b) above shall not be committed to the Trustee without qualification by
           June 30, 2018, or (ii) as a result of Contributing Participants exercising their rights under
           sub-paragraph 8(c), the Trustee is, or may shortly be, precluded from entering into new
           commitments for disbursement or transfer.




                                                                                                           REPLENISHMENT
      (f)	 Commitment and transfer authority shall be increased by:

          (i)	 The income earned on the investment of resources held in the GEF Trust Fund
               pending disbursement or transfer by the Trustee; and

          (ii)	 Payments received by the Trustee as repayment, interest or charges on loans
                made by the GEF Trust Fund.

    (g)	 The Trustee may enter into agreements to provide financing from the GEF Trust Fund,
          conditional on the commitment of such financing becoming effective and binding on
          the GEF Trust Fund when resources become available for commitment by the Trustee.	
          		
Administration of the Fifth Replenishment

9.	   Funds, receipts, assets and liabilities held by the Trustee under the Fifth Replenishment,
      including the full carryover reflected in Attachment 1 hereto, will be administered under
      the Sixth Replenishment.




                                                         131
                              Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                            Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                   ATTACHMENT 1

                       G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                          SIXT H RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES
                                 T ABLE OF C ONT RIBUT ION S

                                   CONTRIBUTIONS (IN MILLIONS)

                     GEF-6 Shares and             Supplemental       GEF-6 Actual
                     Basic Contributions a        Contributions      Shares                        Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants            (%)           SDR              SDR                (%)              SDR         Currency b     Currency
1                        2             3                4                  5                6              7             8
                                                                                                           93.00
Australia               1.46%       46.52             12.02              2.38%           58.54                           AUD
Austria                 1.21%       38.56              6.67 c            1.84%           45.23            50.53          EUR
Bangladesh               -           0.07                -               0.00%            0.07             0.10 e        USD
Belgium                 1.55%       49.39             19.78 c            2.81%           69.17            74.40          EUR
Brazil                   -           4.00 d            6.52              0.43%           10.52            15.89          USD
Canada                  4.28%      136.39             13.12              6.08%          149.51           232.87 c f      CAD
China                    -           4.00 d            9.24              0.54%           13.24            20.00 c        USD
Czech Republic           -           4.00 d              -               0.16%            4.00           118.65 e        CZK
Denmark                 1.71%       54.37 c              -               2.21%           54.37           435.00          DKK
Finland                 1.00%       31.87             28.56 c            2.46%           60.43            65.00          EUR
France                  6.23%      198.64                -               8.07%          198.64           300.00 c e      USD
Germany                 9.57%      304.80                -              12.39%          304.80           350.00 e        EUR
India                    -           4.00 d            3.95              0.32%            7.95            12.00          USD
Ireland                 0.11%        3.51              1.82 c            0.22%            5.33             5.73 e        EUR
Italy                   2.51%       80.12                -               3.26%           80.12            92.00          EUR
Japan                  12.61%      401.97                -              16.34%          401.97        60,000.00          JPY
Korea                   0.16%        4.97              0.34 c            0.22%            5.30             7.50 e        USD
Luxembourg              0.05%        1.59              2.41              0.16%            4.00             4.59          EUR
Mexico                   -           4.00 d            8.97              0.53%           12.97           248.60          MXN
Netherlands             2.27%       72.19                -               2.93%           72.19            82.90 c        EUR
New Zealand             0.12%        3.82              0.18              0.16%            4.00             7.47 e        NZD
Norway                  1.52%       48.39                -               1.97%           48.39           432.00 e        NOK
Pakistan                 -           4.00 d              -               0.16%            4.00             6.04          USD
Russian Federation       -           4.00 d            5.93              0.40%            9.93            15.00          USD
Slovenia                0.03%        0.96              3.04              0.16%            4.00             4.59 e        EUR
South Africa             -           4.00 d            0.35              0.18%            4.35            64.00 e        ZAR
Spain                   0.84%       26.83                -               1.09%           26.83            30.81 e        EUR
Sweden                  2.29%       72.97             61.86              5.48%          134.83         1,335.00          SEK
Switzerland             2.30%       73.29             16.16 c            3.64%           89.45           124.93          CHF
United Kingdom          6.73%      214.56                -               8.72%          214.56           210.00          GBP
United States          11.35%      361.69                -              14.70%          361.69           546.25 c        USD




                                                            132
                                  Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                Global Environment F ac ilit y




                        GEF-6 Shares and              Supplemental       GEF-6 Actual
                        Basic Contributions a         Contributions      Shares                        Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants               (%)            SDR              SDR                (%)              SDR         Currency b   Currency
1                           2              3                4                  5                6              7           8

1 New Funding          69.90% 2,259.46                  200.91             100.00%         2,460.37
  from Contributing
  Participants
2 Projected Investment Income                                                                88.73 g
3 Projected Carryover of GEF Resources                                                      386.22
          Paid-in Unallocated Resources                                                     123.82 h
          Paid-in Deferred Contributions                                                     61.33
          Unpaid Resources                                                                  201.07 i
4 Total Projected Resources to Cover GEF-6 Work Program                                   2,935.31 j




                                                                                                                                   REPLENISHMENT
a	 The GEF-6 basic shares reflect those of the GEF-5 in respect of the following Contributing Participants: Australia, Austria,
   Belgium, Canada, Finland, Ireland, Luxembourg, New Zealand, Slovenia and Sweden.
b	 As agreed by the Contributing Participants at the April 3-4, 2013 GEF-6 replenishment meeting, the average daily
   exchange rates over the period from April 1, 2013 to September 30, 2013 are used as the reference exchange rates to
   convert between the SDR amounts and the national currency amounts.
c	 Contributing Participants have the option of taking a discount or credit for accelerating their payment/encashment
   schedule and: (i) including such credit as part of their basic share; (ii) counting such credit as a supplemental contribu-
   tion; or (iii) taking such discount against the national currency contribution. Austria, Belgium, Finland, Ireland, Korea
   and Switzerland have opted to take the credit for accelerated encashment as a supplemental contribution. Denmark has
   opted to take the credit for accelerated payment as a part of its basic share. Canada, China, France and the Netherlands
   have opted to take a discount against the national currency contribution. The United States has opted to take a credit
   and use it for payments under previous replenishments.
d	 For those Contributing Participants that do not have a basic share, this represents the agreed minimum contribution of
   SDR 4 million.
e	 These pledges are subject to government or parliamentary approval.
f	 This represents an indicative amount calculated by the Trustee, and does not represent pledge by the Contributing
   Participant. Pledge amount is to be determined by the Contributing Participant and confirmed to the Trustee.
g	 Investment income is projected using a USD 3 billion average cash balance and estimated investment return of 1.11% per
   annum.
h	 This amount represents paid-in but unallocated resources in the GEF Trust Fund (excluding amounts for which commit-
   ment by the Trustee is deferred under any prior replenishment of the GEF Trust Fund) and investment income.
i	 This amount comprises Instruments of Commitments not yet deposited plus arrears (late payments under deposited
   Instruments of Commitments or Qualified Instruments of Commitments).
j	 This SDR amount is equivalent to USD 4,433 million using the agreed GEF-6 reference exchange rates.




                                                                133
                          Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                        Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                               ATTACHMENT 2

                    G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                       SIXT H RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES



                               INST R UME NT OF C OMMIT MEN T




Reference is made to Resolution No. 2014-0002 of the Executive Directors of the International
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the “World Bank”) entitled “Global Environment
Facility Trust Fund: Sixth Replenishment of Resources” which was adopted on July 30, 2014
(the “Resolution”).

The Government of ___________________ hereby notifies the World Bank as Trustee of the
Global Environment Facility Trust Fund, pursuant to paragraph 2 of the Resolution, that it will
make the contribution authorized for it in Attachment 1 of the Resolution, in accordance with the
terms of the Resolution, in the amount of ________________________.




_______________________			                                 _________________________
(Date)					                                               (Name, Title and Office)




                                                        134
     Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                   Global Environment F ac ilit y




                        ATTACHMENT 3

G LOBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
   SIXT H RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES

     INDIC AT IVE E NC ASH MENT SC H ED U LE




                 Fiscal                  Percentage of
                  Year                   Total Pledge
                 2015                              3.0




                                                                          REPLENISHMENT
                 2016                              8.0
                 2017                            10.0
                 2018                            12.0
                 2019                            13.0
                 2020                            15.0
                 2021                            14.0
                 2022                             11.0
                 2023                              9.0
                 2024                              5.0
                 Total                         100.0




                                   135
Updated Commitments by
Contributing Participants
                                  Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                Global Environment F ac ilit y




                           G LOBAL ENVIRONMENT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                                         PILOT PH ASE

                P L ED G ES A ND C OMMIT MENT S AS OF DEC EMBER 3 1 , 201 4 * *
                                        (IN MILLIONS)

                                                                           Pilot Phase Total Contributions

 Contributing Participants                                          SDR                 Contribution a               Currency
Australia                                                           9.68                        16.40      	             AUD
Austria                                                            26.02                        29.07                    EUR e
Belgium                                                             5.00 b                       5.00                    SDR c
Brazil                                                              4.00                         4.00                    SDR c
Canada                                                              6.33                        10.00      	             CAD
China                                                               4.00                         4.00                    SDR c
Cote d’Ivoire                                                       2.00                         2.00                    SDR c
Denmark                                                            16.25                        16.25                    SDR c
Egypt                                                               4.00                         4.00                    SDR c
Finland                                                            20.44                        17.66                    EUR e
France                                                            110.08                       123.00                    EUR e
Germany                                                           110.02                       122.85                    EUR e
India                                                               4.00                         4.00                    SDR c
Indonesia                                                           4.00                         4.00                    SDR c
Italy                                                              65.14                        54.23                    EUR e
Japan                                                              27.36                     5,373.00      	              JPY
Mexico                                                              4.00                         5.48      	             USD
Netherlands                                                        37.74                        37.74                    SDR c
Nigeria                                                             4.00                         4.00                    SDR c
Norway                                                             19.56                       165.00      	             NOK
Pakistan                                                            4.00                         4.00                    SDR c
Portugal                                                            4.50                         4.50                    SDR c
Spain                                                              10.00                        10.00                    SDR c
Sweden                                                             24.54                       196.07      	             SEK
Switzerland                                                        30.06                        30.06                    SDR c
Turkey                                                              4.00                         4.00                    SDR c
United Kingdom                                                     54.73                        40.30      	             GBP

1. New Funding from Donors                                        615.45
2. Contribution from IBRD Net Income                               20.92

Total ( 1 + 2 )                                                  636.37 d


** Based on Pledges and Instruments of Commitments or Qualified Instruments of Commitment received by the Trustee.
a	 Calculated by converting the SDR amount to currency of contribution using an average daily exchange rate over the
   period from July 1, 1990 to Sep. 30, 1990.
b	 Contributing Participants had the option of taking a discount or credit for acceleration of encashment and; (i) includ-
   ing such credit as part of their basic share; (ii) counting such credit as a supplemental contribution; or (iii) taking such
   discount against the national currency contribution. Belgium opted to take a discount against their national currency
   contribution.
c	 These Contributing Participants denominated their contributions in SDRs.
d	 This is equivalent to USD 871.83 million using the agreed reference exchange rates for the GEF Pilot Phase.
e	 The contributions of these Contributing Participants that are member states of the European Economic and Monetary
   Union (EMU) were originally pledged in each of their legacy currencies. The Trustee converted these legacy currencies
   into EUR, the common currency for the EMU, in January 2000 at fixed conversion rates.
                                Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                              Global Environment F ac ilit y




                         G L OBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                             F IR ST RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES 1

               P L ED G ES A ND C OMMIT ME NT S AS OF DEC EMBER 3 1 , 201 4 * *
                                       (IN MILLIONS)

                                                                         Adjustment
                    Calculated                   Supplemental           Towards Full
                    Basic Contributions          Contributions            Funding                    GEF-1 Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants            (%) a           SDR             SDR                    SDR                   SDR    Contribution b   Currency
Argentina              -             3.57                                                          3.57            5.00      USD
Australia             1.46%         20.84                                                         20.84           42.76      AUD
Austria               0.90%         12.85              1.05                  0.37                 14.28           16.82      EUR c
Bangladesh             -             2.00                                                          2.00            2.00      SDR d
Belgium               1.55%         22.13             0.73                                        22.86           27.27      EUR c
Brazil                 -             4.00                                                          4.00            4.00      SDR d
Canada                4.00%         57.10             4.68                                        61.78          111.11      CAD
China                  -             4.00                                                          4.00            4.00      SDR d
Cote d’Ivoire          -             4.00                                                          4.00            4.00      SDR d
Czech Republic         -             4.00                                                          4.00            4.00      SDR d
Denmark               1.30%         18.56              1.52                  5.00                 25.08           25.08      SDR d
Egypt                  -             4.00                                                          4.00            4.00      SDR d




                                                                                                                                        COMMITMENTS
Finland               1.00%         14.28             1.17                                        15.45           20.86      EUR c
France                7.02%        100.21             2.05                                      102.26          122.98       EUR c
Germany              11.00%        157.03            12.86                    1.41               171.30          171.30      SDR d
Greece                0.05%          0.71             2.86                                         3.57            5.00      USD
India                  -             6.00                                                          6.00            6.00      SDR d
Ireland               0.11%          1.57             0.14                                         1.71            2.08      EUR c
Italy                 5.30%         75.66                                                         75.66           82.53      EUR c
Japan                18.70%        266.95            21.86                   7.14               295.95       45,698.09        JPY
Korea                 0.23%          3.28             0.72                                         4.00            4.00      SDR d
Luxembourg            0.05%          0.71             3.29                                         4.00            4.00      SDR d
Mexico                 -             4.00                                                          4.00            4.00      SDR d
Netherlands           3.30%         47.11             3.86                                        50.97           50.97      SDR d
New Zealand           0.12%          1.71             0.14                   2.15                  4.00           10.35      NZD
Norway                1.42%         20.27             2.02                                        22.29         220.00       NOK
Pakistan               -             4.00                                                          4.00            4.00      SDR d
Portugal              0.12%          1.71             0.14                   2.15                  4.00            4.45      EUR c
Slovak                 -             4.00                                                          4.00            4.00      SDR d
Republic
Spain                 0.80%         11.42             2.55                                       13.97           13.10       EUR c
Sweden                2.62%         37.40             3.06                   1.14                41.60          450.04       SEK
Switzerland           1.74%         24.84             2.03                   5.10                31.97           31.97       SDR d
Turkey                 -             4.00                                                         4.00            4.00       SDR d
United Kingdom        6.15%         87.79             7.19                    1.06               96.04           89.55       GBP
United States        20.86%        297.78             9.14                                      306.92          430.00       USD


**	 Based on Pledges and Instruments of Commitments or Qualified Instruments of Commitment received by the Trustee.
1 	 See resolution 94-2, page 33.
                                Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                              Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                                         Adjustment
                     Calculated                  Supplemental           Towards Full
                     Basic Contributions         Contributions            Funding                    GEF-1 Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants            (%) a           SDR             SDR                    SDR                   SDR    Contribution b   Currency

New Funding          89.80%      1,329.49            83.05                  25.52             1,438.07
from Donors
Total                                                                                         1,438.07 e




a	 GEF basic share percentages are calculated based on new donor funding required for this replenishment in the amount
   of SDR 1,427.5 million. As agreed by the Contributing Participants in December 1992, the basic shares for IDA 10 were
   the beginning shares of all non-recipient donors to the GEF-1.
b	 Calculated by converting the SDR amount to the currency of contribution using an average daily exchange rate over the
   period from Feb 1, 1993 to Oct 31, 1993 as agreed by the Contributing Participants at the GEF-1 replenishment meeting.
c	 The contributions of these Contributing Participants that are member states of the European Economic and Monetary
   Union (EMU) were originally pledged in each of their legacy currencies. The Trustee converted these legacy currencies
   into EUR, the common currency for the EMU, in January 2000 at fixed conversion rates.	
d	 These Contributing Participants denominated their contributions in SDRs.
e	 This is equivalent to USD 2.01 billion using the agreed reference exchange rates for the GEF-1.




                                                              140
                              Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                            Global Environment F ac ilit y




                      G L OBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                         SE C OND RE PLENISH MENT OF R ES OU RC ES 1

               P L ED G ES A ND C OMMIT ME NT S AS OF DEC EMBER 3 1 , 201 4 * *
                                       (IN MILLIONS)


                                                  Adjustment          Additional
                   Calculated                       Towards          Supplemental
                   Basic Contributions            Full Funding       Contributions                 GEF-2 Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants          (%) a           SDR               SDR                 SDR                SDR        Contribution b   Currency
Australia           1.46%           21.95               1.52                                23.47             43.27            AUD
Austria             0.90%           13.53               0.94 c             0.23 c           14.70 j           16.80            EUR h
Belgium             1.55%           23.30               1.62                                24.92             30.94            EUR h
Canada              4.00%           60.13               4.17             10.30 g            74.60           141.66             CAD
China                    -           4.00 d                               2.00 f             6.00 f            6.00             SDR i
Cote d’Ivoire            -           4.00 d                                                  4.00              4.00             SDR i
Czech Republic           -           4.00 d                                                  4.00              4.00             SDR i
Denmark             1.30%           19.54               1.36                                20.90           193.16             DKK
Finland             1.00%           15.03               1.04                                16.07             19.63            EUR h
France              7.02%          105.54                                                  105.54            131.50            EUR h
Germany            10.66%          160.32                                                  160.32           198.99             EUR h




                                                                                                                                        COMMITMENTS
Greece              0.05%            0.75               0.05 e             3.20 e            4.00              4.46            EUR h
India                    -           4.00 d                                2.56 f            6.56 f         323.83              INR
Ireland             0.11%            1.65               0.12 e             2.23 e            4.00              4.69            EUR h
Italy               4.39%           65.97                                                   65.97 j           73.85            EUR h
Japan              18.70%          281.13              19.54                               300.67        48,754.33               JPY
Korea               0.23%            3.46               0.24 e             0.30 e            4.00         4,933.67             KRW
Luxembourg          0.05%            0.75               0.05 e             3.20 e            4.00              4.97            EUR h
Mexico                   -           4.00 d                                                  4.00              4.00             SDR i
Netherlands         3.30%           49.61               3.44                                53.05             53.05             SDR i
New Zealand         0.12%            1.80               0.13 e             2.07 e            4.00              8.31            NZD
Nigeria                  -           4.00 d                                                  4.00              4.00             SDR i
Norway              1.42%           21.35               1.48                                22.83           228.32             NOK
Pakistan                 -           4.00 d                                                  4.00              4.00             SDR i
Portugal            0.12%            1.80               0.13 e             2.07 e            4.00              4.90            EUR h
Slovenia                 -           1.00                                                    1.00              1.00             SDR i
Spain               0.80%           12.03                                                   12.03             14.81            EUR h
Sweden              2.62%           39.39               2.73                                42.12           448.07              SEK
Switzerland         1.74%           26.16               1.81               4.00             31.97             64.38             CHF
Turkey                   -           4.00 d                                                  4.00              4.00             SDR i
United Kingdom      6.15%           92.46               6.40               2.37            101.23             85.25            GBP
United States      20.84%          313.35                                                  313.35           430.00             USD



** Based on Pledges and Instruments of Commitments or Qualified Instruments of Commitment received by the Trustee.
1 See resolution 98-2, page 82.	  								


                                                            141
                                  Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                      Adjustment          Additional
                      Calculated                        Towards          Supplemental
                      Basic Contributions             Full Funding       Contributions                 GEF-2 Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants              (%) a           SDR               SDR                 SDR                SDR        Contribution b   Currency


1. New Funding        88.53%        1,364.00              46.76              34.53           1,445.30
from Donors
2. Carryover of                                                                                 500.63 k
GEF resources

Total ( 1 + 2 )                                                                              1,945.93 l




a	 GEF basic share percentages are calculated based on new donor funding required for this replenishment in the amount
   of SDR 1,503.35 million. The basic shares, which are originally derived from the GEF-1 and largely maintained in the GEF-
   2, do not add up to 100%.
b	 Calculated by converting the SDR amount to the currency of contribution using an average daily exchange rate over the
   period from May 1, 1997 to Oct 31, 1997 as agreed by the Contributing Participants at the GEF-2 replenishment meetings.
c	 The Adjustment to Full Funding and the Additional Supplementary Contribution are the result of encashing EUR 16.8 mil-
   lion on a five-year, rather than 10-year schedule.
d	 Represents the agreed minimum contribution level to the GEF-2.
e	 These Contributing Participants agreed to adjust their contributions upward to the minimum contribution level of SDR 4
   million.
f	 China and India agreed to contribute more than the minimum contribution level of SDR 4 million.
g	 This represents a transfer of CAD 19.6 million (USDeq. 13.4 million) from a trust fund established by Canada during the
   pilot phase of the GEF.
h	 The contributions of these Contributing Participants that are member states of the European Economic and Monetary
   Union (EMU) were originally pledged in each of their legacy currencies. The Trustee converted these legacy currencies
   into EUR, the common currency for the EMU, in January 2000 at fixed conversion rates.
i	 These Contributing Participants denominated their contributions in SDRs.
j	 The SDR value of the contribution is enhanced as the result of an agreed accelerated encashment schedule.
k	 Represents the amount carried over to the GEF-2 valued on the basis of June 30, 1998 exchange rates.
l	 This is equivalent to USD 2.67 billion using the agreed reference exchange rates for the GEF-2. 	




                                                                142
                               Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                             Global Environment F ac ilit y




                         G L OBAL E NV IR ONME NT F AC ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                             TH IRD RE PLENISH MENT OF RES OU RC ES 1

               P L ED G ES A ND C OMMIT ME NT S AS OF DEC EMBER 3 1 , 201 4 * *
                                       (IN MILLIONS)


                       Calculated                      Supplemental
                       Basic Contributions             Contributions                       GEF-3 Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants                 (%) a       SDR                     SDR                   SDR          Contribution b   Currency
Australia                  1.46%        27.60                                         27.60              68.16         AUD
Austria                    0.90%        17.01                  0.69 c                 17.70 g            24.38         EUR
Belgium                    1.55%        29.30                  3.67 c                 32.97 g            41.98         EUR
Canada                     4.28%        80.91                                         80.91            158.94          CAD
China                       -            4.00 d                4.44 c                  8.44 f g           7.50         SDR h
Cote d’Ivoire               -            4.00 d                                        4.00               4.00         SDR h
Czech Republic              -            4.00 d                0.50 c                  4.50 g             4.00         SDR h
Denmark                    1.30%        24.58                  3.37                   27.95            298.18 a        DKK
Finland                    1.00%        18.91                  2.03                   20.94              30.00 a       EUR
France                     6.81%       128.84 c                                      128.84            164.00          EUR
Germany                   11.00%       207.96                 23.66                  231.62            293.67          USD




                                                                                                                                COMMITMENTS
Greece                     0.05%         0.95                  3.55 c e                4.50 g             5.73         EUR
India                       -            4.00 d                3.99 c                  7.99 f g        426.39           INR
Ireland                    0.11%         2.08                  2.42 c e                4.50 g             5.73         EUR
Italy                      4.39%        82.99                                         82.99            118.90          EUR
Japan                     17.63%       333.41 c                                      333.41         48,754.33           JPY
Korea                      0.23%         4.35                                          4.35               5.51 a       USD
Luxembourg                 0.05%         0.95                  3.05 e                  4.00               5.73         EUR
Mexico                      -            4.00 d                                        4.00               5.07 a       USD
Netherlands                3.30%        62.39                                         62.39              62.39         SDR h
New Zealand                0.12%         2.27                   1.73 e                 4.00              12.14         NZD
Nigeria                     -            4.00 d                                        4.00               4.00         SDR h
Norway                     1.06%        19.96                                         19.96            228.32          NOK
Pakistan                    -            4.00 d                                        4.00               4.00         SDR h
Portugal                   0.12%         2.27                  1.73 e                  4.00               5.73         EUR
Slovenia                    -            1.00                  0.13 c                  1.13 g             1.00         SDR h
Spain                      0.80%        15.12                                         15.12              21.67         EUR
Sweden                     2.62%        49.53                  7.45                   56.98            764.67          SEK
Switzerland                2.43%        45.94                                         45.94              99.07         CHF
Turkey                      -            4.00 d                                        4.00               4.00         SDR h
United Kingdom             6.92%       130.82 c               19.09 c                149.91 g           117.83         GBP
United States             17.94%       339.15 i                                      339.15            430.00 i        USD




** Based on Pledges and Instruments of Commitments or Qualified Instruments of Commitment received by the Trustee.
1 	 See resolution 2002-0005, page 93.
                                 Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                               Global Environment F ac ilit y




                        Calculated                       Supplemental
                        Basic Contributions              Contributions                       GEF-3 Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants                  (%) a         SDR                    SDR                    SDR         Contribution b   Currency
1. New Funding            86.07%        1,660.29                81.50                 1,741.79
from Donors
2. Supplemental                                                 12.50 c j                 12.50
Contributions including Credits
3. Investment Income                                                                     104.47 k
4. Carryover of GEF Resources                                                           450.00 l

Total ( 1 + 2 + 3 + 4 )                                                              2,308.76 m



a	 GEF basic share percentages are calculated based on new donor funding required for this replenishment in the amount
   of SDR 1,890.5 million. The basic shares, which are originally derived from the GEF-1 and were largely maintained in the
   GEF-2, do not add up to 100%.
b	 Calculated by converting the SDR amount to currency of contribution using an average daily exchange rate over the
   period from May 15, 2001 to Nov. 15, 2001, as agreed by the Contributing Participants at the May 7, 2001, GEF-3 replen-
   ishment meeting.
c	 Contributing Participants had the option of taking a discount or credit for acceleration of encashment and; (i) includ-
   ing such credit as part of their basic share; (ii) counting such credit as a supplemental contribution; or (iii) taking
   such discount against the national currency contribution. France and Japan opted to include the credit for accelerated
   encashment in their basic share. The United Kingdom chose to accelerate encashment of its basic and supplemental
   contributions. A credit for accelerated encashment was thus included in its basic share and its supplemental contribu-
   tion. Austria, Belgium, China, Czech Republic, Greece, India, Ireland, and Slovenia have opted to include the credit for
   accelerated encashment as a supplemental contribution. Denmark, Finland, Korea, and Mexico opted to take a discount
   against their national currency contribution. Canada chose to accelerate encashment of its contribution but not to take
   either a discount or a credit.
d	 Represents the agreed minimum contribution level to the GEF-3.
e	 These Contributing Participants agreed to adjust their contributions upward to the agreed minimum contribution level of
   SDR 4 million.
f	 China and India agreed to contribute more than the agreed minimum contribution level of SDR 4 million.
g	 The SDR value of the contribution is enhanced as the result of the agreed accelerated encashment schedule as noted in
   footnote c.
h	 These Contributing Participants denominated their contributions in SDRs.
i	 The United States pledged USD 500 million (representing a basic share of 20.86%) during the GEF-3 negotiations,
   of which USD 70 million was conditional upon achievement of the performance measures outlined in Schedule 1 to
   Attachment 1 of the GEF-3 Resolution. Such measures were not met.
j	 Represents (i) a credit from acceleration from Canada in the amount of SDR 10.13 million and (ii) a supplemental contri-
   bution from The Netherlands in the amount of SDR 2.37 million, bringing The Netherlands’ total SDR contribution to SDR
   64.76 million.
k	 The actual investment income earned on GEF resources during the GEF-3 commitment period (FY03 through FY06) was
   USD 132.46 million. This amount is converted to SDR using the agreed reference exchange rates for the GEF-3.
l	 Represents the amount carried over to the GEF-3 pursuant to paragraph 9 of Resolution No. 2002-0005, valued on the
   basis of June 30, 2002 exchange rates.
m	 This is equivalent to USD 2.93 billion using the agreed reference exchange rates for the GEF-3.




                                                               144
                               Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                             Global Environment F ac ilit y




                 UP D ATE TO GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT F A C ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                         FOUR T H R EPLE NISH ME NT OF RES OU RC ES 1

               P L ED G ES A ND C OMMIT ME NT S AS OF DEC EMBER 3 1 , 201 4 * *
                                       (IN MILLIONS)


                                                                      Adjustment
                    Calculated                  Supplemental          Towards Full
                    Basic Contributions         Contributions           Funding                     GEF-4 Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants           (%) a       SDR                 SDR                  SDR                     SDR     Contribution b   Currency
Australia            1.46%        24.43               6.61                   -                31.04             59.80         AUD
Austria              0.90%        15.06               6.77 c                 -                21.83             24.38         EUR
Belgium              1.55%        25.94              12.83 c                3.51              42.28             46.18         EUR
Brazil                -            4.00 d              -                     -                 4.00              4.00         SDR
Canada               4.28%        71.62              17.57                   -                89.20            158.94 c       CAD
China                 -            4.00 d             3.10 c                 -                 7.10              9.51         USD
Czech Republic        -            4.00 d             0.68 c                 -                 4.68            142.89         CZK
Denmark              1.30%        21.75              15.00 c                1.32              38.07            310.00         DKK
Finland              1.00%        16.73              10.82 c                0.94              28.50             31.12         EUR
France               6.81%        71.28 f            57.42                   -               128.70            188.71 c       USD




                                                                                                                                        COMMITMENTS
Germany             11.00%       115.05 f            86.08 e                 -               201.14            295.00         USD
Greece               0.05%         0.84               4.41 c                 -                 5.25              5.73         EUR
India                 -            4.00 d             2.72 c                 -                 6.72              9.00         USD
Ireland              0.11%         1.84               3.41 c                 -                 5.25              5.73         EUR
Italy                4.39%        73.46                -                     -                73.46             87.91         EUR
Japan               17.63%       184.40 f            23.56                   -               207.96         33,687.97         JPY
Korea                0.23%         3.85               0.62 c                 -                 4.47          6,142.97         KRW
Luxembourg           0.05%         0.84               3.16                   -                 4.00              4.79         EUR
Mexico                -            4.00 d              -                     -                 4.00             63.38 c       MXN
Netherlands          3.30%        55.22              19.47                   -                74.70             89.38         EUR
New Zealand          0.12%         2.01               1.99                   -                 4.00              8.40         NZD
Nigeria               -            4.00 d              -                     -                 4.00              4.00         SDR k
Norway               1.44%        24.11                -                     -                24.11            228.32         NOK
Pakistan              -            4.00 d              -                     -                 4.00            350.01         PKR
Portugal             0.12%         2.01               2.78                   -                 4.79              5.73         EUR
Slovenia             0.03%         0.50               3.88 c                 -                 4.38              4.79         EUR
South Africa          -            4.00 d              -                     -                 4.00             38.27         ZAR
Spain                1.00%        16.73               1.37                   -                18.11             21.67 c       EUR
Sweden               2.62%        43.84              24.70                  7.66              76.20            850.00         SEK
Switzerland          2.26%        37.82                -                    9.67              47.49             88.00         CHF
Turkey                -            4.00 d              -                     -                 4.00              4.00         SDR g
United Kingdom       6.92%       115.80              56.08                   -               171.88            140.00         GBP
United States       20.86%       218.18                -                     -               218.18            320.00         USD


** Based on Pledges and Instruments of Commitments or Qualified Instruments of Commitment received by the Trustee.
1 See resolution 2006-0008, page 106.
                                                             145
                                  Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                                         Adjustment
                      Calculated                   Supplemental          Towards Full
                      Basic Contributions          Contributions           Funding                     GEF-4 Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants              (%) a        SDR                SDR                  SDR                     SDR     Contribution b   Currency

1. New Funding     89.43% 1,179.34                    365.05                 23.10           1,567.49
from Donors
2. Investment Income                                                                           388.24 h
3. Carryover of GEF Resources                                                                  325.67 i

Total ( 1 + 2 + 3 )                                                                          2,281.39 j




a	 The GEF-4 basic shares reflect those of the GEF-3 except for Switzerland, Spain, Norway and Slovenia.
b	 Calculated by converting the SDR amount to currency of contribution using an average daily exchange rate over the
    period from May 1, 2005 to October 31, 2005, as agreed by the Contributing Participants at the June 9-10, 2005 GEF-4
    replenishment meeting.
c	 Contributing Participants had the option of taking a discount or credit for acceleration of encashment and; (i) includ-
    ing such credit as part of their basic share; (ii) counting such credit as a supplemental contribution; (iii) including such
    credit as an adjustment to full funding or (iv) taking such discount against the national currency contribution. Austria,
    Belgium, China, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, Greece, India, Ireland, Korea and Slovenia opted to take the credit
    for accelerated encashment as a supplemental contribution. Canada, France,Mexico and Spain have chosen to take a
    discount against their contribution.
d	 For those Contributing Participants that do not have a basic share, this represents the agreed minimum contribution of
    SDR 4 million.
e	 Germany provided this supplemental contribution of SDR 86.08 million under the terms of the GEF-4 replenishment
    resolution. This contribution was made in order to strengthen the GEF’s ability to meet funding objectives and policy
    commitments of the GEF-4 agreement.
f	 These contributions are calculated to reflect a replenishment share based on the contributions of several major donors.
g	 These Contributing Participants denominated their contributions in SDRs.
h	 The actual investment income earned on GEF resources during the GEF-4 commitment period (FY07 through FY10) was
    USD 569.31 million. This amount is converted to SDR using the agreed reference exchange rates for the GEF-4.
i 	 Represents the amount carried over to the GEF-4 pursuant to paragraph 9 of Resolution No. 2006-0008, valued on the
    basis of June 30, 2006 exchange rates.
j	 This is equivalent to USD 3.34 billion using the agreed reference exchange rates for the GEF-4.	
k	 These Contributing Participants have not deposited Instruments of Commitments as of December 31, 2014.	




                                                                146
                                   Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                 Global Environment F ac ilit y




               UP D ATE T O GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT F A C ILIT Y T RU S T F U N D
                         F IF T H RE PLENISH MENT OF RE S OU RC ES 1

               P L ED G ES A ND C OMMIT MENT S AS OF DEC EMBER 3 1 , 201 4 * *
                                       (IN MILLIONS)


                                                                         Adjustment
                     Calculated                    Supplemental          Towards Full
                     Basic Contributions           Contributions           Funding                 GEF-5 Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants             (%)   a
                                        SDR                SDR                SDR               SDR      Contribution b   Currency

Australia               1.46%         41.92              10.96                  -               52.88       105.00          AUD
Austria                  1.21%        34.66 c             5.50                  -               40.15        42.60 e        EUR
Belgium                 1.55%         44.51              32.55 c                -               77.05        78.00 f        EUR
Brazil                  0.00%          4.00 d             4.00                  -                8.00        12.26          USD
Canada                  4.28%        122.89              12.28                  -              135.17       238.40 c        CAD
China                   0.00%          4.00 d             5.79                  -                9.79        15.00 c        USD
Czech Republic          0.00%          4.00 d             0.60 c                -                4.60       116.91          CZK
Denmark                 1.30%         37.33              15.35                  -               52.69       400.00          DKK
Finland                 1.00%         28.71              27.48 c                -               56.20        57.30          EUR
France                  6.76%        194.16                 -                   -              194.16       215.50 c f      EUR
Germany                10.89%        312.64                 -                   -              312.64       347.00          EUR




                                                                                                                                     COMMITMENTS
Greece                  0.05%          1.44               2.92 c                -                4.35         4.44 g        EUR
India                   0.00%          4.00 d             2.39 c                -                6.39         9.00          USD
Ireland                  0.11%         3.16               2.46 c                -                5.62         5.73          EUR
Italy                   2.89%         82.89                 -                   -               82.89        92.00          EUR
Japan                  11.48%        329.55                 -                   -              329.55    48,377.08          JPY
Korea                   0.17%          4.89               0.43 c                -                5.33         7.50          USD
Luxembourg              0.05%          1.44               2.56                  -                4.00         4.44          EUR
Mexico                  0.00%          4.00 d             2.53 c                -                6.53       124.30          MXN
Netherlands             2.60%         74.69                 -                   -               74.69        82.90 c        EUR
New Zealand             0.12%          3.45               0.55                  -                4.00         9.92          NZD
Nigeria                 0.00%          4.00 d               -                   -                4.00       921.93 g        NGN
Norway                  1.34%         38.47                 -                   -               38.47       376.00          NOK
Pakistan                0.00%          4.00 d               -                   -                4.00       499.64 g        PKR
Portugal                0.12%          3.45               0.55                  -                4.00         4.44 g        EUR
Russian Federation      0.00%          6.53               0.58 c                -                7.10        10.00          USD
Slovenia                0.03%          0.86               3.46 c                -                4.32         4.80          EUR
South Africa            0.00%          4.00 d             0.35 c                -                4.35        51.56          ZAR
Spain                   0.97%         27.76                 -                   -               27.76        30.81          EUR
Sweden                  2.29%         65.65              19.78                  -               85.43     1,015.00 e f      SEK
Switzerland             2.10%         60.30               1.10 c             14.01              75.41       124.93          CHF
United Kingdom          6.93%        199.12              15.32                  -              214.43       210.00          GBP
United States          13.07%        375.23                 -                   -              375.23       575.00          USD


** Based on Pledges and Instruments of Commitments or Qualified Instruments of Commitment received by the Trustee.
1	 See resolution 2010-0004, page 119.
                                      Ins t rument for t he Est ablishment of t he R e s t ru c t u re d
                                                    Global Environment F ac ilit y




                                                                             Adjustment
                      Calculated                      Supplemental           Towards Full
                      Basic Contributions             Contributions            Funding                GEF-5 Total Contributions
Contributing
Participants                (%)   a
                                           SDR                SDR                 SDR              SDR        Contribution b   Currency
1. New Funding          72.76% 2,127.67                    169.50                14.01           2,311.19
from Donors
2. Investment Income                                                                               106.81 h
3. Carryover of GEF Resources                                                                      448.27 i
Total ( 1 + 2 + 3 )                                                                             2,866.27 j




a	 The GEF-5 basic shares reflect those of the GEF-4 except for Austria, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Korea, The
   Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States.
b	 Calculated by converting the SDR amount to currency of contribution using an average daily exchange rate over the
   period from March 1, 2009 to September 30, 2009, as agreed by the Contributing Participants at the October 14-15,
   2009 GEF-5 replenishment meeting.
c	 Contributing Participants had the option of taking a discount or credit for accelerating their payment/encashment
   schedule and: (i) including such credit as part of their basic share; (ii) counting such credit as a supplemental contribu-
   tion; or (iii) taking such discount against the national currency contribution. Austria has opted to include such credit as
   part of its basic share. Belgium, Czech Republic, Finland, Greece, India, Ireland, Korea, Mexico, the Russian Federation,
   Slovenia, South Africa and Switzerland have opted to take the credit for accelerated encashment as a supplemental
   contribution. Canada, China, France and The Netherlands have opted to take a discount against the national currency
   contribution.
d	 For those Contributing Participants that do not have a basic share, this represents the agreed minimum contribution of
   SDR 4 million.
e	 The Governments of Austria and Sweden noted that their contribution amounts include, respectively, EUR 6.1 million
   and SEK 235 million in recognition of their commitments to support Fast-Start Climate Financing.
f	 The Governments of Belgium, France and Sweden noted that their contribution amounts include, respectively, EUR 10
   million, EUR 75 million and SEK 100 million to support Fast-Start Climate Financing for Sustainable Forest Management.
g	 These Contributing Participants have not deposited Instruments of Commitments as of December 31, 2014.
h	 The actual investment income earned on GEF resources during the GEF-5 commitment period was USD 163.65 million.
   This amount is converted to SDR using the agreed reference exchange rates for the GEF-5.
i	 Represents the amount carried over to the GEF-5 pursuant to paragraph 9 of Resolution No. 2010-0004, valued on the
   basis of June 30, 2010 exchange rates.
j	 This SDR amount is equivalent to USD 4.39 billion using the agreed GEF-5 reference exchange rates.




                                                                    148
1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA


Reprinted March 2015




www.theGEF.org




Printed on Environmentally Friendly Paper
