                    99395




Environmental and Social
Management System
Implementation Handbook
METAL PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING
    Although the environmental and social management system described in this
    Handbook is based on IFC Performance Standard 1, the process outlined herein
    may not provide for meeting all the requirements of IFC Performance Standard 1,
    or any other IFC Performance Standard. The purpose of this Handbook is to dem-
    onstrate a technical means of integrating environmental and social concerns into
    company management, so that a business can become more effective in reducing
    its impact on the environment, its workers and its neighboring communities.

    The Handbook is provided “AS IS,” and is provided without warranty of any kind,
    either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of mer-
    chantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Development of
    an environmental and social management system based on this Handbook does
    not imply any type of certification or compliance with any IFC Performance Stan-
    dards, including but not limited to IFC Performance Standard 1, nor does it imply
    endorsement by or affiliation or sponsorship with IFC.

    The Handbook is distributed with the understanding that neither the authors, nor
    the organizations and countries they represent, nor the publisher, are engaged
    in rendering technical advice. The information, policies and procedure templates
    comprising the Handbook are intended as a reference and for informational
    purposes only, and are not to be relied upon for operational or any other purposes.
    Implementation of the Handbook is solely the responsibility and risk of the final
    users. The material in the Handbook is set out in good faith for general guidance,
    and no liability can be accepted for any possible loss or expense incurred as a
    result of relying on the information contained herein. Neither IFC nor any other
    member of the World Bank Group shall be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental,
    special, consequential, punitive or exemplary damages, including, but not limited
    to, damages for loss of profits, goodwill, use, data or other intangible losses (even
    if IFC has been advised of the possibility of such damages) in any way arising or
    resulting from use or reliance on the Handbook or any such conclusion or deter-
    mination. The Handbook is distributed subject to the condition that it shall not by
    way of trade or otherwise be sold or otherwise circulated on a commercial basis
    without IFC’s prior written consent.

    IFC does not guarantee or provide any warranties as to the accuracy, timeli-
    ness, completeness, reliability or usefulness of this publication’s content, and is
    not responsible or liable for any such content or use thereof. The views, advice,
    opinions and other statements herein are not reviewed or endorsed by, and do not
    necessarily represent the views and opinions of IFC or its Board of Directors, the
    World Bank or its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.




2
Table of Contents
Welcome & How to Use This Handbook.....................................................................................4
Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System in the
Metal Products Manufacturing Industry.......................................................................................7
Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System................................... 11
     Overview...........................................................................................................................12
     Elements of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)..................................13
     System Development and System Implementation........................................................15
     Using The Handbook And Companion Publications To Develop And
     Implement Your ESMS......................................................................................................16
Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing
Your Environmental and Social Management System............................................................ 17
     1.	 Policy............................................................................................................................18
         Purpose of an Effective Policy............................................................................................18
         Modifying Your Existing Policy Statement or Creating a New One..........................................18
         Gaining Senior Management and Company Commitment.....................................................19
     2.	 Identification of Risks and Impacts..........................................................................20
         Key Risks in the Metal Products Manufacturing Industry........................................................20
     3.	 Management Programs...............................................................................................23
         Identifying Preventive and Corrective Actions....................................................................24
         Writing an Effective Action Plan......................................................................................25
         Writing an Effective Procedure.........................................................................................26
         Short Cases......................................................................................................................26
     4.	 Organizational Capacity and Competency..............................................................38
         Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities to Implement the ESMS...........................................38
         Communication and Training..........................................................................................40
     5.	 Emergency Preparedness and Response....................................................................42
         Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in the Metal Products Manufacturing Industry..45
         Common Emergency Scenarios..........................................................................................49
     6.	 Stakeholder Engagement...........................................................................................50
         Mapping Your Stakeholders..............................................................................................51
         Developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan......................................................................52
     7.	 External Communication and Grievance Mechanism............................................54
         External Communication.................................................................................................54
         Grievance Mechanism......................................................................................................54
     8.	 Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities.......................................................57
     9.	 Monitoring and Review.............................................................................................58
         Indicators........................................................................................................................59
         Measuring and Improving Your ESMS..............................................................................62
         Linking Your Action Plan and ESMS Improvement Plan...................................................63
         Conducting an Effective Management Review...................................................................64
               	                                                                                                                           3
                      Welcome & How to
                      Use This Handbook
                      Environmental and social responsibility is becoming
                      more and more important in today’s global
                      economy. There are thousands of environmental
                      and social codes and standards in the world
                      today. The codes and standards define the rules
                      and the objectives. But the challenge is in the
                      implementation. An environmental and social
                      management system (ESMS) helps companies to
                      integrate the rules and objectives into core business
                      operations, through a set of clearly defined,
                      repeatable processes.

                      This Handbook is intended to be a practical guide
                      to help companies develop and implement an
                      environmental and social management system,
                      which should help to improve overall operations.




4   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
    In the current economic climate, companies are
    under pressure to perform or even just survive.
    New initiatives are often met with resistance as
    people struggle to keep up with their day-to-
    day responsibilities. Some people think that an
    environmental and social management system
    must be big, complicated and expensive. But that
    is not really true. To be effective, a management
    system needs to be scaled to the nature and size of
    the company.

    If a company has existing management systems for
    quality or health and safety, this Handbook will help
    to expand them to include environmental and social
    performance. Our hope is that this Handbook
    will accelerate a company’s journey of continual
    improvement, for its own benefit and that of its
    employees and stakeholders.




	                                                       5
                       Quick Reference for Using this Handbook
                                                      These sections provide background on environmental and
                        Sections I – II
                                                      social management systems (ESMS).

                                                      This section provides step-by-step instructions on how to
                                                      develop and implement an ESMS. If you see a Toolkit icon,
                        Section III
                                                      it means that there is an accompanying tool in the ESMS
                                                      Toolkit.

                                                      This companion publication gives tools, including forms,
                                                      templates, checklists, and other useful documents, to help
                        ESMS Toolkit                  you develop and implement the systems described in the
                                                      Handbook. We suggest that you adapt each tool for your
                                                      company.

                        ESMS                          This companion publication contains a questionnaire,
                        Self-Assessment               maturity matrix, and improvement tips to help you
                        and Improvement               measure the maturity of your ESMS and develop a plan
                        Guide                         for improvement.




                      Acknowledgements
                      This Handbook was prepared by the Sustainable Business Advisory (SBA)
                      department with primary contributions from Irene Angeletti, Rob Horner, and
                      Larissa Luy.

                      The Handbook is based on primary contributions and technical expertise from
                      the Social Accountability International (SAI) team of Rachel Kanter Kepnes,
                      Craig Moss and Jane Hwang with key contributions from D.K.S. Moorthy,
                      Eileen Kaufman, Dundar Sahin, Richard Rowe, Caroline Lewis, Yogendra
                      Chaudhry and Priyadarshini Sharma of Tata Steel Limited. Graphic design
                      services were provided by Pam Henry.

                      Photography courtesy of IFC ILO Better Work and World Bank Photo Library




6   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                                     I

                             Benefits of an Environmental
                             and Social Management System




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015     ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	   7
“Environmental
and social
management
systems are
our framework                    Benefits of an Environmental
for managing                     and Social Management
compliance and
                                 System in the Metal Products
achieving continual
improvement
                                 Manufacturing Industry
within our                       Today, metal products manufacturing companies are confronted with a num-
                                 ber of significant environmental and social challenges. None of the challenges
company.”                        is insurmountable, but if not effectively assessed and managed, they will hurt
CSR Officer                      your profitability, reputation, and prospects for future business.

Multi-national                   Among these challenges are increasing energy and raw materials costs, the
iron company                     growing power and influence of environmental and labor regulatory agencies
                                 and rapidly evolving consumer awareness and concerns about environmental
                                 and social issues. These risks are in addition to the primary risk of failing to
                                 deliver high-quality metal products on time and build brand and consumer
                                 confidence. All of these risks ultimately have financial consequences. Moreover,
                                 exports and international exposure are vital to the success of many metal prod-
                                 ucts manufacturing businesses; but exporting your products also increases de-
                                 mands from international legislation, local industry standards, and consumer
                                 requirements. Many of these requirements are increasingly related to environ-
                                 mental and social practices. All of these risks, requirements and pressures on
                                 your business are driving forces that should motivate you to implement a




                                “We are facing intense global competition in
                                the current economic climate. Improving our
                                 environmental and social management helps
                                us reduce inputs, minimize waste, and improve
                                 our competitiveness and profitability.”
                                 Senior VP
                                 Multi-National Producer




       8   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
    “For our company, socially and environmentally responsible man-
     agement is not only an ethical obligation; it is also a tool that
     enables us to obtain and maintain competitiveness and pursue
     innovation in our field.”
     CEO - Industrial Manufacturer




                             management system. A management system will enable you to consistently
                             foresee and address issues confronting your business so you can prevent poten-
                             tial risks from becoming actual problems.

                             Implementing an environmental and social management system (ESMS) can
                             have direct business benefits. Conserving and using energy and materials more
                             efficiently helps to reduce production costs. Reducing waste and discharges
                             and increase recycling can minimize costs of waste disposal, which have been
                             steadily increasing over time. A management system can help you benchmark
                             your expenditures against industry standards and identify potential production
                             and operational cost savings.

                             The same tangible benefits can be realized on the social side. Clear, transpar-
                             ent human resource policies and procedures improve communication between
                             workers and managers. This helps to anticipate and avoid labor problems.
                             Effective occupational health and safety management procedures will enable
                             you to identify workplace and process hazards so you can eliminate or reduce
                             their potential negative impacts through controls and employee training on




“Social compliance is a tough dilemma to begin with. Resolving it
takes a systematic approach to each and every issue.“
Managing Director

Multi-national Steel Company




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	            9
                          the avoidance of risks. This can not only reduce near misses, accidents and
                          fatalities, but can also lead to bottom-line business benefits such as reduced
                          absenteeism and worker turnover, and lower insurance premiums for workers’
                          compensation.

                          Many companies already use management systems for quality control and oc-
                          cupational health and safety. An environmental and social management system
                          (ESMS) simply extends that approach to the management of your business’s
                          impact on the environment, your workers and other external stakeholders.

                          Ultimately, your management systems should be integrated and centralized
                          in one comprehensive system, instead of having separate systems for quality,
                          occupational health and safety, and the environment. This handbook will help
                          you implement an integrated ESMS that is appropriate for the size and nature
                          of your company.




10   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                                   II
                             Understanding an
                             Environmental and Social
                             Management System




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015     ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	   11
Understanding an Environmental and
Social Management System
OVERVIEW


A management system is a set of processes and practices to
consistently implement your company’s policies to meet your business
objectives. The goal is to make sure that you have the appropriate
policies and procedures in place and that people consistently follow
them. The management system helps to assess and control your risks
and is the key to lasting improvement. A key feature is the idea of
continual improvement – an ongoing process of reviewing, correcting
and improving your system. The most common method is the Plan-
Do-Check-Act cycle (PDCA), described below.




Identifying and                                                                Developing and
analyzing the risks                                                            implementing a
and objectives                                                                 potential solution
                                  PLAN
                                                              DO




What is important for you                                                      What actions will you
as an organization and                                                         take? Who, what,
what are you going to do                                                       where, when and how?
about it?

                                                                               Measuring how effec-
                                    ACT




Implementing the                                                               tive the solution was,
improved solution
What will you change if
                                                        CHECK                  and analyzing whether
                                                                               it could be improved
results are not what you
                                                                               Did you see the change you
expected?
                                                                               expected after implementing
                                                                               the actions?



12   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                In the workplace, an effective management
                                system is comprised of trained, committed
                                people routinely following procedures.



ELEMENTS OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ESMS)
A solid, functioning environmental and social management system (ESMS) is made up of interrelated parts.
Take a look at the nine elements of an effective ESMS. Each of these elements is important, because they
help you to assess, control and continually improve your environmental and social performance, as part of
the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle. The following section presents step-by-step instructions on how to develop
and implement a system using these elements.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	           13
MEASURING
AND IMPROVING

You can’t improve              A lot of companies in the metal manufacturing industry already have manage-
                               ment systems for quality. If so, you may already have elements of an ESMS, and
what you don’t                 there is no need to replace what you already have. In this Handbook’s compan-
                               ion publication, ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, we provide a
measure.                       self-assessment rating for each of the ESMS elements. The self-assessment will
                               allow you to measure your current level of system development and implementa-
                               tion. You will answer a series of questions and get your score for each element
                               in the ESMS on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is highest). The score measures the maturity
                               of your system. Once you understand the maturity of your system, it is easier to
                               target specific steps you can take to improve it.




                                         THE SYSTEM MATURITY LEVELS (5 = HIGHEST)
                                Level 5 Mature system implemented internally and with key supply
                                        chain partners – continual improvement embedded in opera-
                                        tions
                                Level 4 Systems well developed and implemented internally –
                                        routine improvement projects
                                Level 3 Systems approach adopted, but development and implemen-
                                        tation is inconsistent – improvement sporadic
                                Level 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation –
                                        primarily reactive
                                Level 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
                                Level 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes




     14   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                             REMEMBER
                             A carefully developed, detailed ESMS is only
                             valuable if it is well-implemented.

                             SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
                              One of the most important things to understand about a management system
                              is the difference between system development and system implementation. A
                              management system is comprised of trained, committed people routinely fol-
                              lowing procedures. If you break this statement down, you see that it talks about
                             “procedures.” Procedures are the step-by-step way that people follow your poli-
                              cies. Procedures are the heart of effective system development.

                             Now let’s look at the other part of the statement – “trained, committed people
                             routinely following procedures.” This is the implementation. There is a lot that
                             goes into making it happen. Of course, some training is important to make sure
                             that people are aware of the procedures and understand what they are supposed
                             to do on a routine basis. But you also need to find a way to get their commit-
                             ment.

                             One common observation is that large companies tend to be better at system
                             development. But they often have difficulty getting people in different loca-
                             tions or departments to consistently implement the procedures, despite having
                             well-documented systems. Small companies tend to be better at system imple-
                             mentation – if they have effective leadership. However, they are often weak at
                             developing the documentation needed to ensure continuity when people in the
                             organization change.

                             The approach of this Handbook and its companion publications, the Toolkit
                             and Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, balances system development and
                             system implementation in each of the ESMS elements.



                              DEFINITIONS
                              System                     The documented policies and procedures.
                              Development
                              System                     Trained, committed people routinely follow-
                              Implementation             ing the procedures.




An ESMS does not need to be complicated, but it does need to be
documented and then put into practice. Some people mistakenly
think a management system is just documents. But that is only a part
of it. Management systems are about implementation and continual
improvement.

Version 1.2 April 15, 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	             15
USING THE HANDBOOK AND COMPANION PUBLICATIONS
TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT YOUR ESMS
The Handbook and companion publications are designed to help you measure
and improve the maturity rating of your ESMS. The flowchart below shows
how you can use these three publications in a cycle of continual improvement.




                                                    ESMS
                                                  HANDBOOK

     •	   Use tools to implement                                         •	   Understand the benefits of an ESMS
          improvement plan                                               •	   Learn the nine fundamental
                                                                              elements of an ESMS


                                                 REDO this graphic

                              ESMS                                      ESMS SELF-
                             TOOLKIT                                  ASSESSMENT &
                                                                      IMPROVEMENT
                                                                          GUIDE


                                    •	   Measure the maturity of your ESMS
                                    •	   Prioritize elements and develop an
                                         overall ESMS improvement plan




16        Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                  III
                             Practical Guidelines for
                             Developing and Implementing
                             Your Environmental and Social
                             Management System

                             This section provides step-by-step instructions on
                             how to develop and implement an ESMS.

                             For each element of the ESMS, we offer a quick
                             way to measure where you are now.


                                      When you find a toolkit icon, it means
                                      there is a tool in the companion publication
                                      Toolkit to make it easier to get started.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	   17
                                ELEMENT 1


                                Policy


5
    E&S policies and proce-
    dures clearly commu-
                                The cornerstone of your ESMS is your set of
    nicated internally and
    externally. Senior man-     policies. Your policies summarize the commitment
    agement commitment to
    continual improvement.      that your company has made to managing
                                environmental and social risks and impacts. They


4
    Full set of E&S policies,
    procedures and records,     establish the expectations for conduct in all related
    centrally maintained and
    routinely reviewed. Wide
    awareness in company.
                                aspects of your business.

                                PURPOSE OF AN EFFECTIVE POLICY



3
    Policies and procedures   Simply put, the policies are the rules. They tell everyone what is allowed and
    in place meeting selected what is not allowed when it comes to social and environmental issues such as
    E&S standards. Sporadic
                              labor and working conditions, resource efficiency and pollution prevention,
    communication, imple-
    mentation and review.     and community health, safety and security.

                                A good practice for writing the policies and making them understood is a Poli-
                                cy Statement. The Policy Statement communicates your company’s policies to
                                your management, staff, board, suppliers, contractors, customers and all other



2
    Policies in place meeting   stakeholders. It is important for everyone to have a common understanding
    selected E&S standards.
                                of the core values of the company, how you expect people to behave and how
    Sporadic, conflicting or
    confusing procedures.       external stakeholders can expect you to operate.


                                MODIFYING YOUR EXISTING POLICY STATEMENT OR
                                CREATING A NEW ONE



1
                                The Policy Statement should be clear and simple – it does not need to be long
    Limited E&S policies
    in place.                   and technical like a legal document. Many companies already have a corporate
                                code of conduct that serves as a Policy Statement and includes issues such as
                                ethics. You can expand your existing code to align with internationally recog-
                                nized environmental and social standards for issues relevant to your business,
                                such as the IFC Performance Standards for Environmental and Social Sustain-
                                ability.




0
    No E&S standards            It is important to think through the creation of the Policy Statement and tailor
    adopted. No related         it to your company operations. In developing your Policy Statement, be aware
    policies and procedures.    of the specific risks you face in the metal products manufacturing industry.




    18    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    1. Policy




GAINING SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND COMPANY
COMMITMENT
Modifying or adopting your Policy Statement will require senior manage-
                                                                                    For any change
ment support. In some companies, it may require approval from the Board of
Directors. A high level of senior management support is critical for integrating    initiative, think
environmental and social commitment throughout all levels of your company.
                                                                                    of three critical
Committing to environmental and social policies probably requires some
change in the behavior of your company, workers, contractors and suppliers.         stages:
This can be challenging. There are different strategies and different techniques
for changing organizational behavior, but experts agree that to create lasting      Awareness;
change, senior management must be committed to the effort.

The first step is building awareness. There are many issues that occupy your        Commitment;
employees’ attention day-to-day. As just a written document, your Policy
Statement may not get their attention or seem relevant to their daily activities.   and
Senior management needs to make this Policy Statement come alive.
                                                                                    Implementation.
To do so, they need to communicate the importance of environmental and
social issues, by making them an ongoing part of high-level Board and man-
agement discussions, public speeches, and messages to employees.

Once people are aware of the Policy Statement, the next step is building com-       Your senior
mitment – also known as “buy-in.” You will probably meet resistance: “Why
do we need to do this? It is too much work. I’ve already got enough to do.          management
How does this help our bottom-line?” Senior management needs to effectively
shape and communicate the message internally and externally. They need to           can help you to
send a clear message that this is a long-term commitment by the company.
                                                 The key message is that this       accelerate all
 Use the Toolkit item Checklist for              will contribute to the com-
 Developing a Company Policy                     pany’s success and that each       three stages.
 Statement to get ideas of what you              person will benefit - but that
 could include in your policy.                   they  will also be held ac-
                                                 countable.

Once you have convinced people that they need to do something, senior
management needs to drive implementation. They do not need to lead the
effort on a day-to-day operational level, but they do need to adopt the policy
and oversee the implementation plan. Resources will be necessary in order to
communicate the policy internally and externally, integrate new procedures
and train all relevant staff and suppliers.

Crafting the initial messages can be a good time to talk through the above
                                                 stages with your senior man-
 Use the Toolkit item CEO Letter                 agement. Consider accompa-
 Announcing the ESMS - Internal to               nying the Policy Statements
 get started.                                    with a message from the CEO.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	   19
                                    ELEMENT 2


                                   Identification of Risks
                                   and Impacts

5
    Mature system, routinely
    reviewed and updated
                                   The primary objective of a risk assessment is to
    as part of a continual
    improvement plan. Internal     identify the potential negative environmental
    and external inputs. Proce-
    dures extended to contrac-     and social impacts so that you can develop the
    tors, subcontractors, third
    parties and supply chain
    as relevant.                   appropriate strategies to address them.


4
    Systematic, documented
    identification and prior-
    itization of E&S risks         In the following pages, we present the key issues
    and impacts. Routinely
    reviewed and updated
    across existing, new and
                                   that come up in the metal products manufacturing
    changing activities. Wide
    awareness and engage-          industry.
    ment in company.




3
    Awareness and engage-
    ment of staff in identifica-   KEY RISKS AND IMPACTS IN THE METAL PRODUCTS
    tion and prioritization of     MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY
    E&S risks and impacts.
    External experts involved
    as required.                   1.	 Environmental: Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency
                                     •	 Release of hazardous air pollutants such as hexavalent chromium, manganese,
                                        nickel, and other metals and metal oxides from welding and thermal cutting
                                        processes




2
                                     •	 Release of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and solvent vapors containing
    Procedures in place for             ammonia and ammonium chloride from metal degreasing, cleaning, and
    identification of E&S risks         painting processes
    and impacts across all key
    activities.                      •	 Generation of liquid waste from wet scrubbing used for air emissions control,
                                        spent metal working fluids, spent quenching baths, spent degreasing and
                                        cleaning solvents, and spent surface finishing baths
                                     •	 Generation of large amounts of sludge from wastewater treatment, and metal
                                        surface cleaning and finishing processes (e.g. coating, galvanizing, electroplating)
                                     •	 Generation of solid waste from welding and thermal cutting




1
    Basic identification and         •	 Non-recycling of metal dust or scrap from metal forming, cutting, or grinding
    assessment of E&S risks             processes; and, dust collected from air pollution control devices
    and impacts, but limited         •	 Improper disposal of empty paint containers
    to a few activities.
                                     •	 High water consumption in water-cooling and washing processes
                                     •	 High energy consumption, especially fuel oil, engine oil and petrol, for metal
                                        forming and cutting equipment, as well as by forklifts or cranes used to transport
                                        materials within the factory
                                     •	 Improper disposal of batteries used for diesel generators




0
    No identification or
    assessment of E&S
    risks and impacts.




      20     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                           2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




2.	 Occupational Health and Safety
   •	 Injuries such as crushed limbs and digits from hydraulic forming presses, metal         Top 3 risks and
     working punches, drill presses, and other metal forming tools and machines               opportunities in
   •	 Cuts, abrasions, and puncture wounds from metal cutting tools and machines              the Metal Products
   •	 Eye and soft tissue injuries from flying metallic particles                             Manufacturing
   •	 Exposure to metallic fumes, metal dust, phosgene gas, and VOCs resulting in             Industry
      metal fume fever and other respiratory and Central Nervous System (CNS)
      illnesses
   •	 Respiratory and dermal exposure to toxic and carcinogenic metals, metal
     working fluids, chlorinated and non-chlorinated metal cleaning solvents,
                                                                                              1   There is a high risk of
                                                                                                  accidents and severe
                                                                                              injuries in the industry. The
     priming and painting compounds
   •	 Exposure to extreme temperatures and unsafe levels of noise
                                                                                              types of processes, chemi-
                                                                                              cals, and machines used in
   •	 Exposure to radiation from welding and non-invasive testing (e.g. x-ray stations
      for continuous monitoring of product quality)                                           metal production create an
   •	 Accidental collision with moving items, cranes and forklifts
                                                                                              environment where per-
                                                                                              sonal protective equipment
   •	 Injuries due to falling objects from heights, or workers falling from heights
                                                                                              and proper safety practices
3.	 Labor                                                                                     are essential. The lack of
   •	 Stigmatization and fragmentation of labor unions                                        investment in personal pro-
   •	 Lack of social security or government entitlements for contract workers
                                                                                              tective equipment – both
                                                                                              financially and in terms of
   •	 Exclusion of contract workers from worker unions
                                                                                              training time for workers
   •	 Failure to provide accident/injury compensation per law for contract workers
                                                                                              – can have serious implica-
   •	 Lack of adequate training on use of PPE, especially amongst contract workers
                                                                                              tions for workers’ health
   •	 Lack of proper facilities, such as canteen, clean drinking water, hygienic storage      and safety.
      of food, which can affect hygiene and health of workers
   •	 Excessive overtime not properly compensated or unrealistic production quotas
   •	 Failure to compensate at minimum wage or insufficient wages to achieve a


                                                                                              2
     reasonable standard of living                                                                Fire and explosion
   •	 Use of child labor                                                                          hazards from combus-
                                                                                              tible metal dust, combined
4.	 Community Health, Safety and Security
                                                                                              with ineffective emergency
   •	 Ground or surface water contamination due to improper management of
                                                                                              planning, can have disas-
     wastewater and liquid wastes
                                                                                              trous impacts on workers
   •	 Exposure to hazardous materials and hazardous waste due to improper transport
      and disposal                                                                            and businesses in the
                                                                                              industry. Safety planning
   •	 Exposure to air emissions from various metal production processes
                                                                                              and frequent training are
   •	 Use of private security personnel leading to risk of violence against community
      members                                                                                 required to prevent fires
                                                                                              from occurring and prepare
   •	 Increased vehicle traffic due to the transport of raw materials and finished
      products to/from the factories                                                          workers to respond to any
   •	 Dangers from industrial fires or accidents, including the release of harmful
                                                                                              emergency that may arise.
      substances and chemical spills




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	              21
3   Solid and liquid waste
    from metal cleaning
and finishing processes
                                    The following are key considerations for a robust risk
                                    assessment system:

                                      •	   Cover environmental, OHS, labor and community risks;
may contain toxic and
carcinogenic substances               •	   Conduct at regular intervals – at least once a year;
that can contaminate areas
surrounding facilities.               •	   Conduct any time there are significant changes to
Air emissions containing                   operations;
metals and volatile organic
                                      •	   Conduct any time there are external changes such as
compounds (VOCs) can
                                           new laws or regulations;
also contribute to environ-
mental pollution. The use             •	   Include input from all levels of workers and managers;
of pollution prevention
                                      •	   Include input from affected communities and other
methods and proper waste
                                           external stakeholders;
treatment and disposal can
reduce negative impacts               •	   Use external consultants and experts if your staff does
to the environment and                     not have the capability;
decrease health risks from
contaminated air, soil and            •	   Assess and prioritize risks according to both the severity
water.                                     and probability of negative impacts;

                                      •	   Consider risks in your supply chain in addition to those
                                           in your company; and

                                      •	   Scale as appropriate to the size and complexity of your
                                           business.


                                                Now that you have an understanding of the typical risks in
                                                the metal products manufacturing industry, you can first
                                                use the Risk Identification Worksheet to identify your
                                                potential risks and negative impacts based on your operations
                                                and operating environment. Then you can use the Process
                                                Mapping or the Physical Mapping tools to identify in
                                                more detail where problems are likely to arise within your
                                                production process.
                                                Often it is not possible or practical for you to deal with every
                                                single environmental and social impact that your company
                                                could possibly have. You can use the Risk Assessment Form
                                                to prioritize which risks should be addressed first.


                                    For more information on environmental, OHS and community risks
                                    and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at
                                    www.ifc.org/sustainability.

         22   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
 ELEMENT 3


Management
Programs

                                                                                                        5
Management Programs are centered on Action                                Verified progress against
                                                                          objectives and targets;
                                                                          significant improvements
Plans and improved procedures to avoid, minimize                          in E&S performance. Dem-
                                                                          onstrated commitment to
or compensate for the risks and impacts that were                         continual improvement
                                                                          using annual improvement
                                                                          plans.
identified.


                                                                                                        4
                                                                          Routine, consistent imple-
                                                                          mentation of actions/
For example, if you have a policy commitment                              activities to proactively
                                                                          manage E&S risks and
                                                                          impacts. Measurable com-
to avoid discrimination in the workplace and you                          pany-wide objectives and
                                                                          targets. Periodic review
have identified this as a risk factor based on the                        and update.




                                                                                                        3
lack of a system for employees to express their                           Actions/activities in place
                                                                          to manage E&S risks and
                                                                          impacts, following the
complaints, you may implement a complaint                                 mitigation hierarchy –
                                                                          avoid, minimize, offset/
procedure as a way to minimize the risk of                                compensate. Proactive
                                                                          approach to managing
                                                                          issues.
discrimination. Or, if one of your policy objectives


                                                                                                        2
                                                                          Procedures and assigned
is the reduction of hazardous waste and you                               responsibilities to address
                                                                          and mitigate E&S risks
have identified this as a risk factor because of the                      and impacts across all key
                                                                          activities. Primarily reac-
                                                                          tive.
high percentage of chemical waste produced in
your plant, you may take action by using fewer

                                                                                                        1
                                                                          A few informal programs
                                                                          or activities to mitigate
hazardous chemicals.                                                      E&S impacts. No systems
                                                                          awareness or repeatable
                                                                          processes




                                                                          No process for mitigating
                                                                          E&S risks and impacts.
                                                                                                        0
Version 1.2 April 15, 2015   ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	         23
3. Management Programs




                                        IDENTIFYING PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
                                        It is good practice to emphasize preventive and proactive actions: (1) try to
                                        avoid causing social or environmental damage; (2) if not possible, then mini-
                                        mize the impact; (3) if not possible, then compensate or offset the damage.

                                    First, attempt to take actions to avoid or prevent the negative impacts. For
                                    example, suppose you are expanding operations and have identified potable
                                    water as a key risk. You might change your new facility location or design it
                                    differently, so that you avoid contamination of groundwater close to home-
                                    owners and communities. Or, suppose you have identified a certain process
                                               that exposes workers to toxic chemicals and pollutes the local river
              Prioritizing Your Actions        system. You might change your manufacturing processes processes
                                               to avoid using these chemicals.
                        AVOID
                                               In many cases, complete avoidance is not possible – you may not
                                              be able to relocate or find alternative processes or materials. In these
                       MINIMIZE                cases, you should try to minimize the impact. For example, suppose
                                               that you are located in an area where women are traditionally given
                                              lower status and less access to education, and in the workplace they
               COMPENSATE/OFFSET               are often mistreated by male co-workers and supervisors. Given
                                               this cultural context, it is important to be clear in your recruitment,
                                               hiring and training procedures, in order to make sure that women
                                    are hired on equitable terms and given equal access to training and promotion
                                    opportunities. You can also develop non-discrimination procedures to ensure
                                    that rules for recruitment, hiring and training are clear for everyone to follow.
                                    Additionally, you can conduct training to make sure that everyone is aware of
                                    and follows the procedures.

                                        In some cases, it may not be possible to completely avoid or minimize certain
                                        negative impacts. Then you should find ways to offset them with comparable
                                        positive impacts or provide compensation to those impacted. For example,
                                        suppose your operation uses a large amount of water. Despite taking action to
                                        minimize water consumption, there are still periods of the year when water be-
                                        comes scarce in the local community. You might collaborate with community
                                        leaders to dig new wells or provide alternate sources of drinking water.




            24    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                           3. Management Programs




                             WRITING AN EFFECTIVE ACTION PLAN
                             Whatever actions you decide to take, think of them as a continual improvement
                             process - you will need to set targets, set deadlines, measure the results, and ad-
                             just the plans if necessary. You need to assign responsibilities and start to involve
                             the right internal people and departments.

                             As you develop your Action Plans, these are the key questions that you need to
                             think about:

                               •	   What – environmental and social risks you want to address
                               •	   How – related actions and procedures to be implemented to address the risk
                               •	   Why – reasons (objectives) for the actions and procedures, and the expected
                                    results (targets)
                               •	   When – timeframe and deadlines
                               •	   Who – responsible people



                               Use the Toolkit item Action Plan Chart to get started.

                             The above examples address some of the risks highlighted in the metal products
                             manufacturing industry. These are just some of the actions that might be taken.
                             You can adapt them to your situation and add as needed – be flexible to meet
                             your company’s specific situation. As you tailor your action plans, consult with
                             your workers and managers, experts and external stakeholders, including your
                             suppliers and community. They can offer insight into important issues and effec-
                             tive actions. They can also help you obtain commitment for plans you are trying
                             to implement, and provide candid feedback about how well the plans are work-
                             ing. This will be critical to the continual improvement of your systems.



                             For recommendations on how to address environmental, OHS and
                             community risks and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS
                             Guidelines at www.ifc.org/sustainability.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015              ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	           25
3. Management Programs




                                        WRITING AN EFFECTIVE PROCEDURE
                                        Procedures serve as step-by-step instructions for workers, supervisors and
                                        managers. They allow for everyone to have a common understanding of how
                                        to behave. They enable the rules to be followed even when there is staff turn-
                                        over. Clear, detailed procedures help to embed your social and environmental
                                        policies into your daily operations.

                                        It is a good practice to document your procedures. The key is to make your
                                        procedures as clear and as brief as possible. You can use text, checklists,
                                        flowcharts, or simple illustrations. The format for your procedure can vary
                                        depending on the audience. A written procedure may be more appropriate for
                                        managers and supervisors, while illustrations may be useful when dealing with
                                        less literate or immigrant workers. Keep your procedure as short and simple as
                                        possible.


                                          Use the Toolkit item Outline of Procedure and the
                                          Sample Procedure Flowchart to get started.

                                        Simply documenting a procedure is not enough. Effective implementation is
                                        the ultimate goal. Most importantly, employees need to be aware that a new
                                        procedure exists and understand why it is important to follow. They need the
                                        skills and knowledge to be able to implement it. This is achieved through
                                        routine communication and effective training. You will learn more about this
                                        in the next chapter, Organizational Capacity and Competency.

                                        Finally, you must ensure that your employees have access to the current version
                                        of each procedure. Out-of-date documentation should be removed or clearly
                                        marked as outdated to ensure that no one unintentionally follows the old
                                        procedure.




            SHORT CASES

            Here we present several short cases that illustrate some of the
            actions that companies can take to avoid, minimize or offset/
            compensate common environmental and social key risks in the
            metal products manufacturing industry. Action Plans can be scaled
            to the size of your company and the nature of the risks you face.


             26   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: PERU


Electroplating Plant
RISK: Improper disposal and treatment of
wastewater and hazardous waste
Quality Electroplating is a small independent electroplating company based in Lima, Peru. A
recent article published by a local environmental NGO has raised concerns about the pollution
from the small informal electroplating industry in the country, and specifically identified Quality
Electroplating for its poor practices. Because the company is small and located in a mostly com-
mercial area, it has been struggling to afford the costs of wastewater treatment. The company
has been part of the steady growth of poorly monitored independent, small- to medium-scale
electroplating units. The article claims that they are contributing to soil and groundwater pollu-
tion in the city and highlights rising concerns about processes that use highly toxic or carcinogenic
materials that are difficult to destroy, stabilize and dispose of in an environmentally sound way.
Some of these processes include hexavalent chromium, cadmium, and cyanide-based plating. The
company has received increasing numbers of complaints from local community members and has
decided to review its practices to address the issue.

  I M PAC T

  •	 Contamination of soil and water sources

  AVO I D

  •	 Assign pollution prevention responsibilities and authority to properly trained individual(s)
    to analyze, evaluate and implement pollution prevention methods, such as:
     •	 Replace hexavalent chromium, cadmium, and cyanide-based plating processes
     •	 Recycle and extend the life of process baths (spent baths should be sent for recovery of
        plating chemicals and not discharged into wastewater treatment units)
     •	 Reduce the use of rinse waters (e.g. reduce drag-out)
     •	 Minimize and recycle metal sludge from spent baths and wastewater treatment plants

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Develop and implement policies and procedures for the proper segregation, treatment
    and disposal of hazardous wastes generated from the electroplating processes
  •	 Regularly train workers on the proper labeling, handling and storage of chemicals and
    hazardous wastes
  •	 Explore the possibility of sharing a common wastewater treatment plant with other small
    electroplating facilities. Wastewater must be pretreated to ensure cyanide destruction and
    conversion of hexavalent chromium into trivalent chromium

  O FF S E T

  •	 Assist in the remediation of contaminated community sites and water supplies




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	        27
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: PAKISTAN


            Metal Fabrication
            RISK: High Energy Consumption
            SBD Metal Fabrication is a small sheet metal manufacturer in Pakistan that produces chemical
            handling fume cabinets and hoods. The factory operates as many hours as possible each day in
            order to maximize the use of its machinery, such as sandblasters and ovens for powder coated
            metal. Production has often been halted due to electricity blackouts, so the company usually
            leaves the machines on overnight so that they can be used whenever electricity becomes avail-
            able. The company recently purchased a generator to ensure that it can continue its production
            during the blackouts, but the cost of fuel is more than expected due to the increasing number of
            blackouts. The percentage of total production costs spent on energy increased 30%. This is unsus-
            tainable for the company, so the owner has instructed the managers to look into alternatives to
            cut energy costs and decrease consumption.


              I M PAC T

              •	 Emission of greenhouse gases

              •	 Increased air emissions

              AVO I D

              •	 Measure energy use per process and machine to benchmark use against industry standards
                 and identify inefficiencies.
              •	 Replace old and outdated machines with energy efficient technology.

              •	 Identify and implement opportunities for heat recovery (e.g. exhaust heat from curing
                 ovens).
              •	 Install a voltage optimization system to prevent overvoltage or undervoltage.

              •	 Invest in renewable energy sources.

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Implement an energy conservation awareness and training program for workers, supervi-
                 sors and area managers. Train workers to switch off machines and lights when not in use.
              •	 Insulate ovens to prevent heat waste.

              •	 Examine wiring and replace or repair damaged wires so they do not leak electricity.

              •	 Retrofit facility lighting and install energy efficient lighting, timer switches, daylight
                 sensors and motion-activated lighting.
              •	 Implement a program for regular maintenance, in order to improve the energy efficiency
                 of equipment.
              •	 Review and revise production schedules so that high energy consuming equipment is used
                 efficiently (e.g. batch operation to reduce machine operation time). Schedule “rolling
                 blackouts” with the local power generation authority to plan for blackout times.




            28    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: USA


Metal Stamping Company
RISK: Use of cleaning solvents containing
hazardous chemicals
A metal stamping company in Indiana, USA is being investigated by local authorities for improper
disposal of trichloroethylene (TCE) from its degreasing operations by local authorities. TCE is a
halogenated volatile organic compound (VOC) widely used for cleaning processes in the industry
since it evaporates quickly, is cost effective and can be used for many different types of metals.
However, the Indiana Department of Environmental Management recently passed a mandate that
companies must reduce their use of TCE due to its negative health impacts. TCE exposure through
inhalation or ingestion of contaminated drinking water has been associated with central nervous
system (CNS) symptoms such as dizziness, headaches and confusion, and can increase the risk of
liver and kidney cancer. A recent inspection of the company detected the odor of TCE and found
four degreasing machines using it. The company claimed that the machines were old and sched-
uled to be replaced over the next few months. Further inspection determined that the company
was improperly disposing the spent TCE, leading to the probable contamination of local drinking
water supplies. The company is now under further investigation for improper business practices.


  I M PAC T

  •	 Worker illnesses due to respiratory exposure to hazardous cleaning solvents

  •	 Negative health impacts on community members due to ingestion of drinking water
    contaminated with hazardous cleaning solvents

  AVO I D

  •	 Replace solvent-based cleaning units with alternative processes, such as mechanical clean-
    ing, ultrasonic degreasing technology, or biological cleaning in aqueous solutions.
  •	 Substitute TCE with less hazardous cleaning and degreasing solutions.

  •	 Modify working methods to reduce the need for cleaning.

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Train personnel on procedures for the safe handling of degreasers, including setting safety
    devices, maintaining the correct solvent level and monitoring its degree of decomposition,
    unloading and loading machines at correct speed, repairing leaks, and cleaning effectively.
  •	 Reduce vapor emissions by installing degreasers with improved enclosure and vapor con-
    densation systems, and avoiding air turbulence close to the work area.
  •	 Control vapor emissions through the installation of rim ventilation (lip extraction) on the
    sides of the degreaser; pass vapor through an adsorption media (e.g. activated carbon)
    before releasing it to the atmosphere.
  •	 Install an on-site solvent recycling and recovery system or contract the services of a solvent
    recovery firm to do so.
  •	 Ship solvent waste to an accredited Treatment Storage and Disposal Facility (TSDF) for
    recovery, or dispose of it through controlled incineration.

  O FF S E T

  •	 Assist in the remediation of water sources contaminated by TCE

  •	 Provide compensation and proper healthcare to workers and community members
    impacted by TCE exposure, according to local and national regulations


Version 1.2 April 15, 2015      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	       29
3. Management Programs
                                          CASE STUDY: BULGARIA

           Metal Cutting Company
           RISK: Worker exposure to metalworking fluids
           Best Metalworks is a medium-sized metal cutting company in Bulgaria that produces a variety
           of different metal parts for medical devices. The company has seen increasing rates of employee
           turnover and employee absenteeism due to health issues. Many workers are complaining of skin
           irritation, difficulty breathing and other respiratory conditions, such as asthma and bronchitis. A
           group of workers recently quit after only six months on the job because of health problems and
           a worker who has been with the company for decades was recently diagnosed with cancer. These
           issues have been traced to exposure to metalworking fluids (MWFs). MWFs are used to decrease
           heat and friction in metal production operations and remove small metal particles from grinding
           and other processes. Workers can be exposed to MWFs by inhaling the vapor or mist or through
           skin contact (e.g. from splashed liquid). The company asserts that all workers are instructed to
           wear personal protective equipment (PPE) to limit their exposure. However, workers have to pay
           for their own PPE. As a result, many workers do not actually use the PPE and are vulnerable to
           MWF exposure. Many workers also do not remember any training on proper handling of MWFs.

              I M PAC T
             •	 Negative health impacts on workers
             AVO I D
             •	 Obtain Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) from suppliers to learn about MWFs’ composi-
                tion and associated hazards. Select and use MWFs with the lowest amount of toxic materials.
             •	 Install ventilation systems and maintain them regularly to ensure that they are working
                properly. Repair and replace the systems as needed.
             •	 Develop and implement policies and procedures for the proper handling of MWFs and
                maintenance of equipment to reduce MWFs contamination.
             •	 Place washing stations close to the work area to encourage good washing practices.
             M I N I M IZE
             •	 Develop and implement a training program for all metalworking personnel about the
                hazards of MWFs and techniques to avoid and limit exposure, including regular housekeep-
                ing, proper cleaning techniques and appropriate use of personal protective equipment.
                Include information on good hygiene practices to limit exposure, such as regular hand-
                washing and changing contaminated clothing.
             •	 Based on a risk assessment, provide personnel with appropriate protective equipment free
                of charge (e.g. “resistant to oil” or oil-proof respiratory protection, goggles, face shields,
                gloves, chemical-resistant clothing).
             •	 Install emergency showers near working areas.
             •	 Regularly assess workers’ exposure to MWFs. Identify high exposure tasks and monitor
                them through the appropriate air sampling strategy (e.g. personal air sampling). Monitoring
                results will determine if engineering and work practice controls are effective.
             •	 Periodically conduct medical screenings of workers exposed to MWFs to facilitate early
                diagnosis and treatment of associated diseases. Examination should include an employee-
                completed health questionnaire, limited examination of the areas of the body at risk (lungs
                and skin), and measurement of lung function (pulmonary capacity test).
             •	 Maintain records of all MWF-related accidents and worker’s medical screenings. Conduct
                regular review and root-cause analysis.
             O FF S E T
             •	 Provide medical care and timely assistance to affected workers.
             •	 Compensate for work-related health impacts and loss of ability to work according to local
                 and national regulations.




            30     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: BANGLADESH

Pipe Construction Company
RISK: Worker exposure to welding fumes
Metal Pipes is a medium-sized pipe production company in Bangladesh. The company is pro-
ducing pipes for a buried pipeline project that will improve irrigation in certain areas of the
country. The client recently halted production due to the deaths of two workers and concerns
about working conditions. The company claimed to have no connection to the deaths. However,
many workers complain of flu-like symptoms, especially at the beginning of the work week.
Since they are not paid for sick days, none of the workers have taken any time off from work.
Further investigation into the source of the illness and cause of death determined that the
workers are regularly exposed to high levels of welding fumes. The workers who died had acute
exposure to welding fumes because they worked in a confined, unventilated space. Welding
fumes are formed during the heating of metal in welding processes. Exposure can produce sig-
nificant health impacts, including metal fume fever, asthma, cancer and even death. The fumes
can also ignite if they interact with flames. The company claimed to have instituted control
measures, but the workers were not using any personal protective equipment (PPE), and there
are no ventilation systems in the facility. As a result, workers are exposed to welding fumes for
eight to ten hours each day in non-ventilated spaces.

 I M PAC T
 •	 Worker illnesses and loss of life
 AVO I D
 •	 Modify processes and implement new methods, such as cold jointing techniques, to decrease
    the need for hot work overall.
 •	 Install forced exhaust ventilation systems in working areas and implement a regular mainte-
    nance program to ensure that they are consistently effective. Install spark arresters in welding
    fume extraction systems to prevent fires.
 •	 Train workers about the hazards of metal fumes and safe work practices.
 •	 Develop, implement and communicate emergency preparedness and response procedures in
    case of fire from ignited fumes. Regularly train workers on fire response and conduct evacua-
    tion drills in all shifts.
 •	 Eliminate the use of specific plating materials (e.g. cadmium) that produce the worst health
    impacts.
 M I N I M IZE
 •	 Assess current welding techniques and replace them with methods that produce fewer fumes.
 •	 Ensure that metals are cleaned properly prior to welding. Remove coatings that increase the
    toxicity of fumes.
 •	 Assess work stations and reposition workers so that they are not positioned directly in the
    fume cloud. Develop and implement policies and procedures regarding working hours,
    breaks and paid sick days. Limit workers’ overtime and ensure they take regular breaks to
    reduce exposure time.
 •	 Monitor workers’ exposure to welding fumes regularly through the appropriate air sam-
    pling strategy (e.g. personal air sampling) to check if controls in place are effective.
 •	 Based on a risk assessment provide personnel with appropriate PPE free of charge. Train
    workers on the proper use and maintenance of their PPE, and monitor regularly to ensure
    workers are using their PPE correctly.
 •	 Establish and follow a maintenance schedule for welding machinery. Train workers on
    proper maintenance procedures. Conduct periodic medical check-ups for workers to
    monitor health impacts of metal fumes.
 •	 Train workers to identify symptoms of welding fumes exposure and encourage them to
    report issues to their supervisors.
 O FF S E T
 •	 Provide compensation and proper healthcare to workers impacted by metal fume exposure
   according to local and national regulations.
Version 1.2 April 15, 2015       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	     31
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: TURKEY


            Construction Material Manufacturer
            RISK: Malfunctioning or improperly used machines
            MTC is a large steel manufacturer in Turkey. The company is one of the oldest in the country and
            produces steel channels, anchors and other products for construction. The company has had plans
            to update its facility and machines for years, but has not yet implemented them. As a result, many
            of the machines are 5 to 10 years old. Recently, a worker was injured while operating a 10-year
            old computer numerical control (CNC) punch press that did not have proper safeguards in place.
            The multi-punch press had a malfunctioning part, which caused it to punch two holes simultane-
            ously instead of one. The worker was new to the company and had not been trained properly,
            so he reached across the front of the machine to push the malfunctioning part back into place.
            When the punch press cycled, the worker’s hand became caught in a pinch point between the top
            of the ram and the machine housing, and three of his fingers were crushed by the machine. The
            company claimed that the accident was caused by worker carelessness.

              I M PAC T

              •	 Worker injury due to traumatic amputations and loss of digits

              AVO I D

              •	 Develop and implement policies and procedures for the proper maintenance of all
                 machines in accordance with manufacturer’s specifications to ensure they are in safe
                 working condition.
              •	 Shut down and repair machines the first time that they malfunction to prevent possible
                 incidents. Do not allow workers to use malfunctioning machinery.
              •	 Replace machines when they have become ineffective or pose a danger to workers. Install
                 effective safeguards on machinery to prevent hands, arms, and other body parts from
                 contacting hazardous moving parts.
              •	 Arrange work areas so that workers can easily access equipment and controls without
                 reaching across moving parts.
              •	 Inspect machines regularly and update risk assessments accordingly. Include an assessment
                 of all potentially hazardous interactions that workers might have with machines.

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Implement an orientation and on-going training program for all workers to inform and
                 remind them about workplace hazards and how to safely operate machinery. As part
                 of the training, instruct workers not to wear loose-fitting clothing, dangling jewelry or
                 expose long hair, since these can become caught in machines. Workers should also lock out
                 equipment before clearing obstructions or doing any maintenance.
              •	 Assign a responsible staff member to monitor workers who interact with the moving parts
                 of machinery.
              •	 Post work instructions for safely operating equipment throughout the facility in a form
                 that workers can understand (e.g. in their native language or using illustrations).
              •	 Instruct workers to report any unsafe conditions.
              •	 Provide proper lighting in each work area.

              O FF S E T

              •	 Provide medical care for workers who are injured in the workplace.
              •	 Provide compensation for worker injury or lost ability to work, according to local and
                 national regulations.




            32    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: CHINA


Automotive Parts Manufacturer
RISK: High concentration of metal dust in the workplace
RIMS Co. is a metal products company in eastern China. The company employs 450 workers and
specializes in polishing metal wheel rims for automobile companies. This process produces a signifi-
cant amount of metal dust, especially aluminum and magnesium. Many workers have complained
that it is difficult to breathe in the factory since the dust goes through their face masks. They leave
the factory covered in grey dust. A couple of weeks ago, there was an explosion at a similar factory
nearby. Investigators have determined that the explosion was caused by the ignition of built-up com-
bustible metal dust in the ventilation ducts. The explosion killed 50 people and injured 150 workers.
This horrible accident brought attention to metal products companies in the area. The management
of RIMS Co. is now determined to prevent a similar accident from happening in its factory and is
taking steps to improve its dust removal processes.

  I M PAC T
 •	 Worker illnesses due to airborne contaminants in the workplace
 •	 Fatal and nonfatal worker injuries due to explosions
 AVO I D
 •	 Annually conduct a fire and emergency risk assessment to evaluate root causes of potential
   explosions, focusing especially on combustible and water-reactive metal dust.
 •	 Install a dust collection system to efficiently capture dust from equipment. Hoods, enclosures,
    ductwork and collectors must be appropriately designed and built to reduce risks of explosion
    (see National Fire Protection Association - NFPA standards).
 •	 Regularly monitor the concentration of metal fines in the ductwork to ensure that it is safely
    below the lower explosive limit.
 •	 Regularly monitor the concentration of airborne metal fines in the workplace to ensure that it
    is below the occupational exposure limits.
 •	 Implement a dust housekeeping program to regularly clean and remove dust from the factory.
 •	 Ensure that Safety Data Sheets (SDSs) are completed and available for all materials.
 M I N I M IZE
 •	 Install appropriate fire and explosion protection systems (e.g. isolation, suppression and
    venting devices).
 •	 Ensure that proper and adequate fire suppressing agents are in place throughout the facility,
    such as a Class D type fire extinguisher. Do not use water or foam fire extinguishers on com-
    bustible metal fires due to the water-reactivity of alkali metals.
 •	 Establish, communicate and implement a fire safety and emergency preparedness and
    response plan through a joint worker-manager occupational health and safety committee.
 •	 Conduct worker trainings on emergency preparedness and response procedures, including
    identification of workplace hazards, safe operation of machines, use of fire and explosion
    protection systems, equipment maintenance, and housekeeping procedures.
 •	 Assemble and regularly train fire-fighting and emergency response teams. The number of
    responders must be proportional to the total workforce and there should be at least one for
    each section of the facility.
 •	 Conduct emergency drills regularly for workers in all shifts, including contract and temporary
    workers.
 •	 Implement a risk-free communication channel to receive workers’ feedback on health and
    safety conditions in the workplace, especially related to the build-up of combustible dust.
    Reward workers for alerting management to hazards.
 O FF S E T
 •	 Provide medical care to those injured in the workplace.
 •	 Compensate for loss of life and loss of ability to work due to injury according to local/national
    laws and regulations.
 •	 Ensure that workers continue to receive salary until re-opening of area damaged by explosion.

Version 1.2 April 15, 2015      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	      33
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: INDIA


            Steel Manufacturer
            RISK: Lack of protection for temporary/contract workers
            ABC Manufacturing is a large steel manufacturing company in India. The company employs con-
            tract workers to carry out temporary projects at its manufacturing facility. In total, the company
            hires approximately 1,500 contract workers on a regular basis from a variety of different labor
            contractors. One recent project required workers to work on raised platforms. This work can
            be dangerous and requires appropriate use of personal protective equipment (PPE). However,
            many of the workers are not trained properly and do not wear the proper harness or neglect to
            fasten the hook to a firm supporting structure above the working platform. This can cause ac-
            cidental falls. Recently, one worker fell and broke his leg during his first month on the job. As a
            contract worker, he should have received a state insurance card, which covers any hospitalization
            or medical treatment. However, he never received his insurance card and had to pay for all of his
            medical costs due to the accident out of pocket. The company refused to compensate him for the
            costs since he was hired through a labor contractor. The contractor also refused to accept respon-
            sibility. He could not afford the costs and had to borrow money at a high interest rate from a local
            money lender.

              I M PAC T

              •	 Worker injury or loss of life due to lack of safety training
              •	 Worker economic insecurity due to lack of legal protection or social insurance

              AVO I D

              •	 Develop and implement policies and procedures regarding workers’ compensation insurance.
                 Communicate policies to labor contractor. Do not assign workers to hazardous jobs unless
                 proof of insurance coverage is provided.

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Provide workers with appropriate PPE free of charge based on a risk assessment. Safety
                 belt and harness should be made of materials strong enough to hold the weight of the
                 worker in case of an accidental fall.
              •	 Train workers, including contract workers, on safety procedures and use of PPE. Ensure
                 that workers understand the instructions by conducting a simulation prior to worker de-
                 ployment at the worksite.
              •	 Assign a responsible staff member to monitor working platforms and ensure that they are
                 properly installed. Structures should be equipped with safety nets, be fastened and bolted
                 properly, and have appropriate fasteners where workers can clamp their harness hook.
              •	 Assign a responsible staff member to monitor working practices of workers in hazardous
                 jobs.
              •	 Record all accidents and near misses, including those involving contractors, and conduct an
                 analysis to identify the root causes.

              O FF S E T

              •	 Provide medical care for workers who are injured in the workplace.
              •	 Work with the contractor to provide compensation for worker injury and lost ability to work
                 according to local and national regulations.




            34    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: SOUTH AFRICA


Boiler Manufacturer
RISK: Excessive overtime
MNC Incorporated is a medium-size boiler manufacturing company in South Africa. The company
produces steam boilers that are used in process industries. The company is located in a remote
area away from any major cities. As a result, it is difficult for the company to recruit workers with
the necessary skill level. High-skilled workers are reluctant to join the company due to its location
and lack of facilities. Furthermore, the growth of process industries in the country has increased
the demand for MNC’s products. The company is struggling to keep up with demand, but does
not want to turn down orders and lose business to its competitors. In order to accommodate
the increased demand, the company has been increasing the number of hours its workers are
required to work. Though the national law limits working hours per week to 55 hours, including
overtime, the company has been deploying workers for an average of 90 hours per week. This is
almost double the number of allowed working hours. And, due to the strenuous nature of the
work, this excessive overtime has resulted in deterioration of product quality over the past year.
Customers have begun to complain and demand compensation for defective products. The local
authorities have also taken notice of the company’s practices and have issued a warning that any
further violation will result in suspension of the factory’s operating license. The company’s man-
agement must now review its operations to remedy the issue.

  I M PAC T
 •	 Workplace injuries/illnesses caused by workers’ fatigue due to excessive overtime
 •	 Reduced product quality and lost business
 •	 Suspension of operating license and damage to company’s reputation
  AVO I D
 •	 Review current production planning to avoid committing to unrealistic delivery schedules.
   Restrict contracts to orders that are feasible to complete within the legal working hours.
 •	 Develop, communicate and implement policies and procedures for working hours in confor-
   mance with national laws, including provisions for overtime work:
    •	 Normal working hours should not exceed 48 hours per week and workers should receive
       at least one day off after every six consecutive working days, unless there are exceptions
       in national law or collective bargaining agreements.
    •	 Overtime should not exceed 12 hours per week
    •	 Overtime should not be mandated on a regular basis and workers should be allowed to
       refuse overtime without penalty.
  M I N I M IZE
 •	 Identify processes that can be modified to shorten the amount of time needed for produc-
    tion and delivery.
 •	 Develop and implement strategies to recruit skilled workers. Consider providing incentives,
    such as transportation to/from the facility and the nearest city, accommodation for workers
    (according to decent standards) and an educational facility for workers’ children.
 •	 Establish connections with technical training institutes to recruit trainees with the necessary
    skill level. Ensure that the trainee program is conducted according to regulations and does
    not expose young workers to hazardous situations.
 •	 Add shifts, modify the timing of shifts, or create more flexible working schedules to mini-
    mize overtime in any single shift operation. Develop a long-term vendor development plan
    to meet exigencies of workload through sub-contracting to reliable suppliers.
  O FF S E T
 •	 Retroactively compensate for overtime work at the established overtime premium rate.
 •	 Conduct periodic medical check-ups for workers. Provide adequate rest and suitable medical
   assistance to workers suffering from fatigue.


Version 1.2 April 15, 2015      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	       35
                                    ELEMENT 4


                                   Organizational Capacity
                                   and Competency
    All levels of the company
    are trained and engaged –
                                   A well-implemented ESMS is ultimately about


5
    multiple units and workers
    as well as managers. E&S       trained, committed people. How do you make
    staff has implementation
    authority. Management          that happen?
    commitment is reflected
    in resources devoted to
    E&S management and
    training.
                                   ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITIES TO
                                   IMPLEMENT THE ESMS
                                   First, you need senior management commitment. Senior management



4
    Multiple units have E&S
                                   commitment starts with adopting the ESMS policies, but it must go
    responsibilities, and senior
    management is involved.        beyond that. Senior management support is critical to implementing a
    E&S is managed as an           sustainable ESMS. It is the responsibility of senior management to lead
    inte- grated system. New       the effort. They don’t have to lead the effort on a day-to-day basis, but they
    staff receives some E&S        do need to send a clear message, to all employees at all levels, that this is a
    management guidance.           long-term commitment by your company.

                                   Beyond senior management commitment, you need a team that takes
                                   responsibility for the ESMS. This does not need to be a full-time job for




3
    All levels of the company      anyone, but senior management needs to ensure realignment of reporting
    are involved in aware-         duties, allocation of appropriate time and authority to carry out the work
    ness training. E&S roles       involved.
    and responsibilities are
    assigned and part of daily     A well-balanced ESMS Team is a prerequisite for meaningful engagement
    operations. E&S staff is       with your peers and colleagues. It should include knowledgeable profes-
    trained and competent.
                                   sionals from environment, health and safety, operations or production,
                                   contracts and purchasing, human resources, for example.
    E&S roles are defined and



2
    assigned. Each issues is       In fact, the success of a management system depends on departments that
    handled only by one func-      have traditionally been seen as beyond the reach of environmental and
    tional area. Some aware-
                                   social issues, such as human resources, production, procurement and main-
    ness training is provided
    at orientation and addi-       tenance. For example, human resources manages training needs related to
    tional training is provided    the labor aspects; production focuses on the more efficient use of resources
    for EHS staff.                 and the reduction of waste; procurement manages the qualifications and
                                   performance of suppliers and contractors; and maintenance ensures that the
    No assigned staff with         equipment runs efficiently and that spills, leaks and other emergency situa-



1
    E&S management respon-         tions are minimized.
    sibilities. Some limited
    awareness and E&S roles        The ESMS Team should not work in isolation when identifying risks and
    and responsibilities start-    impacts, developing improved procedures, designing actions plans, etc. To
    ing to get defined. No         be truly effective, the ESMS Team needs to consult with people from all
    systems awareness or
                                   levels of the company, including supervisors and workers, as they are key
    repeatable processes.
                                   frontline identifiers of problems.




0   No internal awareness
    and no formally assigned
    responsibility for E&S.




    36    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                      4. Org. Capacity and Competency




                             As with the overall management system, the team should be scaled to the size
                             and complexity of your company. Your organization might not have multiple
                             departments with distinct roles; maybe a few people cover several functions.
                             The key is to involve people across the range of functions. If a team already
                             exists in your company (e.g. fire safety team, health and safety committee)
                             consider building your ESMS Team upon it.

                             Once the ESMS Team is selected, the team members need to select a team
                             leader. This is an important role, especially in the beginning. The team leader
                             needs to set the tone for the group and keep people motivated. All new initia-
                             tives in a company face hurdles, and developing and implementing an ESMS is
                             no exception. The team leader needs to help the team overcome the inevitable
                             hurdles, and should have direct access to senior management.




                               Take a look at the Toolkit item Roadmap and Time Estimate for
                               Developing and Implementing an ESMS in the Toolkit for a list
                               and sequencing of activities to develop and implement an ESMS.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	          37
                                                          EXAMPLE OF AN ESMS TEAM




                                                                                        Quality
                                                                  Human
When selecting a                                                 resources
                                                                                        control


team leader, look                                                                             Environmental
                                                                                              health & safety
for someone who                                Production


has the following                                                           Select a
                                                                          team leader
qualities:
  •	 communicator;                                                                       Procurement/
                                                          Worker
                                                                                           Sourcing
  •	 problem-solver;                                   Representatives


  •	 project manager;
  •	 pragmatic; and                COMMUNICATION AND TRAINING
  •	 respectful to all.            Now that you have identified the actions to be taken and updated your proce-
                                   dures, you need trained, committed people who follow the ESMS procedures.
                                   This is the end goal of communication and training.

                                   There are three key steps that build on each other:

                                   1.	They need to be aware of the ESMS.
                                      •	 What is it?
                                      •	 What are its goals?
                                      •	 What do I need to do?

                                   2.	 They need to understand that the ESMS is necessary and will improve
                                       the company.
                                      •	 How does this help our company?
                                      •	 How does it help my department?
                                      •	 What will change?
                                      •	 What is in it for me?

                                   3.	They need to obtain the skills and knowledge to be effective in
                                      their roles.
                                      •	 What are the new policies and procedures?
                                      •	 What exactly do I need to do?
                                      •	 How do I do that?
                                      •	 What will happen if I don’t do it?




        38   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                           4. Org. Capacity and Competency




      TIP
                                                            Your ESMS Team needs detailed training to
      Effective Communication and Training
                                                            develop the necessary knowledge and skills. They
                                                            will need to understand the basics of the Plan-Do-
      Ask yourself if the goal of this specific com-
                                                            Check-Act cycle and know the nine elements of
      munication or training module is to build
                                                            an ESMS. This Handbook provides the informa-
      awareness, to gain commitment and/or give
                                                            tion they will need, but additional help may be
      people the knowledge and skills needed to
                                                            necessary. In addition to the detailed training of
      implement.
                                                            the team, everyone will need to receive awareness
                                                            training so there is a shared understanding of the
                                                            goals of the ESMS.

                                 The chapters in this Handbook provide an easy way to structure efficient
                                 general training. You can give everybody an overview about what you have
                                 learned here about developing and implementing an ESMS.

                                 You may also need to provide training that is specifically related to your Ac-
                                 tion Plan and new operating procedures.

                                 Examine the specific actions and who is going to be involved. This is a quick
                                 way to determine what training will be needed by the various departments
                                 and people in your company. Ask yourself what knowledge and skills do
                                 people need to effectively implement new procedures, carry out allocated
                                 responsibilities and complete the action plan.



                                   Use the Toolkit item Training Plan Worksheet as template and
                                   tie it to your Action Plans and improved procedures.




AWA REN ESS                      CO M M ITM ENT                   I M PLEM ENTATI O N



    Version 1.2 April 15, 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	               39
                                     ELEMENT 5


                                    Emergency Preparedness
                                    and Response

5
    Regular engagement with         Even when you have considered all the risks and put
    local community and gov-
    ernment for onsite and
    offsite emergency plan.
                                    the appropriate management programs in place,
    Formal resource-sharing
    agreements with neighbor-       accidents and emergency situations can happen.
    ing companies.

                                    Your business is a dynamic operation, and many

4
    Senior management and
    all units and shifts, includ-
    ing contract and tempo-         things change from day to day – people go in and
    rary workers, participate
    in emergency risk assess-       out of your workforce, materials and suppliers enter
    ment, preparedness plan-
    ning and mock drills.           and exit your supply chain, facilities and equipment
    Continual improvement.
                                    are added to and removed from your production


3
    All onsite and off-site
    emergency issues have           line. A management system will help to maintain
    been identified and an
    effective preparedness
    plan is in place. The plan
                                    continuity and consistency throughout these
    meets the local regulatory
    requirements and the local      changes. However, there may be a momentary lapse
    industry best practices.
                                    or gaps in the system (e.g. someone not properly


2
    The emergency prepared-
    ness plan is in place, but      trained, someone not following the procedures,
    there is no evidence of
    consistent implementa-          a machine breakdown), or an external force (e.g.
    tion. Some trainings are
    provided to the workers on      natural disaster) that can lead to an accident or
    emergency requirements.
                                    emergency situation at your facility. While it is not


1
    Emergency management
    planning is not effective,      always possible to prevent such situations, you can
    as all emergency risks
    have not been identified.       be prepared to respond effectively to prevent and
    Occasional trainings are
    provided to workers.            mitigate any harm to your workers, community and
                                    the environment.

0
    Very limited emergency
    control and personal pro-
    tective equipment. No for-
    mal plan in place.




       40   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                              5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                             The key to effective response is effective preparation. The following steps will
                             help you to anticipate the possible scenarios and prepare accordingly:
                                •	 Identify the areas where accidents and emergency situations may occur, and
                                  communities and individuals that may be impacted. This should begin during
                                  your overall risk and impact assessment, through your process analysis, physical
                                  mapping and consultations with workers, experts and the community.
                                •	 Develop response procedures for each identified emergency situation that clearly
                                  explain what actions need to be taken. These need to be detailed clearly for
                                  everyone in your company to understand what he or she needs to do.
                                •	 Provide the necessary equipment and resources to effectively implement the
                                  response plans. A stockpile of fire extinguishers does not put out fires, unless
                                  people can effectively find and use them when needed. Think about equipment
                                  that is easy for people to use and is located where it can be immediately accessed
                                  during accidents and emergencies.
                                •	 Assign responsibilities so that each activity has people responsible for carrying
                                  it out. Also designate people who will routinely analyze how well the system is
                                  working and update the risk assessment and plans.
                                •	 Communicate so that everyone in your company understands the importance
                                  of the emergency preparedness and response system and is encouraged to help
                                  monitor and improve its effectiveness. Also include people in the community
                                  who may be affected.
                                •	 Provide periodic training so that everyone in your company has an overview
                                  of the system, and knows the response plans. Don’t just lecture about what
                                  to do – ask for and obtaininput on what needs to be addressed and what can
                                  be improved. Even with the most detailed procedures and plans, people will
                                  need to exercise individual judgment and adapt to quickly changing situations.
                                  This is more likely to happen if you engage people in all aspects of the system
                                  beforehand.
                                •	 Work with government agencies and community groups to identify areas where
                                  you can collaborate to respond effectively to internal and external situations.
                                •	 Conduct periodic checks and drills to test how well the system is working and
                                  to re-assess the risks to reflect changing conditions. Incorporate your findings to
                                  continually improve your system.
                                •	 Remember, it is essential that the emergency response plan be site specific.
                                  Even if you have similar operations at two different sites, it does not mean that
                                  the same emergency plan would be effective at both locations. An emergency
                                  response plan at each site should be independently reviewed for its suitability
                                  and effectiveness.




                              Look at the Sample Fire Response Procedure and Sample Chemical
                              Spill Response Procedure Flowchart for examples.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	                       41
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                         An Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
                                         should include:
                                           •	   identification of potential emergencies based on
                                                hazard assessment;

                                           •	   procedures to respond to the identified emergency
                                                situations;

                                           •	   procedures to shut down equipment;

                                           •	   procedures to contain and limit pollution;

                                           •	   procedures for decontamination;

                                           •	   procedures for rescue and evacuation, including a
                                                designated meeting place outside the facility;

                                           •	   location of alarms and schedule of maintenance;
                                           •	   list and location of equipment and facilities for
                                                employees responsible for responding to the
                                                emergency (fire-fighting equipment, spill response
                                                equipment, personal protection equipment for the
                                                emergency response teams, first aid kits and stations);

                                           •	   protocols for the use of the emergency equipment
                                                and facilities;

                                           •	   schedule for periodic inspection, testing and
                                                maintenance of emergency equipment;

                                           •	   clear identification of evacuation routes and
                                                meeting points;

                                           •	   schedule of trainings (drills), including with local
                                                emergency response services (fire fighters);
                                           •	   procedures for emergency drills;

                                           •	   emergency contacts and communication protocols,
                                                including with affected communities when necessary,
                                                and procedures for interaction with the government
                                                authorities;

                                           •	   procedures for periodic review and update of
                                                emergency response plans.




             42   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                             Common OHS Hazards and Emergency Situations
                             in the Metal Products Manufacturing Industry
                             Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) hazards in the workplace can be
                             divided into five categories: physical, chemical, biological, ergonomic and
                             radiological.

                             You should identify the specific hazards that are relevant to your company’s
                             operations during your risk assessment, using methodologies such as job safety
                             reviews or job hazard analyses. The results of these analyses and the tasks
                             required to mitigate the identified hazards should be incorporated into action
                             plans, which also stipulate the assigned responsible staff and expected timelines
                             for completion.

                             Your management program should seek to first avoid negative impacts from
                             each hazard, by eliminating or substituting the equipment, material, or work
                             practice that is causing the hazard. If it is not possible to eliminate the hazard,
                             you should seek to minimize its impacts by instituting engineering controls
                             (e.g. by installing machine guards or active ventilation) and administrative
                             controls (e.g. job rotation, clear work instructions or warning signage). You
                             should also provide technically appropriate personal protective equipment
                             (PPE) and train your personnel on the appropriate use and maintenance of
                             supplied PPE.

                             OHS emergency situations often occur because of gaps in a company’s man-
                             agement system. Thus, even though the hazards may seem to be very different,
                             such as slips and falls on spilled liquids vs. exposure to radiation, they are often
                             the result of the same root cause – ineffective implementation of the ESMS.
                             The tables below describe common workplace hazards and their associated po-
                             tential impacts. They also illustrate how inadequate implementation of any of
                             the 9 ESMS elements can be the root cause of such situations. The examples
                             below are not an exhaustive list of root causes. You should identify gaps in your
                             own system to determine potential root causes of problems during your risk
                             assessment.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	              43
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                                         PHYSICAL HAZARDS
               Examples                                                Potential Impacts

               •	 Slipping on spilled liquids (e.g. fuel or             •	 Sprains and strains
                  lubricants)                                           •	 Fractures
               •	 Falling from heights (e.g. from a ladder or           •	 Cuts, abrasions, puncture wounds
                  work platform)
                                                                        •	 Traumatic amputation
               •	 Collision with moving items (e.g. cranes,
                  vehicles or forklifts)                                •	 Eye injuries

               •	 Interacting with improperly enclosed, un-             •	 Hearing threshold shifts and loss
                  guarded or moving machines (e.g. hydrau-              •	 Heat stress, dehydration, heat stroke
                  lic forming presses, drill presses, or metal          •	 Electrocution
                  cutting tools)
                                                                        •	 Asphyxiation and burnings in case of fire
               •	 Being struck by flying metallic particles
                                                                        •	 Death
               •	 Exposure to high noise levels
                                                                       Fires or explosions from ignited combustible
               •	 Exposure to extreme temperatures
                                                                       materials can lead to massive loss of life and
               •	 Exposure to welding arcs                             destruction of property.
               •	 Touching exposed, damaged or improperly
                  grounded electrical wires
               •	 Improper grounding of electrical wires
               •	 Ignition of metallic dust or other combus-
                  tible materials
               •	 Explosion of improperly stored oxygen,
                  nitrogen, acetylene or argon gas cylinders
                  (i.e. no protection from heat and sunlight
                  or improper fastening arrangement)


                                                         Potential Root Causes

               Management Program:                Organizational Capacity and             Emergency Preparedness and
               •	 Lack of, inadequate, or         Competency:                             Response:
                  improperly implemented          •	 Insufficient worker training         •	 Lack of or inadequate
                  safety procedures                  about hazards                          emergency preparedness
                                                  •	 Failure to nominate respon-            and response plan
                                                     sible party for managing             •	 Insufficient mock drills
                                                     hazards                              •	 Contract and temporary
                                                                                            workers not included in
                                                                                            emergency planning




             44     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                      CHEMICAL HAZARDS
  Examples                                         Potential Impacts

  •	 Skin contact or inhalation of toxic and         •	 Skin irritation and burns
    carcinogenic substances contained in me-         •	 Irritation of eyes, nose and throat
    tallic fumes, metal working fluids, metal
    cleaning solvents, or priming and painting       •	 Breathing difficulty
    compounds                                        •	 Intoxication
  •	 Ignition of flammable liquids and gases         •	 Damage to internal organs
                                                     •	 Damage to nervous, immune, and repro-
                                                       ductive systems
                                                     •	 Cancer
                                                     •	 Asphyxiation and/or burning in case of fire
                                                     •	 Death
                                                   Fires from ignited flammable liquids or gases
                                                   may have disastrous impacts on worker safety
                                                   and your business.

                                       Potential Root Causes

  Identification of Risks and    Management Program:                   Emergency Preparedness and
  Impacts:                       •	 Use of incompatible or             Response:
  •	 Incomplete risk assess-       damaged storage containers          •	 Lack of or incomplete
    ment of chemicals and        •	 Uninformed or incorrect              emergency response
    raw materials used in the      labeling                              planning
    facility                                                           •	 Poorly executed emergency
                                 •	 Insufficient monitoring of
  •	 Lack of awareness of          allowable chemical concen-            detection, alarms, evacua-
    chemical risks in the          trations in the workplace             tion, and fire suppression
    workplaces                                                           systems
                                 •	 Inadequate PPE
                                                                       •	 Insufficient worker training
                                                                         and mock drills
                                                                       •	 Lack of communication or
                                                                         awareness of individual
                                                                         responsibilities during
                                                                         emergencies.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	           45
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                                       BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS
               Examples                                                          Potential Impacts

               •	 Exposure to bodily fluids that may carry pathogens               •	 Debilitating illnesses among
                  (e.g. when treating an injured worker)                             workers and even death
               •	 Exposure to pathogens due to lack of hygiene in
                  canteen facilities and amongst food handlers

                                                         Potential Root Causes

               Policy:                              Emergency Preparedness and                 Monitoring and Review:
               •	 Lack of, inadequate or            Response:                                  •	 Failure to monitor and
                  improperly implemented            •	 Failure to nominate emergency             review hygiene prac-
                  safety policies and proce-          response brigades                          tices and improve them
                  dures                                                                          as needed
                                                    •	 Insufficient worker training on
                                                      first aid response




                                                       ERGONOMIC HAZARDS
               Examples                                                Potential Impacts

               •	 Heavy lifting or improper lifting techniques          •	 Strains and sprains to muscles and connec-
               •	 Repetitive motions                                      tive tissues causing pain, inflammation,
                                                                          numbness, or loss of muscle function
               •	 Improperly aligned work stations
                                                                        •	 Lower back injuries
               •	 Insufficient and restricted work space
                                                                        •	 Permanent disabilities
               •	 Standing for extended periods of time
                                                                        •	 Eyestrain
               •	 Continued forceful exertions
               •	 Inadequate lighting

                                                         Potential Root Causes

               Identification of Risks and        Management Program:                     Organizational Capacity and
               Impacts:                           •	 Insufficient number of staff         Competency:
               •	 Incomplete risk assess-           to perform duties (e.g.               •	 Deficient worker training
                  ment of working areas             heavy lifting)                          on proper techniques for
               •	 Lack of awareness of            •	 Insufficient breaks                    lifting or performing duties
                  ergonomic risks in the          •	 Inadequate PPE                       •	 Failure to nominate respon-
                  workplaces                                                                sible party for managing
                                                  •	 Inadequate medical care
                                                                                            ergonomic hazards
                                                    for staff




             46     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                              5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                        RADIOLOGICAL HAZARDS
  Examples                                                     Potential Impacts

  •	 Exposure to radiation (e.g. x-ray from                    •	 Radiation sickness
    non-invasive testing, UV radiation from                    •	 Cancer
    welding)
                                                               •	 Welder’s eye
  •	 Continued exposure to radiation from
    electronic equipment                                       •	 Skin cancer

  •	 Exposure to laser light                                   •	 Eye injuries



                                               Potential Root Causes

  Identification of Risks and        Management Program:                         Monitoring and Reviewt:
  Impacts:                           •	 Use of non-certified equip-              •	 Inadequate monitoring
  •	 Lack of awareness of               ment and radiation sources                 of worker exposure to
    radiation sources and            •	 Use of expired radiation                   radiation sources
    associated risks in the             licenses
    company
                                     •	 Deficient procedures re-
                                        garding allowable exposure
                                        limits and worker exposure
                                        periods




Emergencies                  In addition to emergencies that may result from workplace hazards, all
                             workplaces are also vulnerable to other types of accidents and emergencies,
Caused by                    including manmade or natural disasters. Some of these situations may
External Events              be preventable, such as fires resulting from improperly stored flammable
                             chemicals, while other may not be, such as an earthquake.

                             The following list includes common types of emergencies, all of which can
                             result in significant worker injury or death, as well as disruption of operations,
                             destruction of property, and severe financial losses.

                             During your risk assessment, you should identify the emergencies that are
                             most likely to occur in your area and create a comprehensive emergency
                             preparedness plan so you can respond properly to the unplanned event and
                             minimize damage to your company and workers in case of an emergency.

                             Possible manmade or natural disasters include:
                                •	 storms, including tornados, typhoons, and hurricanes (many can result in
                                  flooding);
                                •	 flooding, earthquakes and associated tsunamis, and volcanic eruptions;
                                •	 local and regional fires;
                                •	 explosions, including accidental, military or terrorism;
                                •	 civil unrest; and
                                •	 chemical spill or release of hazardous substances due to ruptured containers,
                                  transport accidents, earthquakes and other natural disasters.


Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	                   47
                                     ELEMENT 6


                                     Stakeholder Engagement


5
    Stakeholder engagement            Your company may have an impact on the lives
    is part of regular activities.
    Awareness and engage-
    ment at senior levels. Flu-
                                      of many people and organizations. All of these
    ent and inclusive commu-
    nication and consultation         people and organizations are your stakeholders
    process with stakeholders.
                                     - they have a stake in your company’s financial,
    Multiple and ongoing
    public consultation and
                                      environmental and social performance.

4
    participation in a cultur-
    ally appropriate manner.          Look at the diagram below and think about how your company interacts
    Stakeholder feedback
                                      with each group. Your relationship with each group is different, and you
    is actively considered.
                                      need to adapt the way you engage with each of them to mitigate risks to
    Reporting to communities
    and effective grievance           your business.
    mechanism is evidenced            Systematically engaging with affected communities in the identification
    by formal records.                and management of the impacts that negatively affect them contributes
                                      to building trust, credibility and local support. Engaging with them also
    Stakeholders have been



3
                                      provides the opportunity to highlight the positive aspects of the company’s
    identified and engaged
    in several events with            presence. This lowers the risk of anti-company sentiments that could lead
    effective dialogue. Some          to costly litigation or disruption of company operations.
    procedures and assigned
    responsibility for engaging
    with stakeholders.
                                                                                    FINANCIAL
                                                                               S   COMMUNIT Y
                                                                            ER                   AC
                                                                    U   M
    Some public events, lim-                                     NS                             G R TIV




2
                                                            CO                                     OU IS
    ited ongoing engagement                                                                           PS T
    process. Sporadic and
                                                       ES




    selective responses
                                                UN D
                                                   ITI
                                            M M C TE




    when approached by
                                          CO F F E




                                                                                                                         NGO




    stakeholders.
                                            A




                                                                                                                           s




    Limited channels in place.                                                 COM PA N Y


1
                                          ERS




    A few meetings and
                                                                                                                                 S/
                                                                                                                     O R NION
                                           WO R K




    discussions, but not an
                                                                                                                              NS
                                                                                                                     C IA E R
                                                                                                                         TI O




    ongoing process yet.
                                                                                                                        EU
                                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                  SO
                                                                                                           TR
                                                    ST




                                                                                                               AS
                                                    O OW
                                                     CK N




                                                                                                               T
                                                       H ER




                                                                                                          EN
                                                        O




0
                                                                                                      M
                                                          LD S




                                                                                                   RN
                                                            ER




    Little or no transparency                                                  SUPPLIERS/     VE
                                                               S/




                                                                                            GO
    with stakeholders.                                                        CONTRACTORS




      48    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                        6. Stakeholder Engagement




                             Other stakeholders such as activists and NGOs may not be directly affected
                             by your operations but may have an interest in what you do. Keeping these
                             groups informed and maintaining an open communication channel may lower
                             the risk of negative campaigns that could affect your company’s reputation.


                             MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
                             The first step in building a relationship with your stakeholders is to identify
                             them. To start, look back at your risk assessment and the areas of potential
                             negative impacts and identify who would be directly or indirectly impacted.

                             Once you have identified your stakeholders, you should prioritize the differ-
                             ent groups based on the nature and severity of the impacts, and the ability of
                             these groups to influence your business. Engagement should be stronger and
                             more frequent with those groups that are more severely affected, as well as with
                             those that have a greater ability to influence your business.

                             Also, as you identify your stakeholders and the issues that may affect or interest
                             them, you can tailor your communication material and methods to effectively
                             engage with each of them.



                              INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS

                               Workers are an important internal stakeholder group. They also
                               need to be involved in the identification of risks that affect them
                               and be consulted when developing action plans and procedures.
                               However, the methods of engagement with them will differ from
                               those used for external stakeholders.




                               Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Map and Impact
                               Zoning Tool for Affected Communities to get started.



Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	               49
For effective                           DEVELOPING A STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN
                                        After mapping your stakeholders, the next step is to develop a plan for how
consultation
                                        to engage with the groups that you have identified. Your stakeholder engage-
with affected                           ment plan can be simple. But it is important to be proactive and to address key
                                        environmental and social concerns.
communities :
                                        At a minimum, even if your company does not have adverse impacts on com-
                                        munities or other stakeholders, you should always implement a procedure to
•	 Start early;
                                        receive communications from the public and accordingly adjust your man-
•	 Disclose meaningful                  agement program (see Element 7, External Communications and Grievance
                                        Mechanisms).
   and accurate
                                        If it is determined that there are affected communities, you need to imple-
   information;                         ment a Grievance Mechanism (see Element 7, External Communications and
                                        Grievance Mechanisms) and actively engage them in consultation, regularly
•	 Use culturally                       disclosing clear and meaningful information on both your impacts and poten-
   appropriate means to                 tial benefits, and providing communities with opportunities to express their
                                        concerns and suggestions.
   reach them;
                                        In the case of potentially significant adverse impacts to individuals and com-
•	 Provide opportunities                munities, you should engage them in a process of Informed Consultation
                                        and Participation (ICP). Compared to a consultation process, an ICP should
   for two-way dialogue ;               ensure a more in-depth exchange of information and a higher level of partici-
                                        pation from affected stakeholders in decision-making, so that their proposed
•	 Document to keep                     mitigation measures are incorporated into the company’s action plan.
   track of issues raised;
                                        Finally, you should periodically report to affected stakeholders on the actions
   and                                  your company is putting in place to address the issues identified through
                                        the engagement process (see Element 8, Ongoing Reporting to Affected
•	 Report back on how                   Communities).
   their input has been                 Regular communication with the various stakeholder groups is an excel-
                                        lent way for you to understand how company operations affect them and to
   used and considered
                                        get early warnings of potential problems. In all your efforts to reach out to
                                        stakeholders, ensure that you do so early on – relationship-building takes time.
                                        Don’t wait until a crisis arises to act, as it will be more difficult without those
                                        relationships in place to manage the problem.




                                                                    Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                    Plan Worksheet to record how you will engage
                                                                    with the important stakeholder groups.




           50     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                  6. Stakeholder Engagement




                             TIP

                              Effective Stakeholder Engagement

                              ••   Be strategic and prioritize which stakeholders to approach –
                                   you may not have the resources to engage them all at once.

                              ••   Update your stakeholder map regularly and in the case of
                                   significant events (e.g., changes to your business, government
                                   elections, natural disasters, etc.).

                              ••   Be aware of what issues are important to each group.

                              ••   If you are dealing with a representative for the group, make
                                   sure that he/she legitimately represents the interests of the af-
                                   fected groups and communities.

                              ••   Engage with stakeholders in their own communities and places
                                   where they feel comfortable.

                              ••   Reach out to vulnerable and marginalized groups.

                              ••   Keep a record of questions, comments and suggestions. Records
                                   provide important information that should be used to adapt
                                   your Action Plans and improve your ESMS.

                              ••   Recognize that your employees are a good link to stakeholders
                                   in the “outside world.”

                              ••   Be prepared to respond to stakeholders, and do not generate
                                   expectations that cannot or will not be fulfilled.




 DEFINITIONS

  Stakeholder                 Any person or organization that has an interest in or is affected by
                              your company

  Affected                    People or communities who are subject to company-related ad-
                              verse impacts on their environment, infrastructure, way of life,
  Communitites
                              personal safety, health or livelihood.




                             For more information on how to develop and implement a Stakeholder
                             Engagement Plan, refer to the Good Practice Handbook “Stakeholder
                             Engagement,” IFC (2007).



Version 1.2 April 15, 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	        51
                                   ELEMENT 7


                                   External Communications
                                   and Grievance Mechanisms

5
    Proactive and responsive
    external communication
                                   If your company has social and environmental
    and grievance mechanism.
    Stakeholders are consulted     impacts in the community, inquiries, concerns and
    on ESMS effectiveness
    and are part of the regular    complaints are bound to arise. How you respond
    review process.
                                   to and manage these issues will have significant


4
    Effective grievance mecha-
    nism is evidenced by for-      implications for how your business is perceived and,
    mal records. There is rou-
    tine review of the records     possibly, whether or not it succeeds.
    and the effectiveness of
    the program.
                                   EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS
    Grievance mechanism is         Even if affected communities per se are not identified, you should always



3
    fully implemented; how-        establish and maintain a publicly available and easily accessible channel for
    ever, there is not enough      stakeholders to contact you (e.g., phone number, website, email address, etc.).
    evidence of its effective-
    ness. No tracking of inter-    External stakeholders can provide valuable information, such as suggestions
    nal or external awareness;     on product improvement, advance warning in critical situations, feedback
    limited tracking of cases.
                                   on interactions with your employees, and/or comments from regulators,
                                   NGOs and individuals regarding your company’s environmental and social
                                   performance.




2
    Procedures and assigned        The procedure for external communication should include methods to (i)
    responsibilities for receiv-   receive, register and validate external communications and requests for infor-
    ing and handling com-
                                   mation from the public; (ii) screen and assess the importance of the issue raised
    plaints. Awareness is
    limited to those directly      and determine how to address it; (iii) provide, track, document and publish
    handling the complaints.       responses; and (iv) adjust the management program when appropriate.


                                   GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS



1
    Some basic procedures          The purpose of a grievance mechanism is to establish a way for individuals,
    for receiving complaints.      groups or communities affected by your business to contact you if they have an
    Responsibility limited to      inquiry, a concern or a formal complaint.
    one person or unit.




0   No mechanism in place.




      52    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                           7. Ext. Communication and Grievance




                             In practice, a grievance mechanism should:

                               •	   Establish a way for people to contact you – openly or anonymously – to
                                    pose their questions, to express concerns or to file a complaint. Examples
                                    are suggestion boxes, a toll-free telephone hotline, an email address, and
                                    regular meetings arranged to discuss particular problem areas.
                               •	   Assign a person or team in your company to be responsible for receiving,
                                    registering and processing all grievances.
                               •	   Establish procedures to register, screen, categorize, investigate and deter-
                                    mine resolution and redress options.
                               •	   Establish a system to communicate decisions taken and progress on pend-
                                    ing actions. It is important that people know when they can expect a
                                    response.
                             Not all complaints can be resolved in the same way. Simpler issues, such as a
                             company truck running over chickens in the road, might be dealt with by the
                             same team responsible for registering the complaint. More complex problems,
                             such as allegations of widespread groundwater contamination, might require
                             immediate intervention by senior managers and more dedicated resources for
                             investigating, documenting and reporting. For complex and recurring prob-
                             lems, consider reaching out to third-party facilitators that can act as indepen-
                             dent mediators.
 TIP
                                                            The more serious the claim is, the more indepen-
  Implementing a Grievance Mechanism                        dent the mechanism should be to determine the
                                                            resolution and options for redress.
  ••   Scale it to fit the level and complexity
       of social and environmental risks and
                                                            The most important thing is to make sure the griev-
       impacts identified in your company.
                                                            ance mechanism is accessible and trusted. Tailor it
                                                            for the local community so that it is easy for them
  ••   Design the process to be easily un-                  to raise concerns. This requirement mandates
       derstandable, accessible, trusted and                having the right people leading this effort inside
       culturally appropriate.                              your company. The grievance mechanism must be
                                                            accessible at no cost and without retribution to the
  ••   Publicize the availability of the griev-
                                                            party that originated the complaint and should not
       ance procedure so people know where
                                                            impede access to judicial or administrative remedies.
       to go and whom to approach.

  ••   Commit to a response time and keep                   Don’t underestimate the value of a well-implement-
       to it as this will increase transparency             ed grievance mechanism. The information you re-
       and a sense of “fair process.”                       ceive can act as an early-warning system before the
                                                            problem becomes too costly and time-consuming
  ••   Keep records of each step to create a                to address.
       “paper trail.”




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	                 53
7. Ext. Communication and Grievance



                                         Look at the Toolkit items Checklist for an Effective Grievance
                                         Mechanism and Grievances Log to get started.




                                          Seriousness
                                          of the claim
                                                                                     Independent
                                                                                     mediator

                                                             Multistakeholder group
                                                             including representatives
                                                             of Affected Communities,
                                                             NGOs, government


                                                Company team                                            Independence of
                                                                                                        the mechanism



                                        TIP

                                         A Grievance Mechanism is

                                         UNDERSTANDABLE AND TRUSTED when:

                                         ••   affected communities understand the procedure to handle a
                                              complaint;

                                         ••   people are aware of the expected response time; and

                                         ••   confidentiality of the person raising the complaint is protected.

                                         CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE AND ACCESSIBLE when:

                                         ••   claims can be presented in the local language;

                                         ••   technology required to present a claim is commonly used (e.g.,
                                              paper, text messaging, internet); and

                                         ••   illiterate persons can present verbal complaints.

                                         AT NO COST when:

                                         ••   people don’t need to travel long distances to present a claim; and

                                         ••   the company covers the costs of third party facilitation.




                                      For more information on how to develop and implement a Grievance
                                      Mechanism, refer to the Good Practice Note “Addressing Grievances from
                                      Project-Affected Communities,” IFC (2009), and the Advisory Note “A
                                      Guide to Designing and Implementing Grievance Mechanisms for Develop-
                                      ment Projects,” CAO (2008).


             54    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
        ELEMENT 8




       Ongoing Reporting to
                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                             Affected communities’
                                                                                             issues and concerns are
                                                                                             proactively addressed.
       Affected Communities                                                                  There is ongoing com-
                                                                                             munication to avoid risks
                                                                                             and impacts before new
       Affected communities will want to know what                                           projects as well as to
                                                                                             address existing issues.
       actions your company has put in place to resolve


                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                             Reporting to affected
       the issues identified when engaging with them.                                        communities is regu-
                                                                                             larly implemented and
       Keeping affected communities informed of what you are doing is a critical             evidenced in documen-
       element for building and maintaining a good relationship. If people know              tation. Key units are
       when they will receive an update, it helps to build trust. It can also reduce the     involved in the review
       amount of time you spend responding to questions.                                     of the key issues.




                                                                                                                         3
       The frequency of this communication will be proportional to the scale of stake-       When applicable, con-
       holders’ concerns, but it should be at least annual. If your company’s activities     sultation processes have
       change or new environmental and social risks emerge, you do need to contact           been implemented.
       stakeholders outside of the regular schedule to discuss these changes.                External consultants are
                                                                                             involved as required. No
TIP                                                         You can also decide to           ongoing review.
                                                            report back to the wider
 Ongoing Communication
                                                            public on your progress




                                                                                                                         2
••    Provide an immediate update if new envi-              in meeting your commit-
                                                            ments to avoid, reduce           Procedures in place
      ronmental or social risks emerge.                                                      for reporting, usually
                                                            and mitigate any negative
••    Report progress on implementation of                                                   assigned to E&S staff.
                                                            environmental or social
      your commitments.                                                                      Primarily reactive.
                                                            impacts from your com-
••    Report monitoring results on issues that              pany’s activities. Sustain-
      interest the community.                               ability reporting initiatives,
                                                            guidelines, including



                                                                                                                         1
••    Use the opportunity to communicate the
      benefits generated by your company.                   sector-specific guidelines,      Some basic communica-
                                                            and good practices are also      tions with affected com-
••    Translate information into local languages
                                                            rapidly emerging in this         munities, mostly limited
      and easily understandable formats.
                                                            area. The most notable           to meetings.
••    Try to maintain continuity in who deals               is the Global Reporting
      with the community.                                   Initiative (GRI).
••    Involve your employees as communication



                                                                                                                         0
      links to the community.
••    Consider conducting a stakeholder survey                                               No reporting.
      to learn how your company is perceived.


          Look at the Toolkit item Reporting to Affected Communities for
          examples of formats and venues you can use.



       Version 1.2 April 15, 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	           55
                                         ELEMENT 9


                                        Monitoring and Review


5
    Robust system of continual          We’ve talked about the relationship between
    learning and improvement.
    Senior management receives
    periodic reports about E&S          your ESMS and the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle of
    performance and progress
    toward E&S objectives and           continual improvement. Monitoring and review
    targets. All key project deci-
    sions consider E&S.                 are critical, because this is how you check and
    Monitoring, supervising and
                                        adjust the system.

4
    auditing activities are inte-
    grated and included in man-
    agement review. Includes
    consultation with workers,          So far, you’ve formed or assigned a team to
    customers and suppliers.
    E&S objectives and targets
    are included in job descrip-
                                        lead the effort. You have developed your ESMS
    tions and performance
    reviews.                            and started to implement your action plans in


3
    Routine review of monitor-          response to the risks and impacts you identified.
    ing and supervision activi-
    ties, including participation
    of workers. Corrective              You’ve started to train people. The next step
    actions routinely imple-
    mented. An E&S internal             is to monitor the effectiveness of your ESMS
    audit plan is in place.
                                        and your action plans and make the necessary


2
    Key E&S monitoring plans in
    place, with inspection and          adjustments.
    supervision activities. Pri-
    marily reactive and guided
    by external experts, custom-
    ers and investors.


                                                                               PLAN
                                                                                                        DO




1
    Few monitoring plans to sat-
    isfy regulatory requirements.
    No formal review activities.
    No systems awareness or       Monitoring is the CHECK
                                                                                 ACT




    repeatable processes            step of the PDCA cycle

                                              Review is the ACT                                    CHECK
                                           step of the PDCA cycle




0   No monitoring of E&S
    performance.



      56    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          9. Monitoring and Review




                              TIP

                               Monitoring measures intent, implementation and effectiveness

                              Intent:
                                    1.	Are the nine elements of the ESMS in place?
                              Implementation:
                                    2.	Are the action plans being carried out?
                                    3.	Are procedures being followed?
                              Effectiveness:
                                    4.	Are you in compliance with laws and regulations?
                                    5.	Are you making progress toward your overall objectives
                                       and targets?
                                    6.	How is the environmental and social performance of the
                                       company in general?



                             INDICATORS
                             A key aspect of monitoring is defining relevant indicators. These are quan-
                             titative or qualitative measures of progress against set goals. Some indicators
                             might focus on performance, evaluated against the criteria defined in your
                             environmental and social policy.

                             Some examples of key performance indicators could be:

                               •	   energy consumption;
                               •	   volume of solid waste disposal;
                               •	   water consumption;
                               •	   liquid effluents discharge;
                               •	   emissions to air;
                               •	   noise and vibration levels;
                               •	   work zone air quality;
                               •	   accidents (injuries, ill-health, property damage), incidents and near misses;
                               •	   lost work time injury frequency, incidence, and severity rates
                               •	   emergency response incidents;
                               •	   average working hours and wages paid;
                               •	   wage levels;
                               •	   incidences of child labor;
                               •	   incidences of disciplinary and discrimination complaints; and
                               •	   employee demographics matching access to training, jobs, and wages.


Version 1.2 April 15, 2015            ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	             57
9. Monitoring and Review




  Measuring and                          You can also use this information when reporting to a wider public on your
                                         ESMS performance. When selecting your key performance indicators, you may
  Improving                              refer to voluntary guidelines such as the Global Reporting Initiative, which
                                         provides a list of indicators for various industries.
  Remember, you
                                         Other indicators can look at the processes or inputs that you use to try to
  can’t improve what                     achieve performance.
  you don’t measure.                     For example, in your action plan, you might have included worker training as
                                         a necessary step to raise awareness among workers about OHS, so that they
                                         can help to identify and address key risks and hazards. In this case, you might
                                         evaluate your progress against the action plan by tracking the percentage of
                                         workers who have been trained, or the percentage of workers who can correctly
                                         describe the risk analysis procedure.

                                         Some examples of process indicators include:

                                           •	   procedures in place for chemical, fuel and hazardous waste handling,
                                                storage, and disposal;
                                           •	   processes analyzing the efficient use of energy and materials;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the grievance mechanism;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the health and safety procedures;
                                           •	   percentage of workers trained on labor standards requirements; and
                                           •	   communications from stakeholders.
                                         It is helpful to have a mix of performance and process indicators, to get a
                                         deeper understanding of whether you are measuring the appropriate things and
                                         whether you are taking the appropriate actions. For example, a performance in-
                                         dicator such as “zero incidences of child labor” does not tell the full story: Was
                                         this the result of effective procedures and training or was the system inadequate
                                         in identifying and recording incidences?



                                         For environmental and OHS performance indicators and benchmarks
                                         relevant to your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at www.ifc.
                                         org/sustainability




                                           Look at the Monitoring Plans in the Toolkit for more examples
                                           of key indicators common in the metal products manufacturing
                                           industry



             58    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                  9. Monitoring and Review




                                           THE BASICS OF MONITORING
                             Visual observation                   Interviews
                             physical walk-throughs of            consultations with workers,
                             your facility and surround-          managers and external stake-
                             ing land. Examples of what           holders. Examples of topics
                             you might observe: slip, trip,       you might discuss: Do workers
                             and fall hazards, improp-            and managers understand
                             erly guarded machinery,              the policies and procedures?
                             warning signs, fire detection,       How are they impacted? Are
                             alarm and fighting equip-            there ideas for improvement?
                             ment, use of PPE, storage of         Do workers feel comfortable
                             hazardous materials, waste           filing complaints? How are
                             segregation and treatment,           external stakeholders
                             facility ambient temperature,        impacted by the company?
                             raised platforms, worker and         Are there ideas for improve-
                             manager body language and            ment? Do external stakehold-
                             interactions.                        ers feel comfortable filing
                                                                  complaints?

                             Measuring and                        Document review
                             testing                              looking through documents
                             checking using equipment             and records. Examples of
                             that is properly calibrated.         what you might review: busi-
                             Examples of what you might           ness permits and licenses,
                             check: air emissions, waste-         energy and water bills, health
                             water quality, concentration         and safety plan, OHS records,
                             of airborne metal fines, noise       OHS corrective actions plans
                             levels, quality of drinking          and status of corrective
                             water.                               actions, equipment mainte-
                                                                  nance logs, inspection records,
                                                                  complaint logs, wage slips,
                                                                  time cards, policies and proce-
                                                                  dures, training records.




                                       Look at the Toolkit item Auditing Guidance for guidelines
                                       on how to conduct an audit.



Version 1.2 April 15, 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	      59
9. Monitoring and Review



                                         Monitoring and auditing are words that are often
                                         used interchangeably, which can be confusing.
                                         Auditing is a formal, on-site evaluation against a
                                         specific set of criteria. Audits can be conducted
                                         internally by your own staff or by outside parties.
                                         Monitoring is an umbrella term that includes various
                                         methods for evaluating performance. These may
                                         include: visual observation, measuring and testing,
                                         questionnaires, surveys, interviews with employees
                                         and external stakeholders, and document review.
                                         It is important to design your monitoring program
                                         to obtain qualitative and quantitative information.
                                         It is also important that workers and managers are
                                         monitoring the workplace on an on going basis.

                                         MEASURING AND IMPROVING YOUR ESMS
                                         While your Action Plan monitoring looks at whether corrective actions are
                                         being implemented and are achieving the intended results, your ESMS moni-
                                         toring is looking at the maturity of your system development and implementa-
                                         tion. The Action Plan lists new actions you are taking to address risks. But for
                                         the new actions to be sustainable, you also need to improve your ESMS. The
                                         two need to be linked.

                                         This Handbook’s companion publication ESMS Self-Assessment and Improve-
                                         ment Guide provides you with a practical tool to monitor the maturity of your
                                         ESMS. For each of the nine ESMS elements, we provide self-assessment ques-
                                         tions that show you the level of your ESMS development and implementation
                                         on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is the highest). Conducting the ESMS self-assessment is
                                         an important first step that enables you to see where you stand now. The results
                                         form the basis of your ESMS Improvement Plan. The ESMS self-assessment
                                         responses should be based on Visual Observation, Measuring or Testing,
                                         Document Review and Interviews.

                                         Let’s take another look at the nine elements of the ESMS and maturity ratings.




             60    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                           Purpose of Action Plan and ESMS
                                           Improvement Plan
                                           Action Plan: specific actions to correct
                                           environmental, labor and community
                                           problems and remediate negative impacts
                                           ESMS Improvement Plan: steps targeted to
                                           continually improve the management system to
                                           support activities in the Action Plan




                                                                                                                       Ongoing Reporting
               Risks and Impacts




                                                                     Preparedness and




                                                                                                      Communications
               Identification of




                                                                                                                                           Monitoring and
                                                    Organizational




                                                                                                      and Grievance
                                   Management




                                                                                                                       Communities
                                                    Capacity and




                                                                                        Engagement




                                                                                                      Mechanisms
                                                    Competency




                                                                                        Stakeholder




                                                                                                                       to Affected
                                                                     Emergency

                                                                     Response
                                   Programs




                                                                                                      External




                                                                                                                                           Review
     Policy




      Mature system implemented internally and with key supply chain partners – continual
 5
      improvement embedded in operations
 4 Systems well-developed and implemented internally – routine improvement projects
      Systems approach adopted, but development and implementation is inconsistent -
 3
      improvement sporadic
 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation – primarily reactive
 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes


LINKING YOUR ACTION PLAN AND ESMS IMPROVEMENT PLAN
It is important to understand the link between the Action Plan and the ESMS Improvement Plan. The
Action Plan lists specific projects and activities. The ESMS Improvement Plan is about making system
improvements needed to support the activities and to make the necessary changes in how the company
operates.

Improving environmental and social performance and integrating it into your routine business operations
takes time. The improvement plan for your ESMS needs to be practical. It needs to be designed with
the understanding that people have their core operating responsibilities in your company. You cannot
improve everything at once. The ESMS Team plays the critical role of leading the improvement effort.
Prioritizing what to work on first is an important job for the team in coordination with senior manage-
ment. The ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide will help you to get started.



Version 1.2 April 15, 2015                      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	                                                61
9. Monitoring and Review




                                         CONDUCTING AN EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT REVIEW
                                         The purpose of the management review is to routinely involve senior manage-
                                         ment in evaluating the development and implementation of the ESMS. The
                                         management review is led by the ESMS Team. In the beginning, we recom-
                                         mend conducting a management review every three to six months. Once the
                                         ESMS is well-established, once a year is usually fine. It is important to keep a
                                         written record (called minutes) during the meeting of the key topics discussed
                                         and the decisions made. The minutes should be kept in a central log.

                                         For the ESMS Team, the management review is an important opportunity to
                                         keep senior management involved. Remember, the sustainability of the pro-
                                         gram requires ongoing commitment from senior management.



                                         Typical Agenda for a Management Review:
                                           •	   Review progress on Action Plan

                                           •	   Review progress on ESMS Improvement Plan

                                           •	   Review compliance with environmental and labor
                                                laws and regulations

                                           •	   Review progress on environmental and social
                                                performance

                                           •	   Discuss possible adjustments in risk assessment

                                           •	   Prioritize activities for next three, six and 12 months

                                           •	   Review and approve needed resources by senior
                                                management




             62    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                             Additional References Consulted

                             1.	 Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety. 2015. “OSH Answers Fact Sheets:
                                  Trichloroethylene.” Last updated April 20, 2015.
                                  http://www.ccohs.ca/oshanswers/chemicals/chem_profiles/trichloroethylene.html.

                             2.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2014. “Workplace Safety and Health Topics:
                                  Metalworking Fluids.” Last updated August 16, 2013.
                                  http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/metalworking/.

                             3.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2014. “Workplace Safety and Health Topics:
                                  Welding and Manganese: Potential Neaurologic Effects.” Last updated May 29, 2014
                                  http://www.cdc.gov/niosh/topics/welding/.

                             4.	 Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 2012. “Coffee Break Training – Fire
                                  Protection Series: Portable Extinguishers: Overview of “Class D” Agents.” FP-2012-34.

                             5.	 Jeff Becker, “Improving Metal Fabricating and Coating Energy Efficiencies.” (presented at
                                  the 2012 Paint and Powder Coating Expo, March 15, 2012).

                             6.	 National Resources Defense Council. 2010. “Congress Must Protect People from Toxic
                                  Chemicals Known to Cause Harm: Tricholoroethylene (TCE).”

                             7.	 UK Health and Safety Executive. “Illness caused by welding fume and gases.”
                                  http://www.hse.gov.uk/welding/illness.htm.

                             8.	 US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration. 2013.
                                  “OSHA FactSheet: Controlling Hazardous Fume and Gases during Welding.”

                             9.	 US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
                                  “Metalworking Fluids: Safety and Health Best Practices Manual.”
                                  https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/metalworkingfluids/metalworkingfluids_manual.html.

                             10.	 US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration.2014.
                                  “Combustible Dust in Industry: Preventing and Mitigating the Effects of Fire and
                                  Explosions.” Last updated November 12, 2014.
                                  https://www.osha.gov/dts/shib/shib073105.html.

                             11.	 US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health Administration 2014.
                                  “Combustible Dust: An Explosion Hazard.”
                                  https://www.osha.gov/dsg/combustibledust/.

                             12.	 OSHA. www.osha.gov




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Metal Products Manufacturing	                          63
Address:

2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Tel. 1-202-473-3800
www.ifc.org/sustainability




Copyright
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of
the content for educational purposes. Content from thispublication may be used freely
without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content
is not used for commercial purposes.



March 2015
