                         99394




Environmental and Social
Management System
Implementation Handbook
HEALTH CARE FACILITIES
    Although the environmental and social management system described in this
    Handbook is based on IFC Performance Standard 1, the process outlined herein
    may not provide for meeting all the requirements of IFC Performance Standard 1,
    or any other IFC Performance Standard. The purpose of this Handbook is to dem-
    onstrate a technical means of integrating environmental and social concerns into
    company management, so that a business can become more effective in reducing
    its impact on the environment, its workers and its neighboring communities.

    The Handbook is provided “AS IS,” and is provided without warranty of any kind,
    either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of mer-
    chantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Development of
    an environmental and social management system based on this Handbook does
    not imply any type of certification or compliance with any IFC Performance Stan-
    dards, including but not limited to IFC Performance Standard 1, nor does it imply
    endorsement by or affiliation or sponsorship with IFC.

    The Handbook is distributed with the understanding that neither the authors, nor
    the organizations and countries they represent, nor the publisher, are engaged
    in rendering technical advice. The information, policies and procedure templates
    comprising the Handbook are intended as a reference and for informational
    purposes only, and are not to be relied upon for operational or any other purposes.
    Implementation of the Handbook is solely the responsibility and risk of the final
    users. The material in the Handbook is set out in good faith for general guidance,
    and no liability can be accepted for any possible loss or expense incurred as a
    result of relying on the information contained herein. Neither IFC nor any other
    member of the World Bank Group shall be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental,
    special, consequential, punitive or exemplary damages, including, but not limited
    to, damages for loss of profits, goodwill, use, data or other intangible losses (even
    if IFC has been advised of the possibility of such damages) in any way arising or
    resulting from use or reliance on the Handbook or any such conclusion or deter-
    mination. The Handbook is distributed subject to the condition that it shall not by
    way of trade or otherwise be sold or otherwise circulated on a commercial basis
    without IFC’s prior written consent.

    IFC does not guarantee or provide any warranties as to the accuracy, timeli-
    ness, completeness, reliability or usefulness of this publication’s content, and is
    not responsible or liable for any such content or use thereof. The views, advice,
    opinions and other statements herein are not reviewed or endorsed by, and do not
    necessarily represent the views and opinions of IFC or its Board of Directors, the
    World Bank or its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.




2
Table of Contents
Welcome & How to Use This Handbook.....................................................................................4
Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System in
Health Care Facilities...................................................................................................................7
Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System................................... 11
      Overview...........................................................................................................................12
      Elements of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)..................................13
      System Development and System Implementation........................................................15
      Using The Handbook And Companion Publications To Develop And
      Implement Your ESMS......................................................................................................16
Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing
Your Environmental and Social Management System............................................................ 17
      1.	 Policy............................................................................................................................18
          Purpose of an Effective Policy............................................................................................18
          Modifying Your Existing Policy Statement or Creating a New One..........................................18
          Gaining Senior Management and Company Commitment.....................................................19
      2.	 Identification of Risks and Impacts..........................................................................20
          Key Risks in Health Care Facilities........................................................................................20
      3.	 Management Programs...............................................................................................23
          Identifying Preventive and Corrective Actions....................................................................24
          Writing an Effective Action Plan......................................................................................25
          Writing an Effective Procedure.........................................................................................26
          Short Cases......................................................................................................................26
      4.	 Organizational Capacity and Competency..............................................................38
          Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities to Implement the ESMS...........................................38
          Communication and Training..........................................................................................40
      5.	 Emergency Preparedness and Response....................................................................42
          Common Hazards and Emergency Situations in Health Care Facilities...............................45
          Common Emergency Scenarios..........................................................................................49
      6.	 Stakeholder Engagement...........................................................................................50
          Mapping Your Stakeholders..............................................................................................51
          Developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan......................................................................52
      7.	 External Communication and Grievance Mechanism............................................54
          External Communication.................................................................................................54
          Grievance Mechanism......................................................................................................54
      8.	 Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities.......................................................57
      9.	 Monitoring and Review.............................................................................................58
          Indicators........................................................................................................................59
          Measuring and Improving Your ESMS..............................................................................62
          Linking Your Action Plan and ESMS Improvement Plan...................................................63
          Conducting an Effective Management Review...................................................................64
                	                                                                                                                           3
                      Welcome & How to
                      Use This Handbook
                      Environmental and social responsibility is becoming
                      more and more important in today’s global
                      economy. There are thousands of environmental
                      and social codes and standards in the world
                      today. The codes and standards define the rules
                      and the objectives. But the challenge is in the
                      implementation. An environmental and social
                      management system (ESMS) helps companies and
                      organizations to integrate the rules and objectives
                      into core operations, through a set of clearly
                      defined, repeatable processes.

                      This Handbook is intended to be a practical
                      guide to help you develop and implement an
                      environmental and social management system,
                      which should help to improve overall operations.




4   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
    In the current economic climate, health care
    facilities are under pressure to perform or even
    just survive. New initiatives are often met with
    resistance as people struggle to keep up with their
    day-to-day responsibilities. Some people think that
    an environmental and social management system
    must be big, complicated and expensive. But that
    is not really true. To be effective, a management
    system needs to be scaled to the nature and size of
    your organization.

    Your facility likely already has existing management
    systems for managing the delivery and quality of
    healthcare services and staff and patient safety.
    This Handbook will help you expand your existing
    systems to include environmental and social
    performance. Our hope is that this Handbook will
    accelerate your journey of continual improvement,
    the benefit of your facility overall, as well as your
    employees, patients, and other stakeholders.




	                                                           5
                       Quick Reference for Using this Handbook
                                                      These sections provide background on environmental and
                        Sections I – II
                                                      social management systems (ESMS).

                                                      This section provides step-by-step instructions on how to
                                                      develop and implement an ESMS. If you see a Toolkit icon,
                        Section III
                                                      it means that there is an accompanying tool in the ESMS
                                                      Toolkit.

                                                      This companion publication gives tools, including forms,
                                                      templates, checklists, and other useful documents, to help
                        ESMS Toolkit                  you develop and implement the systems described in the
                                                      Handbook. We suggest that you adapt each tool for your
                                                      company.

                        ESMS                          This companion publication contains a questionnaire,
                        Self-Assessment               maturity matrix, and improvement tips to help you
                        and Improvement               measure the maturity of your ESMS and develop a plan
                        Guide                         for improvement.




                      Acknowledgements
                      This Handbook was prepared by the Sustainable Business Advisory (SBA)
                      department with primary contributions from Irene Angeletti, Rob Horner,
                      and Larissa Luy.

                      The Handbook is based on primary contributions and technical expertise from
                      the Social Accountability International (SAI) team of Rachel Kanter Kepnes,
                      Craig Moss, Jane Hwang, Yogendra Chaudry, Caroline Lewis and Edwin Koster,
                      with key input from Aswin Kumar Krishnamoorthy and Joy Rosen.

                      Additional resources include United States Department of Labor Occupational
                      Safety & Health Administration training materials and Hospital eTool. Graphic
                      design services were provided by Pam Henry.

                      Photography courtesy of IFC ILO Better Work and World Bank Photo Library




6   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                                     I

                             Benefits of an Environmental
                             and Social Management System




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015     ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	   7
Labor shortages
had always been
a challenge for us.
Now, thanks to our
social management                 Benefits of an Environmental
system, not only are              and Social Management System
our employees happy
                                  for Health Care Facilities
and productive, but
also they stay with
us longer.”                       Today, health care facilities are confronted with a number of significant envi-
                                  ronmental and social challenges. None of the challenges is insurmountable,
Hospital                          but if not effectively assessed and managed, they will hurt the quality of your
Administrator                     patient care, profitability, reputation, and prospects for future sustainability.

Private hospital                  Among these challenges are the increasing cost of energy and water, the grow-
                                  ing power and influence of regulatory agencies, and rapidly evolving commu-
                                  nity awareness and concerns about environmental and social issues. These risks
                                  are in addition to the primary risk of failing to provide high-quality health
                                  care or build patient confidence. All of these risks ultimately have financial
                                  consequences and are driving forces that should motivate you to implement a
                                  management system for your health care facility. A management system will
                                  enable you to consistently foresee and address issues confronting your facility
                                  so you can prevent potential risks from becoming actual problems.

                                  Implementing an environmental and social management system (ESMS) can
                                  have direct financial benefits. Conserving and using energy and water more
                                  efficiently helps to reduce operational costs. Reducing waste and discharges



                                 “We are seeing a direct correlation – the suppliers
                                 with better social compliance consistently score
                                  higher in key performance indicators such as
                                  on-time delivery and quality.”
                                  Senior VP
                                  Multi-National Retailer




        8   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
    “As a leading producer and exporter, we operate in compet­     itive,
     globalized and volatile markets. Our management system based
     approach towards quality, environment and social issues has helped
     us attract and keep our global clientele through un­  compromising
     product quality; prompt, reliable delivery; and fair, transparent and
     ethical business practices.”
     Managing Director - Producer and export company




                             can minimize costs of waste disposal, which have been steadily increasing
                             over time. A management system can help you benchmark your expenditures
                             against industry standards and identify potential operational cost savings.

                             The same tangible benefits can be realized on the social side as well. Clear,
                             transparent human resource policies and procedures improve communication
                             between healthcare staff and supervisors. This helps to anticipate and avoid
                             labor problems. Effective occupational health and safety management proce-
                             dures will enable you to identify workplace hazards so you can eliminate or
                             reduce their potential negative impacts through controls and employee training
                             on the avoidance of risks. This can not only reduce near misses, accidents and
                             fatalities, but can also lead to bottom-line business benefits such as reduced
                             absenteeism and worker turnover, and lower insurance premiums for workers’
                             compensation.




“We are facing intense global competition and declining spend-
ing during the current global economic crisis. Improving our
 environmental and social management is helping us to reduce
material inputs, minimize waste and improve our competiveness
and our profitability.”
CFO - Manufacturer




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                 9
                          Many healthcare facilities already use management systems for patient care,
                          quality control and occupational health and safety. An environmental and
                          social management system (ESMS) simply extends that approach to the man-
                          agement of your facilities’ impact on the environment, your staff and other
                          stakeholders, including the community that you serve.

                          Ultimately, your management systems should be integrated and centralized
                          in one comprehensive system, instead of having separate systems for quality,
                          occupational health and safety, and the environment. This handbook will help
                          you implement an integrated ESMS that is appropriate for the size and nature
                          of your health care facility.




10   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                                   II
                             Understanding an
                             Environmental and Social
                             Management System




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015     ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	   11
Understanding an Environmental and
Social Management System
OVERVIEW


A management system is a set of processes and practices to
consistently implement your facility’s policies to meet your objectives.
The goal is to make sure that you have the appropriate policies and
procedures in place and that people consistently follow them. The
management system helps to assess and control your risks and is the
key to lasting improvement. A key feature is the idea of continual
improvement – an ongoing process of reviewing, correcting and
improving your system. The most common method is the Plan-Do-
Check-Act cycle (PDCA), described below.




Identifying and                                                                Developing and
analyzing the risks                                                            implementing a
and objectives                                                                 potential solution
                                  PLAN
                                                              DO




What is important for you                                                      What actions will you
as an organization and                                                         take? Who, what,
what are you going to do                                                       where, when and how?
about it?

                                                                               Measuring how effec-
                                    ACT




Implementing the                                                               tive the solution was,
improved solution
What will you change if
                                                        CHECK                  and analyzing whether
                                                                               it could be improved
results are not what you
                                                                               Did you see the change you
expected?
                                                                               expected after implementing
                                                                               the actions?



12   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                In the workplace, an effective management
                                system is comprised of trained, committed
                                people routinely following procedures.



ELEMENTS OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ESMS)
A solid, functioning environmental and social management system (ESMS) is made up of interrelated parts.
Take a look at the nine elements of an effective ESMS. Each of these elements is important, because they
help you to assess, control and continually improve your environmental and social performance, as part of
the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle. The following section presents step-by-step instructions on how to develop
and implement a system using these elements.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                 13
MEASURING
AND IMPROVING

You can’t improve              Most health care facilities already have management systems for quality, safety
                               and patient care. If your facility already has systems in place, you may already be
what you don’t                 implementing certain elements of the ESMS, and you can build on your existing
                               systems. In this Handbook’s companion publication, ESMS Self-Assessment
measure.                       and Improvement Guide, we provide a self-assessment rating for each of the
                               ESMS elements. The self-assessment will allow you to measure your current
                               level of system development and implementation. You will answer a series of
                               questions and get your score for each element in the ESMS on a scale of 0 to
                               5 (5 is highest). The score measures the maturity of your system. Once you
                               understand the maturity of your system, it is easier to target specific steps you
                               can take to improve it.



                                         THE SYSTEM MATURITY LEVELS (5 = HIGHEST)
                                Level 5 Mature system implemented internally and with key supply
                                        chain partners – continual improvement embedded in
                                        operations
                                Level 4 Systems well developed and implemented internally –
                                        routine improvement projects
                                Level 3 Systems approach adopted, but development and
                                        implementation is inconsistent – improvement sporadic
                                Level 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation –
                                        primarily reactive
                                Level 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
                                Level 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes




     14   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                             REMEMBER
                             A carefully developed, detailed ESMS is only
                             valuable if it is well-implemented.

                             SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
                              One of the most important things to understand about a management system
                              is the difference between system development and system implementation. A
                              management system is comprised of trained, committed people routinely fol-
                              lowing procedures. If you break this statement down, you see that it talks about
                             “procedures.” Procedures are the step-by-step way that people follow your poli-
                              cies. Procedures are the heart of effective system development.

                             Now let’s look at the other part of the statement – “trained, committed people
                             routinely following procedures.” This is the implementation. There is a lot that
                             goes into making it happen. Of course, some training is important to make sure
                             that people are aware of the procedures and understand what they are supposed
                             to do on a routine basis. But you also need to find a way to get their commit-
                             ment.

                             One common observation is that large organizations tend to be better at system
                             development. But they often have difficulty getting people in different locations
                             or departments to consistently implement the procedures, despite having well-
                             documented systems. Small organizations tend to be better at system imple-
                             mentation – if they have effective leadership. However, they are often weak at
                             developing the documentation needed to ensure continuity when people in the
                             organization change.

                             The approach of this Handbook and its companion publications, Toolkit and
                             Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, balances system development and
                             system implementation in each of the ESMS elements.



                              DEFINITIONS
                              System                     The documented policies and procedures.
                              Development
                              System                     Trained, committed people routinely follow-
                              Implementation             ing the procedures.




An ESMS does not need to be complicated, but it does need to be
documented and then put into practice. Some people mistakenly
think a management system is just documents. But that is only a part
of it. Management systems are about implementation and continual
improvement.

Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                  15
USING THE HANDBOOK AND COMPANION PUBLICATIONS
TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT YOUR ESMS
The Handbook and companion publications are designed to help you measure
and improve the maturity rating of your ESMS. The flowchart below shows
how you can use these three publications in a cycle of continual improvement.




                                                    ESMS
                                                  HANDBOOK

     •	   Use tools to implement                                         •	   Understand the benefits of an ESMS
          improvement plan                                               •	   Learn the nine fundamental
                                                                              elements of an ESMS


                                                 REDO this graphic
                                                                        ESMS SELF-
                              ESMS
                                                                      ASSESSMENT &
                             TOOLKIT
                                                                      IMPROVEMENT
                                                                          GUIDE


                                    •	   Measure the maturity of your ESMS
                                    •	   Prioritize elements and develop an
                                         overall ESMS improvement plan




16        Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                  III
                             Practical Guidelines for
                             Developing and Implementing
                             Your Environmental and Social
                             Management System

                             This section provides step-by-step instructions on
                             how to develop and implement an ESMS.

                             For each element of the ESMS, we offer a quick
                             way to measure where you are now.


                                       When you find a toolkit icon, it means
                                       there is a tool in the companion publication
                                       Toolkit to make it easier to get started.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	   17
                                ELEMENT 1


                                Policy


5
    E&S policies and proce-
    dures clearly commu-
                                The cornerstone of your ESMS is your set of
    nicated internally and
    externally. Senior man-     policies. Your policies summarize the commitment
    agement commitment to
    continual improvement.      that your organization has made to managing
                                environmental and social risks and impacts. They


4
    Full set of E&S policies,
    procedures and records,     establish the expectations for conduct in all related
    centrally maintained and
    routinely reviewed. Wide
    awareness in company.
                                aspects of your organization.

                                PURPOSE OF AN EFFECTIVE POLICY



3
    Policies and procedures   Simply put, the policies are the rules. They tell everyone what is allowed and
    in place meeting selected what is not allowed when it comes to social and environmental issues such as
    E&S standards. Sporadic
                              labor and working conditions, resource efficiency and pollution prevention,
    communication, imple-
    mentation and review.     and community health, safety and security.

                                A good practice for writing the policies and making them understood is a
                                Policy Statement. The Policy Statement communicates your policies to your
                                management, staff, board, suppliers, contractors, patients and all other stake-



2
    Policies in place meeting   holders. It is important for everyone to have a common understanding of the
    selected E&S standards.
                                core values of the organization, how you expect people to behave and how
    Sporadic, conflicting or
    confusing procedures.       external stakeholders can expect you to operate.


                                MODIFYING YOUR EXISTING POLICY STATEMENT OR
                                CREATING A NEW ONE



1
                                The Policy Statement should be clear and simple – it does not need to be long
    Limited E&S policies
    in place.                   and technical like a legal document. Many companies already have a corporate
                                code of conduct that serves as a Policy Statement and includes issues such as
                                ethics. You can expand your existing code to align with internationally recog-
                                nized environmental and social standards for issues relevant to your organiza-
                                tion, such as the IFC Performance Standards for Environmental and Social
                                Sustainability.




0
    No E&S standards            It is important to think through the creation of the Policy Statement and tailor
    adopted. No related         it to your operations. In developing your Policy Statement, be aware of the
    policies and procedures.    specific risks you face in your health care facility.




    18    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                     1. Policy




GAINING SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND ORGANIZATION
COMMITMENT
Modifying or adopting your Policy Statement will require senior management
                                                                                     For any change
support. In some organizations, it may require approval from the Board of
Directors. A high level of senior management support is critical for integrating     initiative, think
environmental and social commitment throughout all levels of your organiza-
tion.                                                                                of three critical
Committing to environmental and social policies probably requires some               stages:
change in the behavior of your workers, contractors and suppliers. This can be
challenging. There are different strategies and different techniques for chang-      Awareness;
ing organizational behavior, but experts agree that to create lasting change,
senior management must be committed to the effort.                                   Commitment;
The first step is building awareness. There are many issues that occupy your
employees’ attention day-to-day. As just a written document, your Policy             and
Statement may not get their attention or seem relevant to their daily activities.
Senior management needs to make this Policy Statement come alive.                    Implementation.
To do so, they need to communicate the importance of environmental and
social issues, by making them an ongoing part of high-level Board and man-
agement discussions, public speeches, and messages to employees.                    Your senior
Once people are aware of the Policy Statement, the next step is building com-
mitment – also known as “buy-in.” You will probably meet resistance: “Why            management
do we need to do this? It is too much work. I’ve already got enough to do.
How does this help our delivery of health care services?” Senior management          can help you to
needs to effectively shape and communicate the message internally and
externally. They need to send a clear message that this is a long-term commit-       accelerate all
ment by the organization. The key message is that this will contribute to the
                                                  organization’s success and         three stages.
 Use the Toolkit item Checklist for               that each person will benefit -
 Developing a Company Policy                      but that they will also be held
 Statement to get ideas of what you               accountable.
 could include in your policy.                    Once you have convinced
                                                  people that they need to do
something, senior management needs to drive implementation. They do not
need to lead the effort on a day-to-day operational level, but they do need to
adopt the policy and oversee the implementation plan. Resources will be nec-
essary in order to communicate the policy internally and externally, integrate
new procedures and train all relevant staff and suppliers.

                                             Crafting the initial messages
 Use the Toolkit item CEO Letter             can be a good time to talk
 Announcing the ESMS - Internal to           through the above stages with
 get started.                                your senior management.
                                             Consider accompanying the
Policy Statements with a message from the CEO.

Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	        19
                                    ELEMENT 2


                                   Identification of Risks
                                   and Impacts

5
    Mature system, routinely
    reviewed and updated
                                   The primary objective of a risk assessment is to
    as part of a continual
    improvement plan. Internal     identify the potential negative environmental
    and external inputs. Proce-
    dures extended to contrac-     and social impacts so that you can develop the
    tors, subcontractors, third
    parties and supply chain
    as relevant.                   appropriate strategies to address them.


4
    Systematic, documented
    identification and prior-
    itization of E&S risks         In the following pages, we present the key issues
    and impacts. Routinely
    reviewed and updated
    across existing, new and
                                   that come up in health care facilities.
    changing activities. Wide
    awareness and engage-
    ment in company.
                                   KEY RISKS AND IMPACTS IN HEALTH CARE FACILITIES


3
    Awareness and engage-
    ment of staff in identifica-
    tion and prioritization of     1.	 Environmental: Pollution Prevention and Resource Efficiency
    E&S risks and impacts.           •	 Generation of significant volumes of general health care waste (comparable to
    External experts involved           domestic solid waste)
    as required.                     •	 Generation and inadequate management of hazardous health care waste, which
                                        requires precise segregation and special handling and treatment. Such waste
                                        includes: infectious, pathological, radioactive, pharmaceutical, and genotoxic/
                                        cytotoxic waste, sharp items, pressurized containers, products containing heavy




2
                                        metals (e.g. mercury, cadmium) or persistent, bio-accumulative toxic (PBT)
    Procedures in place for             compounds, and chemical waste from laboratories and cleaning/disinfecting
    identification of E&S risks         operations, such as formaldehyde and halogenated solvents
    and impacts across all key
    activities.                      •	 Air emissions from hospital waste incinerators
                                     •	 Exhaust air from infectious disease wards and other health care facilities
                                        potentially contaminated with biological agents, pathogens, or other hazardous
                                        materials
                                     •	 High energy and potable water consumption in hospital buildings
                                     •	 Leakages and spills from storage tanks for compressed gases (oxygen) and other




1
    Basic identification and            materials stored in bulk (boiler, generator and vehicle fuels)
    assessment of E&S risks          •	 Inadequate wastewater treatment and disinfection prior to discharge, leading to
    and impacts, but limited            surface or ground water contamination
    to a few activities.
                                     •	 Improper management of radioactive sources and retired equipment that may
                                        contain sources and/or other hazardous materials




0
    No identification or
    assessment of E&S
    risks and impacts.




      20     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                               2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




                             2.	 Occupational Health and Safety
                               •	 Nosocomial (hospital acquired) infections among patients and staff
                               •	 Needle-sticks, surgical cuts, and other injuries posing transmission risk of
                                  blood-borne diseases such as Hepatitis C, HIV-AIDS, etc.
                               •	 Environmental services (sanitation) workers’ exposure to infectious and
                                  communicable diseases
                               •	 Occupational dermatitis and allergic reactions due to workplace exposures
                                  (e.g. disinfectants and cleaning agents or latex)
                               •	 Negative impacts on mental health, due to high levels of stress
                               •	 High rates of fatigue, gastrointestinal, psychological and cardiovascular
                                  conditions, and increased injury rates due to long working hours and shift work
                               •	 Injuries from repetitive manual work (e.g. improper patient movement or
                                  cleaning activities)
                               •	 Exposure to violence, including verbal or physical assaults, from patients and
                                  their attendants
                               •	 Exposure to hazardous substances such as cytotoxic drugs, anesthetic gases,
                                  and substances used for sterilization (e.g. ethylene oxide, formaldehyde, and
                                  glutaraldehyde)

                             3.	 Labor
                               •	 Lack of oversight of recruitment agencies for nurse staffing, with associated risk
                                  of forced labor
                               •	 Lack of protection of migrant migrant workers (e.g. in-home nurses or
                                  caretakers)
                               •	 Inefficiently planned work schedules leading to excessive working hours,
                                  inadequate rest periods, and insufficient time off
                               •	 Excessive overtime not properly compensated
                               •	 Exposure to violence and sexual harassment
                               •	 Lack of awareness or due diligence of supply chain labor risks in hospital
                                  procurement processes due to focus on cost minimization (e.g. risk of child labor
                                  or forced labor in factories that produce hospital linens)

                             4.	 Community Health, Safety and Security
                               •	 Inadequate design, construction, and maintenance of facilities to assure life and
                                  fire safety in health care facilities to which the public has access
                               •	 Inadequate design, construction, and maintenance of detection and suppression
                                  systems, compartmentation, smoke control, and facility egress for patients,
                                  attendants and visitors with compromised maneuverability and mobility
                               •	 Lack of emergency potable water reserves for the community
                               •	 Air emissions, odors and mists/fumes from improper air handling leading to
                                  cross contamination and pathogen transmission
                               •	 Increased vehicle traffic around health care facilities from patients, employees
                                  and visitors leading to congestion and risk of accidents
                               •	 Increased emergency vehicle traffic and associated noise




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                           21
Top 3 risks and
opportunities in
Health Care Facilities


1   Patients and health
    care providers are at
risk of being exposed to             The following are key considerations for a robust risk
infections inside health             assessment system:
care facilities. Without
                                       •	   Cover environmental, OHS, labor and community risks;
proper controls in place,
infections can also spread             •	   Conduct at regular intervals – at least once a year;
to surrounding commu-
nities. Infection control              •	   Conduct any time there are significant changes to
systems are required to                     operations;
detect cases and prevent
                                       •	   Conduct any time there are external changes such as
infections from spreading.
                                            new laws or regulations;


2   Due to the demanding
    nature of health care
work, health care provid-
                                       •	

                                       •	
                                            Include input from all levels of workers and managers;

                                            Include input from affected communities and other
ers and staff often work                    external stakeholders;
excessive hours. This can              •	   Use external consultants and experts if your staff does
have negative impacts on                    not have the capability;
workers’ health and can
also impact the quality of             •	   Assess and prioritize risks according to both the severity
care that they deliver. It is               and probability of negative impacts;
important for health care
                                       •	   Consider risks in your supply chain in addition to those
facilities to be aware of
                                            in your facility; and
the risks associated with
excessive working hours so             •	   Scale as appropriate to the size and complexity of your
they can plan and monitor                   business.
working hours and shifts
appropriately.


3   Health care facilities,
    especially hospitals,
use high amounts of
                                                 Now that you have an understanding of the typical risks in
                                                 health care facilities, you can first use the Risk Identification
                                                 Worksheet to identify your potential risks and negative
energy and water in order                        impacts based on your operations and operating environment.
to provide the requisite                         Then you can use the Process Mapping or the Physical
services. This use of natural                    Mapping tools to identify in more detail where problems are
resources can have serious                       likely to arise within your operations.
implications on the envi-
ronments surrounding hos-                        Often it is not possible or practical for you to deal with every
pitals. Improving energy                         single environmental and social impact that your facility
and water use efficiency                         could possibly have. You can use the Risk Assessment Form
can reduce costs for health                      to prioritize which risks should be addressed first.
care facilities and lessen
the impact on the sur-
                                     For more information on environmental, OHS and community risks
rounding communities.
                                     and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at
                                     www.ifc.org/sustainability.

          22   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
 ELEMENT 3


Management
Programs

                                                                                                         5
Management Programs are centered on Action                                 Verified progress against
                                                                           objectives and targets;
                                                                           significant improvements
Plans and improved procedures to avoid, minimize                           in E&S performance. Dem-
                                                                           onstrated commitment to
or compensate for the risks and impacts that were                          continual improvement
                                                                           using annual improvement
                                                                           plans.
identified.


                                                                                                         4
                                                                           Routine, consistent imple-
                                                                           mentation of actions/
For example, if you have a policy commitment                               activities to proactively
                                                                           manage E&S risks and
                                                                           impacts. Measurable com-
to avoid discrimination in the workplace and you                           pany-wide objectives and
                                                                           targets. Periodic review
have identified this as a risk factor based on the                         and update.




                                                                                                         3
lack of a system for employees to express their                            Actions/activities in place
                                                                           to manage E&S risks and
                                                                           impacts, following the
complaints, you may implement a complaint                                  mitigation hierarchy –
                                                                           avoid, minimize, offset/
procedure as a way to minimize the risk of                                 compensate. Proactive
                                                                           approach to managing
                                                                           issues.
discrimination. Or, if one of your policy objectives


                                                                                                         2
                                                                           Procedures and assigned
is the reduction of sharps injuries, and you have                          responsibilities to address
                                                                           and mitigate E&S risks
identified this as a risk factor because of the                            and impacts across all key
                                                                           activities. Primarily reac-
                                                                           tive.
high rates of occurrence, you may take action
by replacing sharps with other instruments.

                                                                                                         1
                                                                           A few informal programs
                                                                           or activities to mitigate
                                                                           E&S impacts. No systems
                                                                           awareness or repeatable
                                                                           processes




                                                                           No process for mitigating
                                                                           E&S risks and impacts.
                                                                                                         0
Version 1.2 April 15, 2015   ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                23
3. Management Programs




                                        IDENTIFYING PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
                                        It is good practice to emphasize preventive and proactive actions: (1) try to
                                        avoid causing social or environmental damage; (2) if not possible, then mini-
                                        mize the impact; (3) if not possible, then compensate or offset the damage.

                                    First, attempt to take actions to avoid or prevent the negative impacts. For
                                    example, suppose you are expanding operations and have identified potable
                                    water as a key risk. You might change your new facility location or design it
                                    differently, so that you avoid contamination of groundwater close to home-
                                    owners and communities. Or, suppose you have identified a certain sanitation
                                               process that exposes health care workers to certain hazardous materi-
              Prioritizing Your Actions        als. You might change your processes to avoid using these materials
                                               or reduce the risk of exposure.
                        AVOID
                                               In many cases, complete avoidance is not possible – you may not
                                              be able to relocate or find alternative processes or materials. In these
                       MINIMIZE                cases, you should try to minimize the impact. For example, suppose
                                              that you are located in an area where women are traditionally given
               COMPENSATE/OFFSET               lower status and less access to education, and in the workplace they
                                               are often mistreated by male co-workers and supervisors. Given
                                               this cultural context, it is important to be clear in your recruitment,
                                               hiring and training procedures, in order to make sure that women
                                    are hired on equitable terms and given equal access to training and promotion
                                    opportunities. You can also develop non-discrimination procedures to ensure
                                    that rules for recruitment, hiring and training are clear for everyone to follow.
                                    Additionally, you can conduct training to make sure that everyone is aware of
                                    and follows the procedures.

                                        In some cases, it may not be possible to completely avoid or minimize certain
                                        negative impacts. Then you should find ways to offset them with comparable
                                        positive impacts or provide compensation to those impacted. For example,
                                        suppose your operation uses a large amount of water. Despite taking action to
                                        minimize water consumption, there are still periods of the year when water be-
                                        comes scarce in the local community. You might collaborate with community
                                        leaders to dig new wells or provide alternate sources of drinking water.




            24    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                            3. Management Programs




                             WRITING AN EFFECTIVE ACTION PLAN
                             Whatever actions you decide to take, think of them as a continual improvement
                             process - you will need to set targets, set deadlines, measure the results, and ad-
                             just the plans if necessary. You need to assign responsibilities and start to involve
                             the right internal people and departments.

                             As you develop your Action Plans, these are the key questions that you need to
                             think about:

                               •	   What – environmental and social risks you want to address
                               •	   How – related actions and procedures to be implemented to address the risk
                               •	   Why – reasons (objectives) for the actions and procedures, and the expected
                                    results (targets)
                               •	   When – timeframe and deadlines
                               •	   Who – responsible people



                               Use the Toolkit item Action Plan Chart to get started.

                             The above examples address some of the risks highlighted in the industry. These
                             are just some of the actions that might be taken. You can adapt them to your
                             situation and add as needed – be flexible to meet your organization’s specific
                             situation. As you tailor your action plans, consult with your workers and manag-
                             ers, experts and external stakeholders, including your suppliers and community.
                             They can offer insight into important issues and effective actions. They can also
                             help you obtain commitment for plans you are trying to implement, and provide
                             candid feedback about how well the plans are working. This will be critical to
                             the continual improvement of your systems.



                             For recommendations on how to address environmental, OHS and
                             community risks and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS
                             Guidelines at www.ifc.org/sustainability.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015               ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                25
3. Management Programs




                                       WRITING AN EFFECTIVE PROCEDURE
                                       Procedures serve as step-by-step instructions for workers, supervisors and
                                       managers. They allow for everyone to have a common understanding of how
                                       to behave. They enable the rules to be followed even when there is staff turn-
                                       over. Clear, detailed procedures help to embed your social and environmental
                                       policies into your daily operations.

                                       It is a good practice to document your procedures. The key is to make your
                                       procedures as clear and as brief as possible. You can use text, checklists,
                                       flowcharts, or simple illustrations. The format for your procedure can vary
                                       depending on the audience. A written procedure may be more appropriate for
                                       managers and supervisors, while illustrations may be useful when dealing with
                                       less literate or immigrant workers. Keep your procedure as short and simple as
                                       possible.


                                         Use the Toolkit item Outline of Procedure and the
                                         Sample Procedure Flowchart to get started.

                                       Simply documenting a procedure is not enough. Effective implementation is
                                       the ultimate goal. Most importantly, employees need to be aware that a new
                                       procedure exists and understand why it is important to follow. They need the
                                       skills and knowledge to be able to implement it. This is achieved through
                                       routine communication and effective training. You will learn more about this
                                       in the next chapter, Organizational Capacity and Competency.

                                       Finally, you must ensure that your employees have access to the current version
                                       of each procedure. Out-of-date documentation should be removed or clearly
                                       marked as outdated to ensure that no one unintentionally follows the old
                                       procedure.




            SHORT CASES

            Here we present several short cases that illustrate some of the
            actions that companies can take to avoid, minimize or offset/
            compensate common environmental and social key risks in health
            care facilities. Action Plans can be scaled to the size of your facility
            and the nature of the risks you face.


            26   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: KENYA


Health Insurance and Outpatient Care Services
RISK: Improper disposal of health care waste
Kenya Health Services (KHS) Group is one of the largest providers of health insurance and outpa-
tient care in East Africa. The Group recently restructured its operations. KHS now plans to enter
the inpatient care market by acquiring two medium-sized hospitals. However, a recent study
conducted by a Japanese international cooperation agency revealed that health care waste man-
agement practices at most Kenyan hospitals, including the two that KHS plans to acquire, do not
comply with international requirements. Hospitals do not segregate different types of wastes and
manage hazardous health care waste poorly. Health care waste is openly stored on hospital prop-
erty and is not secured against pilfering and vandalism. This results in the reuse of scavenged
syringes and needles, which are documented vectors for outbreaks of hepatitis A, B, and C, and
HIV infections. Furthermore, hospitals often resort to open-air burning of collected wastes. This
practice is a significant source of air pollution and releases dioxins, furans, and mercury. Existing
facilities for adequate external hazardous health care waste management in the area, such as
incinerators, are often out of order or utilized improperly. As a result, 60 per cent of hazardous
health care waste is not disposed of properly in Kenyan hospitals.

  I M PAC T

  •	 Contamination of local environment due to inappropriate storage, treatment and disposal
    of hazardous medical waste
  •	 Release of toxic air emissions, including dioxins, furans, and heavy metals, due to
    uncontrolled burning of medical waste

  AVO I D

  •	 Avoid hazardous waste generation at hospitals by substituting products or equipment
    containing hazardous materials , such as mercury, polyvinyl chloride (PVC), halogenated
    compounds, and carcinogenic, mutagenic or reprotoxic (CMR) substances.
  •	 Prohibit the open-air burning of waste.

  •	 Restrict the access to and handling of waste to trained, authorized personnel only.

  •	 Eliminate incineration of any waste chemically treated with chlorinated disinfectants or
    containing chlorinated plastics.

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Develop and implement policies and procedures for the proper segregation, labeling,
    storage (color-coded), treatment, and disposal of waste. Waste treatment and disposal
    should be conducted differently according to the type of waste, such as: the incineration
    of pathological and microbiological waste; the shredding and landfill of contaminated
    plastics; the deep burial of sharps in hard wall disposal containers; and waste immobiliza-
    tion of unwanted pharmaceuticals.
  •	 Maintain records of all pits used for deep burial of waste.

  •	 Train personnel on all policies and procedures.

  •	 Use autoclave to disinfect and treat biomedical waste as appropriate. Train staff to monitor
    autoclave indicators to ensure that medical waste is treated for the necessary amount of
    time at the correct pressure and temperature during the process.

  O FF S E T

  •	 Assist in the remediation of land and water sources contaminated by hazardous medical
    waste streams from hospitals.

Version 1.2 April 15, 2015      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	             27
3. Management Programs
                                     CASE STUDY: INDIA


            Public Hospital
            RISK: Improper treatment of liquid effluents
            A public hospital in Mumbai was recently issued a notice by the Maharashtra State Pollution Control
            Board (MSPCB) for failing to control liquid effluents from its operations. The order requires the hospital
            to install an effluent treatment plant (ETP). This order emanates from a study that concludes that the
            spread of multiple drug-resistant (MDR) bacteria may be traced to hospital effluent discharges in the
            municipal sewage system. In India, rampant misuse of antibiotics has contributed to the development of
            antibiotic resistance, and many effluent contributors do not meet pre-treatment requirements for their
            discharges. The study found that concentrations of MDR bacteria were alarmingly high in samples of
            effluents collected from five hospitals, including this hospital. The government advised the public that
            the spread of MDR bacteria to the community is a matter of grave concern and has instructed the hospi-
            tal to address this issue. However, the hospital claims that there is not enough space or land available to
            build the effluent pre-treatment works and integrate the out-of-date facility sewerage infrastructure.

             I M PAC T

             •	 Contamination of municipal sewage system with multiple drug-resistant (MDR) bacteria

             AVO I D

             •	 Develop and implement procedures regarding the prescription and disposal of antibiotics
                 •	 Train doctors on procedures to avoid unnecessary prescription or over-prescription of antibiotics.
                 •	 Train other health care personnel on the proper administration of antibiotics. Health care pro-
                    viders should ensure that patients finish their full course of prescribed antibiotics (even if they
                    are feeling better) so that drugs are fully effective and do not breed resistance.
                 •	 Train cleaning and maintenance staff on the proper disposal of antibiotics.
                 •	 Inform patients not to flush any unused drugs in the toilets.
             •	 Develop, implement and train personnel on infection prevention and control procedures. Proce-
                dures should prevent the spread of infection between individuals through hand-washing before
                and after patient contact; appropriate use of alcohol-based hand rub solutions; and the use
                of barrier equipment such as gloves, gown, masks and goggles. Procedures should also seek to
                prevent microbial transmission through contaminated surfaces, such as door handles, over-bed
                tables, and equipment, such as stethoscopes and blood pressure cuffs.
             •	 Conduct a water and waste audit to identify and quantify wastewater streams and wastewater
                contamination sources.
             •	 Ensure that all clinical and other solid wastes are collected and disposed according to regulatory
                guidelines (e.g. incineration, immobilization, etc.) so that they do not interact with liquid waste
                streams.

             M I N I M IZE

             •	 Consult with local authorities and communities to find a site for an effluent treatment plant (ETP)
                and install it. Since most microbiota adhere to suspended solids, focus on developing aeration, set-
                tling, flocculation and clarification processes to ensure efficiency. The settling of solids will reduce
                pathogens and make the chlorination efficient at lower doses to prevent any contamination after
                final discharge.
             •	 Develop and implement proper procedures for the ETP and train personnel accordingly. Proce-
                dures should ensure that treated effluent is effectively chlorinated before its final discharge (e.g.
                chlorine dosage of 5-20 mg/L for a contact time of at least 30 minutes at pH < 7) and sludge is
                adequately disinfected before its final disposal. Sludge disposal must be conducted according to
                local regulations and laws.

             O FF S E T

             •	 Work with the community and local NGOs to build awareness about proper antibiotics usage (e.g.
                use antibiotics only when prescribed by a doctor; do not share antibiotics with others or use left-
                over prescriptions) and disposal of unused drugs.
             •	 Introduce and implement community programs to collect and dispose unused antibiotics.
                                                                                   3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: ALBANIA


Private Healthcare Group
RISK: High energy and water consumption
City Healthcare Group is one of the largest healthcare companies in Albania. The company owns
and operates various large hospitals across the country and is currently in the process of modern-
izing most of its facilities to minimize operational costs. However, high energy and water consump-
tion are major concerns for most of the Group’s hospitals. Elbasan hospital, which has 350 beds,
uses over 350,000 gallons water per day. This is significantly higher than most modern hospital
facilities; the hospital has received numerous notices from a local environmental agency. Further-
more, the city of Elbasan is experiencing a growing electricity shortage. During the last winter
season, most of the city experienced extensive power cuts for 12-14 hours a day. Energy restrictions
and power cuts pose significant challenges for the hospital, given the strict temperature, humidity,
and air quality requirements and associated demands on the hospital HVAC system.


  I M PAC T

  •	 Depletion of water supply in surrounding areas

  •	 Negative health impacts on patients and personnel due to interruption of HVAC system

  AVO I D

  •	 Investigate alternative energy options to complement electricity sourced from the
    municipal grid. Examples include:
     •	 Install a suitable capacity solar panel system.
     •	 Install solar water heaters.

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Conduct an energy audit to identify energy-saving opportunities, such as:
     •	 Insulate hot water pipes to minimize heating loss.
     •	 Identify and seal leaks in duct systems delivering heated or cooled air.
     •	 Install heat exchangers to preheat incoming fresh cold air with outgoing stale heated
        air. Heat exchangers will work conversely during summer months, cutting down the
        amount of energy needed for air-conditioning.
     •	 Incorporate variable speed drives on fans and compressors to reduce amount of elec-
        tricity used by the motors of these devices.
  •	 Conduct a water audit to identify opportunities for water conservation, such as:
     •	 Install water efficient equipment (e.g. dual flush toilets or low volume showerheads).
     •	 Regularly fix drips and leaks.
     •	 Improve cooling towers management.
     •	 Install water-saving sterilizers or retrofit existing sterilizers.
     •	 Recover condensate from air handling and refrigeration units.
     •	 Make operational changes to improve water efficiency, especially related to cleaning
        practices and laundry and food preparation activities.
  •	 Develop, implement and train personnel on water conservation policies and procedures.

  •	 Publicize the water conservation policy to patients and visitors and increase their aware-
    ness of the need to conserve water by placing signs in throughout the hospital, especially
    in patient rooms and restrooms.



Version 1.2 April 15, 2015        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	             29
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: ETHIOPIA

           Private Hospital
           RISK: Lack of potable water and emergency
           water supplies
           Established in 1959, City Memorial Hospital is one of the largest and most respected hospitals in
           Addis Ababa with 370 beds. It aims to serve the most vulnerable populations in Addis Ababa, and
           has a potential patient base of 5 million people. The hospital employs over 1000 clinical and non-
           clinical staff and sees an annual average of 20,000 inpatients. Due to the rapid expansion and
           growth of the capital, demand for potable water in the city has increased drastically. This has led
           to a shortage of water in the city, which affects the operations of businesses and essential services
           like restaurants, hotels and health care facilities. City Memorial Hospital authorities often com-
           plain that the hospital receives its water supply only once a week, which forces the hospital to use
           chemically and bacteriologically infected water from local storage. The quality of water delivered
           to the hospital is also negatively impacted when city water lines are not pressurized. To deal with
           the water shortage, the hospital decided to drill groundwater wells about a year ago. However,
           inconsistent power supply and inadequate water treatment and storage facilities make it difficult
           for the hospital to maintain a safe water supply for its operations. In addition, during a recent
           emergency mock-drill, staff noticed that the hospital fire hydrants were not functioning due to
           lack of power and adequate water storage.

              I M PAC T

              •	 Disruption of hospital services and adverse health impacts due to insufficient and
                 contaminated water supply
              •	 Spread of fire due to lack of emergency water supplies for fire hydrant system

              AVO I D

              •	 Install a fire suppression water storage tank to store raw water (i.e. water prior to treat-
                 ment, such as groundwater) according to National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
                 standards. This water can be used for fire suppression and other non-potable water
                 applications.
              •	 Estimate flow rate per bed and hour in normal operating conditions. Install a waste
                 disinfection unit and potable water storage tanks that can contain sufficient water to
                 meet the requirements for an established period of time.
              •	 Develop and implement procedures for potable water disinfection and storage, including
                 regular maintenance, cleaning and monitoring of the water disinfection unit and water
                 storage tanks.

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Conduct a water audit to identify opportunities for water conservation.
              •	 Develop and implement water conservation policies and procedures.
              •	 Make operational changes to improve water use efficiency, especially related to cleaning
                 practices and laundry and food preparation activities.
              •	 Train personnel on water conservation practices and post post signs/checklists through
                 the building about conserving water.
              •	 Increase patient and visitor awareness of the need to conserve water by placing signs in
                 patient rooms and restrooms and publicizing the water conservation policy.




            30    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                  3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: PHILIPPINES

Community Hospital
RISK: Contamination of indoor air

Country Hospital is one of the oldest hospitals in Antipolo City, Philippines. The 150 bed hospital is
owned by a local Trust and has been known for providing quality health care services to the local
community for more than a century. For the last several months, hospital employees and patients
have been complaining of poor air quality, stuffiness, and unpleasant odors, accompanied by symp-
toms of eye, nose, and throat irritation and nausea. Absenteeism among the staff is on the rise, which
often results in the disruption of essential services during outpatient department hours. Concerned
with the growing patient complaints and disruption in essential medical services, the Hospital
Administrator recently consulted the Maintenance Manager, who suggested that the problem may
be due to HVAC system inadequacies, such as a deficiency of air exchanges, poor air distribution, poor
thermal control, and inadequate maintenance procedures. The Maintenance Manager created a team
to further investigate the issue and implement suitable control measures. Upon careful investigation,
the team discovered several other issues including cross contamination from the underground parking
garage, infectious disease wards, food preparation area, sterilization units, and operating rooms.
These issues are contributing to the indoor air quality problems in the hospital.


  I M PAC T

  •	 Negative health impacts on personnel and patients due to poor indoor air quality

  AVO I D

  •	 Implement an inspection and preventive HVAC maintenance program to prevent re-occurrence.
  •	 Develop and implement policies and procedures related to the cleaning and servicing of the HVAC
    system. Regularly drain, clean and replace HVAC components (e.g. drain pans, ducts, air dampers,
    cooling towers, filters, etc.) to minimize the potential for microbial growth or contamination.
  •	 Review and modify the orientation of air intakes and exhausts to eliminate cross-contamination
    from local pollution sources, such as parking areas, garages, loading zones and cooling towers.
  •	 Relocate intake points or consider adding specialized filtration, such as activated carbon.
  •	 Ensure that the minimum outside air damper settings are enough to provide adequate amounts
    of outside air and that these are not being closed inappropriately for energy efficiency.
  •	 Determine pressure relationships within the facility and implement engineering controls (air flows
    from positively pressurized to negatively pressurized spaces).

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Train appropriate personnel to monitor air quality levels regularly and make the necessary adjust-
    ments in the HVAC system as required.
     •	 Monitor carbon dioxide levels regularly and determine the adequacy of the outside air supply.
     •	 Monitor carbon monoxide levels regularly as an indicator of the infiltration of combustion
        byproducts.
     •	 Monitor respirable suspended particles as an indicator of filtration effectiveness.

  O FF S E T

  •	 Provide timely medical treatment to affected personnel and patients.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	            31
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: UNITED STATES


            Public Psychiatric Hospital
            RISK: Unsafe food preparation
            A state-owned psychiatric hospital has 320 employees and 128 patient beds. More than forty
            people recently were affected by an outbreak of food poisoning. The illness was caused by food
            contamination with Clostridium perfringens, which is found on raw meat or poultry. C. per-
            fringens is the third most common cause of food poisoning in the United States. Though it can
            sometimes be safely ingested, C. perfringens forms spores that can withstand cooking tempera-
            tures and can germinate to develop infective bacterial colonies. This outbreak was traced to a
            contaminated chicken salad that was served to patients and staff. The contaminated salad was
            likely prepared hours in advance of being served and stored at an inappropriate temperature.
            The mishandling of the prepared food created an environment in which the bacteria could grow
            and then infect those who consumed the affected food. Subsequent investigations highlighted
            severe deficiencies in the food preparation services at the hospital.

              I M PAC T

              •	 Bacterial gastroenteritis (food poisoning) among staff and patients due to improper food
                 storage and preparation.

              AVO I D

              •	 Establish a Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points (HACCP) program.
              •	 Establish and implement standard criteria for the purchase of food and food handling
                 equipment.
              •	 Develop and implement procedures for food handling and storage, and for cleaning and
                 disinfection of food handling equipment in order to avoid microbial contamination and
                 maintain a high level of food safety. Any food that is past a certain preparation time or
                 date, or otherwise suspected of being contaminated, must be discarded.
              •	 Assign a responsible, trained person to oversee food preparation and handling. He or
                 she shall monitor food preparation personnel to ensure that they follow safe food
                 handling and storage procedures and regularly clean and disinfect food handling tools
                 and equipment.
              •	 Conduct periodic, mandatory training for food preparation personnel on food handling
                 procedures to prevent contamination

              M I N I M IZE

              •	 Ensure that all water used for drinking or food preparation is appropriately filtered and
                 purified for potability.
              •	 Dispose of any chipped, broken or cracked eating or drinking utensils.
              •	 Seal all holes in the building to ensure pests cannot gain access to the building and imple-
                 ment a pest control system.
              •	 Post signs with food handling instructions in food preparation areas.

              O FF S E T

              •	 Provide medical care and timely assistance to affected persons.




            32    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                 3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: BRAZIL


Private Hospital Network
RISK: Needlestick and sharps injuries
The largest network of private hospitals in Brazil includes 23 hospitals and 30 oncology clinics, as well
as urgent care clinics, research institutes, and corporate offices distributed throughout the country. This
network includes over 30,000 staff members. Thousands of affiliated specialists also utilize facilities
in the network with their own surgical and support personnel. Despite a comprehensive management
system and 168 Occupational Health and Safety staff, hospitals in the network are experiencing high
rates of lost-time due to workplace injury, especially from the recurrence of preventable incidents such
as cuts and punctures from sharp instruments. These accidents have been primarily attributed to the
large number of affiliated specialists who are not included in the network’s management system. One
recent case resulted in the transmission of HIV to a member of the nursing staff. This unfortunate event
raised potential issues about the effectiveness of the hospitals’ occupational health and safety system.

  I M PAC T
 •	 Transfer of diseases among health care personnel
 AVO I D
 •	 Develop, implement and communicate policies and procedures for affiliated specialists’ personnel.
    Policy may require affiliated specialists to use trained hospital personnel.
 •	 Utilize engineering controls to eliminate personnel exposure, including the use of safer medical
    devices, such as: needles that are able to retract, sheath or blunt immediately after use; needleless
    IV connectors; and safety lock winged needles.
 •	 Eliminate the use of the following devices when possible: hollow bore needles; needle devices
    that need to be pulled apart by the health care provider; needles that are left exposed on a
    syringe after use; and needles attached to tubing, such as butterflies, that can be difficult to place
    in sharps containers.
 M I N I M IZE
 •	 Develop and implement policies and procedures to decrease injection use and eliminate the use
   of unnecessary sharps, such as towel clips during surgery.
 •	 Prohibit the recapping of used needles and ensure that used needles are disposed in sharps
    containers after use.
 •	 Ensure that sharps containers are available in all areas where sharps are generated and easily
    accessible to all personnel. Sharps containers should:
     •	 Be placed no higher than 54 inches from the floor
     •	 If not wall-mounted, be in close proximity to the work site to prevent injuries while sharp
        objects are being transported to the container
     •	 Be closable, puncture-resistant, leak-proof, spill-proof and free of contamination
     •	 Be changed when they are three-quarters full so that needles never need to be forced into the
        container
 •	 Train all personnel, including affiliated specialists, on safe work practices for handling sharps and
    provide specific instructions for when sharps must be used. Safe work practices include using
    instruments to hold needles; using verbal cues while passing sharps; avoiding hand-to-hand
    transfer of sharps by placing them in a neutral designated area for retrieval; minimizing splash or
    splatter; and double gloving.
 •	 Post signs in work areas detailing steps to avoid preventable sharps-related injuries.
 O FF S E T
 •	 Provide adequate vaccination and treatment to protect workers at risk of bloodborne pathogen
   exposure from infection.
 •	 Promptly obtain serological testing of source patients where necessary and begin post-exposure
   prophylaxis within four hours of exposure.
 •	 Ensure counseling, testing and treatment is available to personnel 24 hours a day in case of
   occupational exposure.
 •	 Follow standardized procedures in case of exposure to HIV or Hepatitis C, with repeated serological
    investigations for up to one year.
 •	 Provide compensation to affected workers in accordance with local and national regulations.
Version 1.2 April 15, 2015      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	             33
3. Management Programs
                                        CASE STUDY: SOUTH AFRICA


            Public Hospital
            RISK: Excessive mandatory overtime
            A large public hospital in South Africa with 1,300 beds and almost 500,000 patients annually has
            2,000 staff, including 750 nurses and 400 doctors. The nationwide nursing shortage impacted this
            hospital, leaving it with almost 40% fewer nurses than required for its size. As a result, nurses
            are forced to work excessive overtime hours. Approximately 30% of the nurses receive up to 30%
            of their salary in overtime pay, in violation of the national labor law. Furthermore, record-keeping
            is inconsistent, which leads to failures in overtime recording. As a result, it is not possible to deter-
            mine if the hospital is making sufficient overtime payments consistently. One nurse claims to have
            worked 187 overtime hours in a month, including one shift that lasted 22.5 hours without breaks.
            The overtime work is mandatory and nurses have been threatened with dismissal if they refuse to
            work extra hours. These extra hours of work are also dangerous for both patients and personnel,
            since overworked staff can make serious mistakes due to fatigue.


              I M PAC T

              •	 Worker fatigue and potential for workplace injuries and improper patient care

              AVO I D

              •	 Establish, communicate and implement policies and procedures for working hours in keeping
                 with industry standards and national laws, including provisions for overtime work, shift
                 work, work at inconvenient times and on-call duty:
                  •	 Normal working hours should not exceed eight hours a day, unless there are exceptions
                     in national law, collective bargaining agreements or other sources.
                  •	 Overtime should not exceed 4 hours a day (for a maximum of 12 working hours
                     per day).
                  •	 Overtime should not be mandated on a regular basis.
              •	 Allow workers to refuse overtime without penalty.
              •	 Workers should receive 24 hours of continuous rest each week. Shift workers should receive
                 12 hours off between shifts.
              •	 If recruiting nurses from other countries to compensate for the domestic nursing staff
                 shortage, follow international and national laws in the recruitment process. Ensure that all
                 migrant nurses can move freely within and outside the country, and that they are treated
                 fairly and equally to national personnel.
              •	 Partner with government and teaching institutions to recruit and train nurses and nurse’s
                 aides.
              •	 Identify tasks that can be transferred to other workers; recruit, hire, promote and train
                 additional workers




            34    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                  3. Management Programs




  M I N I M IZE
 •	 Train senior management, supervisors and workers about labor regulations regarding
   working hours and the linkages between excessive overtime and increase risk of workplace
   injury or illness and improper patient care.
 •	 Avoid scheduling tasks that are demanding, dangerous, safety-critical or monotonous
   during the night shift, particularly during the early morning hours when workers’ alertness
   is lowest.
 •	 Limit the scheduling of consecutive shifts to a maximum of 3 days for long work shifts (over
   8 hours), night shifts and shifts that begin early in the morning.
 •	 Limit day shifts to a maximum of 12 hours (including overtime) and night shifts to 8 hours.
   Consider the needs of pregnant and older nurses, since they may be more vulnerable during
   night shift work and working long hours.
 •	 Plan appropriate workloads for the length and timing of each shift. Schedule a variety of
   tasks to be completed during each shift to create a more dynamic working environment
   and increase workers’ alertness.
 •	 Develop and implement policies and procedures for improved record-keeping of working
   hours.
    •	 Monitor working hours records on a continuous basis and adjust work planning as
       needed.
    •	 Ensure all overtime is recorded and paid at premium rate.
 •	 Implement an employee grievance mechanism and complaint resolution procedure for
   addressing worker concerns about excessive working hours or other issues.
 •	 Modify the timing of shifts or create more flexible working schedules to cover gaps in
   coverage and prevent excessive overtime and extended work shifts.
  O FF S E T
 •	 Retroactively compensate workers for overtime work at the established overtime
   premium rate.
 •	 Consider implementing a “time in lieu” (time off) system at a premium rate to compensate
   for overtime hours.
 •	 Provide adequate breaks and rest facilities.
 •	 Provide suitable medical assistance or counseling to workers suffering from fatigue or
   work-related stress.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	             35
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: GERMANY

            Nursing Staffing Agency
            RISK: Mistreatment of temporary migrant workers
            One of the largest European temporary professional staffing agencies was recently exposed by
            a newspaper as having forced its temporary nursing employees, the majority of whom are mi-
            grants from North Africa, to work up to 84 hours a week without overtime pay. In addition, the
            agency is accused of withholding workers’ identification documents and passports. The workers
            were threatened with deportation and wage deductions if they complained about this working
            arrangement. Since they had to pay down their debt for high recruitment fees, the workers felt
            they had no choice but to work the long hours required by the agency, even though this was in
            violation of national working time regulations. The Agency Director admitted that he was aware
            of the employees’ working conditions and is now facing complaints by the Labor Inspection Au-
            thority. The police have also filed charges against the agency.

              I M PAC T
             •	 Forced labor due to withheld identification documents and high recruitment fees
             •	 Negative health impacts on workers due to excessive overtime
              AVO I D
             •	 Establish, communicate and implement policies and procedures on hiring, remuneration,
                 terms of employment and working hours, especially for migrant workers.
             •	 Working hours policies should include the following:
                  •	 Normal working hours should not exceed eight hours a day, unless there are exceptions in
                     national law, collective bargaining agreements or other sources.
                  •	 Overtime should not exceed 4 hours a day (for a maximum of 12 working hours per day).
                  •	 Overtime should not be mandated on a regular basis and should be paid at a premium
                     rate.
                  •	 Workers should be allowed to refuse overtime without penalty.
                  •	 Workers should receive at least one day off in every seven consecutive days worked.
             •	 Train personnel on procedures to ensure that they are understood and implemented.

             •	 Revise organization policies so they prohibit the withholding of workers’ original documenta-
                 tion, including identification documents or passports.
             •	 Charge recruitment fees to employers so that workers are not required to pay excessive fees,
                 which may force them into debt bondage.
              M I N I M IZE
             •	 Limit overtime hours to the legal amount and pay premium rate for overtime hours worked.
             •	 Regularly conduct internal audits to ensure compliance with local and international law.
             •	 Ensure that all workers understand their rights, including wages, benefits and deductions.
                 This may necessitate the translation of materials into workers’ native language.
             •	 Ensure that all workers have access to their contracts in a language they understand. Dis-
                 tribute pay stubs with clear calculations of payments and deductions when wages are paid.
             •	 Implement a non-retaliatory grievance mechanism and complaint resolution procedure to
                 address worker concerns about excessive working hours, payment or other issues. Workers
                 should be able to submit complaints confidentially or anonymously.
              O FF S E T
             •	 Pay back-wages for overtime hours worked at a premium rate.
             •	 Reimburse workers for recruitment fees.




            36     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                         3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: EGYPT

Public Hospital
RISK: Improper infection control
Lapses in hospital infection control measures at a public hospital in Egypt recently exacerbated an outbreak of a
deadly viral disease that infected more than 60 people and resulted in 10 fatalities. Epidemiologists have said that
the spread could have been kept under control if the country’s officials and scientists had collaborated earlier on
detailed analyses of viral transmission, the disease’s etiology (origin/cause), current incidence and prevalence of the
disease, as well as geographical distribution. This data is essential to design and implement prevention measures.
Previous viral outbreaks, such as SARS, were contained effectively because epidemiologists and clinicians around
the world worked together to create an effective response in a relatively short period of time (6 months). One
health expert emphasized the importance of implementing robust infection control procedures in hospitals as well
as institutionalizing data collection and analysis. The public hospital must incorporate these activities into its daily
operations so that the virus is not transmitted from patient to patient or from patients to health workers.
I M PAC T
•	 Spread of disease to the local community, with potential for fatalities, especially in vulnerable
  populations
AVO I D
 •	 Develop and implement procedures for infection control to limit the transmission of organisms between patients,
    and between patients and staff. Procedures should include instructions for adequate hand-washing, glove use,
    appropriate aseptic practice, isolation strategies, and sterilization and disinfection practices.
 •	 Restrict visitor and staff interaction with infected patients. Restrict patient movement through the hospital.
 •	 Develop and implement procedures for the early detection of cases, especially by screening patients admitted
    from other hospitals and high-risk patients.
 •	 Protect patients with appropriate use of prophylactic antimicrobials, nutrition, and vaccinations.
 •	 Work with the local authorities and community to develop, communicate and implement preventative public
    infection control policies that encourage the following behavior:
    •	 Wash hands often with soap and water for 20 seconds. If soap and water are not available, use an alcohol-
       based hand sanitizer. (Ensure that young children are taught proper hand washing practices.)
    •	 Cover nose and mouth with a tissue when coughing or sneezing.
    •	 Avoid touching eyes, nose and mouth with unwashed hands.
    •	 Avoid personal contact with ill individuals.
    •	 Clean and disinfect frequently touched surfaces, such as doorknobs.
M I N I M IZE
•	 Treat blood and body fluids from all patients as infectious, whether or not an infection has been confirmed. Utilize
  appropriate disposal techniques to prevent further spread of infection.
•	 Ensure that all personnel wear appropriate personal protective equipment (PPE), including gloves, gowns, and eye
   and face protection. Provided PPE in adequate sizes and quantities for personnel.
•	 Monitor and evaluate individuals who come in close contact with someone that has developed the virus
   for 14 days.
•	 Work with local authorities to improve cooperation and information-sharing locally, with other countries, and
   with international health organizations:	
    •	 Increase lab testing capacity to detect cases of the disease.
    •	 Assist in the development of guidance and tools for health departments to conduct public health
       investigations when disease cases are suspected or confirmed.
    •	 Provide recommendations for healthcare infection control and other measures to prevent spread of disease.
    •	 Assist in the dissemination of up-to-date information about the disease to the general public,
       international travelers, and public health partners.
    •	 Cooperate with other facilities to implement Advanced Molecular Detection (AMD) methods for rapid
       detection of pathogens and timely treatment.
O FF S E T
•	 Provide timely medical care to affected persons.
•	 Work with local authorities and other hospitals to develop quarantine and disease response containment
  procedures and training.

      Version 1.2 April 15, 2015       ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	              37
                                    ELEMENT 4


                                   Organizational Capacity
                                   and Competency
    All levels of the company
    are trained and engaged –
                                   A well-implemented ESMS is ultimately about


5
    multiple units and workers
    as well as managers. E&S       trained, committed people. How do you make
    staff has implementation
    authority. Management          that happen?
    commitment is reflected
    in resources devoted to
    E&S management and
    training.
                                   ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITIES TO
                                   IMPLEMENT THE ESMS
                                   First, you need senior management commitment. Senior management



4
    Multiple units have E&S
                                   commitment starts with adopting the ESMS policies, but it must go
    responsibilities, and senior
    management is involved.        beyond that. Senior management support is critical to implementing a
    E&S is managed as an           sustainable ESMS. It is the responsibility of senior management to lead
    inte- grated system. New       the effort. They don’t have to lead the effort on a day-to-day basis, but they
    staff receives some E&S        do need to send a clear message, to all employees at all levels, that this is a
    management guidance.           long-term commitment by your organization.

                                   Beyond senior management commitment, you need a team that takes
                                   responsibility for the ESMS. This does not need to be a full-time job for




3
    All levels of the company      anyone, but senior management needs to ensure realignment of reporting
    are involved in aware-         duties, allocation of appropriate time and authority to carry out the work
    ness training. E&S roles       involved.
    and responsibilities are
    assigned and part of daily     A well-balanced ESMS Team is a prerequisite for meaningful engagement
    operations. E&S staff is       with your peers and colleagues. It should include knowledgeable profes-
    trained and competent.
                                   sionals from environment, health and safety, operations or production,
                                   contracts and purchasing, human resources, for example.
    E&S roles are defined and



2
    assigned. Each issues is       In fact, the success of a management system depends on departments that
    handled only by one func-      have traditionally been seen as beyond the reach of environmental and
    tional area. Some aware-
                                   social issues, such as human resources, procurement and maintenance. For
    ness training is provided
    at orientation and addi-       example, human resources manages training needs related to the labor as-
    tional training is provided    pects; procurement manages the qualifications and performance of suppliers
    for EHS staff.                 and contractors; and maintenance ensures that the equipment runs effi-
                                   ciently and that spills, leaks and other emergency situations are minimized.
    No assigned staff with



1
    E&S management respon-         The ESMS Team should not work in isolation when identifying risks and
    sibilities. Some limited       impacts, developing improved procedures, designing actions plans, etc. To
    awareness and E&S roles        be truly effective, the ESMS Team needs to consult with people from all
    and responsibilities start-    levels of the organization, including supervisors and workers, as they are
    ing to get defined. No         key frontline identifiers of problems.
    systems awareness or
    repeatable processes.




0   No internal awareness
    and no formally assigned
    responsibility for E&S.




    38    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                         4. Org. Capacity and Competency




                             As with the overall management system, the team should be scaled to the
                             size and complexity of your organization. Your organization might not have
                             multiple departments with distinct roles; maybe a few people cover several
                             functions. The key is to involve people across the range of functions. If a
                             team already exists in your facility (e.g. fire safety team) consider building your
                             ESMS Team upon it.

                             Once the ESMS Team is selected, the team members need to select a team
                             leader. This is an important role, especially in the beginning. The team leader
                             needs to set the tone for the group and keep people motivated. All new initia-
                             tives face hurdles, and developing and implementing an ESMS is no exception.
                             The team leader needs to help the team overcome the inevitable hurdles, and
                             should have direct access to senior management.




                               Take a look at the Toolkit item Roadmap and Time Estimate for
                               Developing and Implementing an ESMS in the Toolkit for a list
                               and sequencing of activities to develop and implement an ESMS.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                   39
                                                          EXAMPLE OF AN ESMS TEAM




                                                                                        Quality
                                                                  Human
When selecting a                                                 resources
                                                                                        control


team leader, look                                                                             Environmental
                                                                                              health & safety
for someone who                                Production


has the following                                                           Select a
                                                                          team leader
qualities:
  •	 communicator;                                                                       Procurement/
                                                          Worker
                                                                                           Sourcing
  •	 problem-solver;                                   Representatives


  •	 project manager;
  •	 pragmatic; and                COMMUNICATION AND TRAINING
  •	 respectful to all.            Now that you have identified the actions to be taken and updated your proce-
                                   dures, you need trained, committed people who follow the ESMS procedures.
                                   This is the end goal of communication and training.

                                   There are three key steps that build on each other:

                                   1.	They need to be aware of the ESMS.
                                      •	 What is it?
                                      •	 What are its goals?
                                      •	 What do I need to do?

                                   2.	 They need to understand that the ESMS is necessary and will improve
                                       the organization.
                                      •	 How does this help our organization?
                                      •	 How does it help my department?
                                      •	 What will change?
                                      •	 What is in it for me?

                                   3.	They need to obtain the skills and knowledge to be effective in
                                      their roles.
                                      •	 What are the new policies and procedures?
                                      •	 What exactly do I need to do?
                                      •	 How do I do that?
                                      •	 What will happen if I don’t do it?




        40   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                           4. Org. Capacity and Competency




      TIP
                                                            Your ESMS Team needs detailed training to
      Effective Communication and Training
                                                            develop the necessary knowledge and skills. They
                                                            will need to understand the basics of the Plan-Do-
      Ask yourself if the goal of this specific com-
                                                            Check-Act cycle and know the nine elements of
      munication or training module is to build
                                                            an ESMS. This Handbook provides the informa-
      awareness, to gain commitment and/or give
                                                            tion they will need, but additional help may be
      people the knowledge and skills needed to
                                                            necessary. In addition to the detailed training of
      implement.
                                                            the team, everyone will need to receive awareness
                                                            training so there is a shared understanding of the
                                                            goals of the ESMS.

                                 The chapters in this Handbook provide an easy way to structure efficient
                                 general training. You can give everybody an overview about what you have
                                 learned here about developing and implementing an ESMS.

                                 You may also need to provide training that is specifically related to your Ac-
                                 tion Plan and new operating procedures.

                                 Examine the specific actions and who is going to be involved. This is a quick
                                 way to determine what training will be needed by the various departments
                                 and people in your organization. Ask yourself what knowledge and skills
                                 do people need to effectively implement new procedures, carry out allocated
                                 responsibilities and complete the action plan.



                                   Use the Toolkit item Training Plan Worksheet as template and
                                   tie it to your Action Plans and improved procedures.




AWA REN ESS                      CO M M ITM ENT                   I M PLEM ENTATI O N



    Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                    41
                                     ELEMENT 5


                                    Emergency Preparedness
                                    and Response

5
    Regular engagement with         Even when you have considered all the risks and put
    local community and gov-
    ernment for onsite and
    offsite emergency plan.
                                    the appropriate management programs in place,
    Formal resource-sharing
    agreements with neighbor-       accidents and emergency situations can happen.
    ing companies.

                                    Your organization is a dynamic operation, and many

4
    Senior management and
    all units and shifts, includ-
    ing contract and tempo-         things change from day to day – people go in and
    rary workers, participate
    in emergency risk assess-       out of your workforce, materials and suppliers enter
    ment, preparedness plan-
    ning and mock drills.           and exit your supply chain, patients are admitted
    Continual improvement.
                                    and discharged from your facility, and equipment


3
    All onsite and off-site
    emergency issues have           are added to and removed from your facility. A
    been identified and an
    effective preparedness
    plan is in place. The plan
                                    management system will help to maintain continuity
    meets the local regulatory
    requirements and the local      and consistency throughout these changes.
    industry best practices.
                                    However, there may be a momentary lapse or


2
    The emergency prepared-
    ness plan is in place, but      gaps in the system (e.g. someone not properly
    there is no evidence of
    consistent implementa-          trained, someone not following the procedures,
    tion. Some trainings are
    provided to the workers on      a machine breakdown), or an external force (e.g.
    emergency requirements.
                                    natural disaster) that can lead to an accident or


1
    Emergency management
    planning is not effective,      emergency situation at your facility. While it is not
    as all emergency risks
    have not been identified.       always possible to prevent such situations, you can
    Occasional trainings are
    provided to workers.            be prepared to respond effectively to prevent and
                                    mitigate any harm to your patients, community and

0
    Very limited emergency
    control and personal pro-
    tective equipment. No for-
                                    the environment.
    mal plan in place.




       42   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                              5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                             The key to effective response is effective preparation. The following steps will
                             help you to anticipate the possible scenarios and prepare accordingly:
                                •	 Identify the areas where accidents and emergency situations may occur, and
                                  communities and individuals that may be impacted. This should begin during
                                  your overall risk and impact assessment, through your process analysis, physical
                                  mapping and consultations with workers, experts and the community.
                                •	 Develop response procedures for each identified emergency situation that clearly
                                  explain what actions need to be taken. These need to be detailed clearly for
                                  everyone in your facility to understand what he or she needs to do.
                                •	 Provide the necessary equipment and resources to effectively implement the
                                  response plans. A stockpile of fire extinguishers does not put out fires, unless
                                  people can effectively find and use them when needed. Think about equipment
                                  that is easy for people to use and is located where it can be immediately accessed
                                  during accidents and emergencies.
                                •	 Assign responsibilities so that each activity has people responsible for carrying
                                  it out. Also designate people who will routinely analyze how well the system is
                                  working and update the risk assessment and plans.
                                •	 Communicate so that everyone in your facility understands the importance
                                  of the emergency preparedness and response system and is encouraged to help
                                  monitor and improve its effectiveness. Also include people in the community
                                  who may be affected, if it is appropriate.
                                •	 Provide periodic training so that everyone in your facility has an overview of the
                                  system, and knows the response plans. Don’t just lecture about what to do – ask
                                  for and obtain input on what needs to be addressed and what can be improved.
                                  Even with the most detailed procedures and plans, people will need to exercise
                                  individual judgment and adapt to quickly changing situations. This is more
                                  likely to happen if you engage people in all aspects of the system beforehand.
                                •	 Work with government agencies and community groups to identify areas where
                                  you can collaborate to respond effectively to internal and external situations.
                                •	 Conduct periodic checks and drills to test how well the system is working and
                                  to re-assess the risks to reflect changing conditions. Incorporate your findings to
                                  continually improve your system.
                                •	 Remember, it is essential that the emergency response plan be site specific.
                                  Even if you have similar operations at two different sites, it does not mean that
                                  the same emergency plan would be effective at both locations. An emergency
                                  response plan at each site should be independently reviewed for its suitability
                                  and effectiveness.




                              Look at the Sample Fire Response Procedure and Sample Chemical
                              Spill Response Procedure Flowchart for examples.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                             43
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                         An Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
                                         should include:
                                           •	   identification of potential emergencies based on
                                                hazard assessment;

                                           •	   procedures to respond to the identified emergency
                                                situations;

                                           •	   procedures to shut down equipment;

                                           •	   procedures to contain and limit pollution;

                                           •	   procedures for decontamination;

                                           •	   procedures for rescue and evacuation of staff and
                                                patients, including a designated meeting place outside
                                                the facility and strategies to relocate patients in need of
                                                continual monitoring and care;
                                           •	   location of alarms and schedule of maintenance;

                                           •	   list and location of equipment and facilities for
                                                employees responsible for responding to the
                                                emergency (fire-fighting equipment, spill response
                                                equipment, personal protection equipment for the
                                                emergency response teams, first aid kits and stations);

                                           •	   protocols for the use of the emergency equipment
                                                and facilities;

                                           •	   schedule for periodic inspection, testing and
                                                maintenance of emergency equipment;

                                           •	   clear identification of evacuation routes and
                                                meeting points;

                                           •	   schedule of trainings (drills), including with local
                                                emergency response services (fire fighters);

                                           •	   procedures for emergency drills;

                                           •	   emergency contacts and communication protocols,
                                                including with affected communities when necessary,
                                                and procedures for interaction with the government
                                                authorities;

                                           •	   procedures for periodic review and update of
                                                emergency response plans.




             44   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                          5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                             Common OHS Hazards and Emergency Situations
                             in Health Care Facilities
                             Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) hazards in the workplace can be
                             divided into five categories: physical, chemical, biological, ergonomic and
                             radiological.

                             You should identify the specific hazards that are relevant to your facility’s
                             operations during your risk assessment, using methodologies such as job safety
                             reviews or job hazard analyses. The results of these analyses and the tasks
                             required to mitigate the identified hazards should be incorporated into action
                             plans, which also stipulate the assigned responsible staff and expected timelines
                             for completion.

                             Your management program should seek to first avoid negative impacts from
                             each hazard, by eliminating or substituting the equipment, material, or work
                             practice that is causing the hazard. If it is not possible to eliminate the hazard,
                             you should seek to minimize its impacts by instituting engineering controls
                             (e.g. by installing machine guards or active ventilation) and administrative
                             controls (e.g. job rotation, clear work instructions or warning signage). You
                             should also provide technically appropriate personal protective equipment
                             (PPE) and train your personnel on the appropriate use and maintenance of
                             supplied PPE.

                             OHS emergency situations often occur because of gaps in a management
                             system. Thus, even though the hazards may seem to be very different, such as
                             slips and falls on spilled liquids vs. exposure to radiation, they are often the
                             result of the same root cause – ineffective implementation of the ESMS. The
                             tables below describe common workplace hazards and their associated poten-
                             tial impacts. They also illustrate how inadequate implementation of any of
                             the 9 ESMS elements can be the root cause of such situations. The examples
                             below are not an exhaustive list of root causes. You should identify gaps in your
                             own system to determine potential root causes of problems during your risk
                             assessment.




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                    45
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                                         PHYSICAL HAZARDS
               Examples                                                Potential Impacts

               •	 Slipping on wet floors, spilled liquids or            •	 Sprains and strains
                  bodily fluids                                         •	 Fractures
               •	 Interaction with unguarded or improperly              •	 Cuts and amputations
                  operated machines (e.g. kitchen equip-
                  ment)                                                 •	 Burns and scalds

               •	 Handling hot or sharp items from auto-                •	 Hearing threshold shifts and loss
                  claves or sterilizers                                 •	 Heat stress, dehydration, heat stroke
               •	 Exposure to high noise levels                         •	 Eye injuries
                  (e.g. in laundry area)                                •	 Electric shock or electrocution
               •	 Exposure to high temperatures
                                                                        •	 Asphyxiation and burning in case of fire
                  (e.g. in laundry area or kitchen)
                                                                        •	 Death
               •	 Use of medical lasers
                                                                       Fires or explosions from ignited equipment
               •	 Touching faulty or damaged electrical
                                                                       or gas can lead to massive loss of life and
                  cords or wires                                       destruction of property.
               •	 Involvement in a vehicular accident
                  (e.g. due to traffic near the emergency
                  entrance)
               •	 Violent assault from patients or their at-
                  tendants
               •	 Ignition of medical (e.g. oxygen hood or
                  cauterizing devices), lighting or cooking
                  equipment
               •	 Explosion of medical gas cylinders


                                                         Potential Root Causes

               Management Program:                Monitoring and Review:                  Organizational Capacity and
               •	 Lack of, inadequate, or         •	 Lack of tracking of accidents        Competency:
                  improperly implemented             and near-misses                      •	 Insufficient worker training
                  safety procedures and                                                     on safety procedures
                  equipment procurement
                                                                                          •	 Failure to assign a respon-
                  and maintenance
                                                                                            sible party for managing
                                                                                            safety hazards
                                                                                          •	 Failure to train contract or
                                                                                            temporary workers




             46     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                     5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                        CHEMICAL HAZARDS
  Examples                                           Potential Impacts

  •	 Exposure to hazardous drugs through              •	 Headaches, nausea, dizziness
    inhalation, skin contact, skin absorption,        •	 Decreased mental abilities
    ingestion or injection
                                                      •	 Skin irritation and burns
  •	 Exposure to hazardous vapors, fumes or
    gases (e.g. mercury, ammonia, formalde-           •	 Irritation of eyes, nose and throat
    hyde, ethylene oxide, waste anesthetic            •	 Respiratory disorders
    gases)                                            •	 Damage to internal organs
  •	 Skin contact with hazardous chemicals
                                                      •	 Damage to nervous, immune, and
    (e.g. sterilizers and disinfectants, such as        reproductive systems
    glutaraldehyde).
                                                      •	 Cancer
  •	 Prolonged exposure to latex
                                                      •	 Allergic reactions
  •	 Ignition of improperly stored and handled
    flammable substances (e.g. ethylene oxide)        •	 Asphyxiation or burning in case of fire
                                                      •	 Death

                                         Potential Root Causes

  Emergency Preparedness          Management Program:                 Monitoring and Review:
  and Response:                   •	 Use of incompatible or           •	 Fail to monitor and review
  •	 Lack of or inadequate          damaged storage containers           work practices to ensure
    emergency response plan       •	 Uninformed or incorrect             that chemical safety proce-
    in case of extreme              labeling                             dures are being followed
    chemical exposure                                                    and improved as needed
                                  •	 Insufficient monitoring of
  •	 Insufficient or ineffec-       allowable chemical concen-
    tive worker training and        trations in the workplace
    mock drills
                                  •	 Inability to follow Material
                                    Safety Data Sheets instruc-
                                    tions
                                  •	 Inadequate PPE




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015        ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                47
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                                       BIOLOGICAL HAZARDS
               Examples                                                              Potential Impacts

               •	 Exposure to bloodborne pathogens (e.g. hepatitis B                  •	 Debilitating diseases among
                  or C and HIV) or other bodily fluids that may carry dis-              workers and patients
                  eases (e.g. Ebola or methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus           •	 Death
                  aureus)
                                                                                      •	 Spread of diseases among local
               •	 Exposure to nosocomial infections                                     communities impacting public
               •	 Needlestick and sharps injury                                         health and local economic
               •	 Exposure to surgical smoke plume                                      productivity

               •	 Exposure to foodborne illness due to contaminated
                  food (e.g. E-coli or salmonella)

                                                         Potential Root Causes

               Management Program:                      Stakeholder Engagement:                  Monitoring and Review:
               •	 Lack of or inconsistent               •	 Lack of or inadequate                 •	 Failure to monitor and
                  hand-washing methods                    stakeholder engagement to               review work prac-
               •	 Failure to use universal                address potential spread of             tices to ensure that
                  precautions                             diseases within the facility or         safety procedures are
                                                          to the local community                  being followed and
               •	 Improper labeling, storage                                                      improved as needed
                  or mishandling of biological                                                    to address biological
                  materials, needles and sharps                                                   risks
               •	 Ineffective exposure
                  control plan
               •	 Inadequate PPE



                                                       ERGONOMIC HAZARDS
               Examples                                                 Potential Impacts

               •	 Handling, lifting or positioning patients              •	 Strains and sprains to muscles and connec-
                  (especially immobile patients) or heavy                  tive tissues causing pain, inflammation,
                  loads                                                    numbness, or loss of muscle function
               •	 Repetitive motions, especially in an                   •	 Lower back injuries
                  awkward position
               •	 Extended periods of standing (e.g. during
                  long surgeries or procedures)
               •	 Continued forceful exertion
                                                         Potential Root Causes

               Policy:                       Identification of Risks and             Organizational Capacity and
               •	 Lack of, inadequate        Impacts:                                Competency:
                  or improperly imple-       •	 Inadequate risk assess-              •	 Insufficient worker training on
                  mented ergonomic              ment to identify ergonomic             proper methods of performing
                  safety policies and           hazards.                               duties (e.g. proper ways to lift
                  procedures                                                           patients or heavy materials)
                                             •	 Lack of worker consultation
                                                in designing work areas and          •	 Failure to assign a responsible
                                                processes                              party for managing ergonomic
                                             •	 Lack of worker awareness               hazards
                                                about ergonomic hazards in           •	 Insufficient number of staff to
                                                the facility                           perform duties

             48     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                            5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                        RADIOLOGICAL HAZARDS
  Examples                                                    Potential Impacts

  •	 Exposure to radiation from portable or                   •	 Nausea, vomiting, stomach pains
    fixed x-ray machines or radiation therapy                   or diarrhea
                                                              •	 Radiation sickness
                                                              •	 Cancer
                                                              •	 Death

                                              Potential Root Causes

  Identification of Risks and        Management Program:                         Organizational Capacity and
  Impacts:                           •	 Use of expired radiation                 Competency:
  •	 Lack of awareness of              licenses or improperly main-              •	 Insufficient worker
    radiation sources and              tained radiation sources                    training on proper
    associated risks in the          •	 Deficient procedures re-                   radiation controls
    facility                           garding allowable exposure                •	 Failure to assign a respon-
                                       limits and worker exposure                  sible party for managing
                                       periods                                     radiological hazards
                                     •	 Inadequate PPE




Emergencies                  In addition to emergencies that may result from hazards in your health
                             care facility, all workplaces are vulnerable to other types of accidents and
Caused by                    emergencies resulting from external events. The following list includes
External Events              common types of manmade and natural disasters, all of which can result in
                             significant worker or patient injury or death, as well as cause disruptions to
                             your operations, destruction of property, and severe financial losses.

                             During your risk assessment, you should identify the emergencies that are most
                             likely to occur in your area and create a comprehensive emergency response
                             and preparedness plan so you can respond properly and minimize damage to
                             your facility, workers and patients in case of unplanned external events.

                             Possible manmade or natural disasters include:
                                •	 Storms, including tornados, typhoons and hurricanes (many can result in
                                  flooding)
                                •	 Flooding
                                •	 Earthquakes and associated tsunamis
                                •	 Volcanic eruptions
                                •	 Local and regional fires
                                •	 Explosions including accidental, military or terrorism
                                •	 Civil unrest
                                •	 Violent assault against health care workers
                                •	 Chemical spill or release of hazardous substances through ruptured containers
                                  due to transport accidents, earthquakes and other natural disasters




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                         49
                                     ELEMENT 6


                                     Stakeholder Engagement


5
    Stakeholder engagement            Your facility may have an impact on the lives of
    is part of regular activities.
    Awareness and engage-
    ment at senior levels. Flu-
                                      many people and organizations. All of these
    ent and inclusive commu-
    nication and consultation         people and organizations are your stakeholders
    process with stakeholders.
                                     - they have a stake in your environmental and
    Multiple and ongoing
    public consultation and
                                      social performance.

4
    participation in a cultur-
    ally appropriate manner.          Look at the diagram below and think about how your organization inter-
    Stakeholder feedback
                                      acts with each group. Your relationship with each group is different, and
    is actively considered.
                                      you need to adapt the way you engage with each of them to mitigate risks
    Reporting to communities
    and effective grievance           to your business.
    mechanism is evidenced            Systematically engaging with affected communities in the identification
    by formal records.                and management of the impacts that negatively affect them contributes
                                      to building trust, credibility and local support. Engaging with them also
    Stakeholders have been



3
                                      provides the opportunity to highlight the positive aspects of your presence.
    identified and engaged
    in several events with            This lowers the risk of negative sentiments that could lead to costly litiga-
    effective dialogue. Some          tion or disruption of operations.
    procedures and assigned
    responsibility for engaging
    with stakeholders.
                                                                               FINANCIAL
                                                                          D
                                                                      AN D    COMMUNIT Y
                                                                                            AC
                                                                    S
                                                                   T V    E
    Some public events, lim-                                    EN O                       G R TIV




2
                                                             ATI I R L E S                    OU IS
    ited ongoing engagement                                 P HE N                               PS T
                                                              T     O
    process. Sporadic and
                                                       ES




    selective responses
                                                UN D
                                                   ITI
                                            M M C TE




    when approached by
                                          CO F F E




                                                                                                                    NGO




    stakeholders.
                                            A




                                                                                                                      s




    Limited channels in place.                                           FACILIT Y


1
                                          ERS




    A few meetings and
                                                                                                                            S/
                                                                                                                O R NION
                                           WO R K




    discussions, but not an
                                                                                                                         NS
                                                                                                                C IA E R
                                                                                                                    TI O




    ongoing process yet.
                                                                                                                   EU
                                                                                                                    K
                                                                                                              AD
                                                                                                              W
                                                                                                             SO
                                                                                                      TR
                                                    ST




                                                                                                          AS
                                                    O OW
                                                     CK N




                                                                                                          T
                                                       H ER




                                                                                                     EN
                                                        O




0
                                                                                                 M
                                                          LD S




                                                                                              RN
                                                            ER




    Little or no transparency                                            SUPPLIERS/      VE
                                                               S/




                                                                                       GO
    with stakeholders.                                                  CONTRACTORS




      50    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                        6. Stakeholder Engagement




                             Other stakeholders such as activists and NGOs may not be directly affected
                             by your operations but may have an interest in what you do. Keeping these
                             groups informed and maintaining an open communication channel may lower
                             the risk of negative campaigns that could affect your organization’s reputation.


                             MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
                             The first step in building a relationship with your stakeholders is to identify
                             them. To start, look back at your risk assessment and the areas of potential
                             negative impacts and identify who would be directly or indirectly impacted.

                             Once you have identified your stakeholders, you should prioritize the different
                             groups based on the nature and severity of the impacts, and the ability of these
                             groups to influence your operations. Engagement should be stronger and
                             more frequent with those groups that are more severely affected, as well as with
                             those that have a greater ability to influence your organization.

                             Also, as you identify your stakeholders and the issues that may affect or interest
                             them, you can tailor your communication material and methods to effectively
                             engage with each of them.



                              INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS

                               Workers are an important internal stakeholder group. They also
                               need to be involved in the identification of risks that affect them
                               and be consulted when developing action plans and procedures.
                               However, the methods of engagement with them will differ from
                               those used for external stakeholders.




                               Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Map and Impact
                               Zoning Tool for Affected Communities to get started.



Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                     51
For effective                           DEVELOPING A STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN
                                        After mapping your stakeholders, the next step is to develop a plan for how
consultation
                                        to engage with the groups that you have identified. Your stakeholder engage-
with affected                           ment plan can be simple. But it is important to be proactive and to address key
                                        environmental and social concerns.
communities :
                                        At a minimum, even if your facility does not have adverse impacts on com-
                                        munities or other stakeholders, you should always implement a procedure to
•	 Start early;
                                        receive communications from the public and accordingly adjust your man-
•	 Disclose meaningful                  agement program (see Element 7, External Communications and Grievance
                                        Mechanisms).
   and accurate
                                        If it is determined that there are affected communities, you need to imple-
   information;                         ment a Grievance Mechanism (see Element 7, External Communications and
                                        Grievance Mechanisms) and actively engage them in consultation, regularly
•	 Use culturally                       disclosing clear and meaningful information on both your impacts and poten-
   appropriate means to                 tial benefits, and providing communities with opportunities to express their
                                        concerns and suggestions.
   reach them;
                                        In the case of potentially significant adverse impacts to individuals and
•	 Provide opportunities                communities, you should engage them in a process of Informed Consultation
                                        and Participation (ICP). Compared to a consultation process, an ICP should
   for two-way dialogue ;               ensure a more in-depth exchange of information and a higher level of partici-
                                        pation from affected stakeholders in decision-making, so that their proposed
•	 Document to keep                     mitigation measures are incorporated into the organization’s action plan.
   track of issues raised;
                                        Finally, you should periodically report to affected stakeholders on the actions
   and                                  your organization is putting in place to address the issues identified through
                                        the engagement process (see Element 8, Ongoing Reporting to Affected
•	 Report back on how                   Communities).
   their input has been                 Regular communication with the various stakeholder groups is an excellent
                                        way for you to understand how your operations affect them and to get early
   used and considered
                                        warnings of potential problems. In all your efforts to reach out to stakeholders,
                                        ensure that you do so early on – relationship-building takes time. Don’t wait
                                        until a crisis arises to act, as it will be more difficult without those relationships
                                        in place to manage the problem.



                                                                    Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                    Plan Worksheet to record how you will engage
                                                                    with the important stakeholder groups.




           52     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                    6. Stakeholder Engagement




                             TIP

                              Effective Stakeholder Engagement

                              ••   Be strategic and prioritize which stakeholders to approach –
                                   you may not have the resources to engage them all at once.

                              ••   Update your stakeholder map regularly and in the case of
                                   significant events (e.g., changes to your operations, govern-
                                   ment elections, natural disasters, etc.).

                              ••   Be aware of what issues are important to each group.

                              ••   If you are dealing with a representative for the group, make
                                   sure that he/she legitimately represents the interests of the
                                   affected groups and communities.

                              ••   Engage with stakeholders in their own communities and places
                                   where they feel comfortable.

                              ••   Reach out to vulnerable and marginalized groups.

                              ••   Keep a record of questions, comments and suggestions. Records
                                   provide important information that should be used to adapt
                                   your Action Plans and improve your ESMS.

                              ••   Recognize that your employees are a good link to stakeholders
                                   in the “outside world.”

                              ••   Be prepared to respond to stakeholders, and do not generate
                                   expectations that cannot or will not be fulfilled.




 DEFINITIONS

  Stakeholder                 Any person or organization that has an interest in or is affected by
                              your organization.

  Affected                    People or communities who are subject to organization-related
                              adverse impacts on their environment, infrastructure, way of life,
  Communitites
                              personal safety, health or livelihood.




                             For more information on how to develop and implement a Stakeholder
                             Engagement Plan, refer to the Good Practice Handbook “Stakeholder
                             Engagement,” IFC (2007).



Version 1.2 April 15, 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	              53
                                   ELEMENT 7


                                   External Communications
                                   and Grievance Mechanisms

5
    Proactive and responsive
    external communication
                                   If your facility has social and environmental
    and grievance mechanism.
    Stakeholders are consulted     impacts in the community, inquiries, concerns and
    on ESMS effectiveness
    and are part of the regular    complaints are bound to arise. How you respond
    review process.
                                   to and manage these issues will have significant


4
    Effective grievance mecha-
    nism is evidenced by for-      implications for how your organization is perceived
    mal records. There is rou-
    tine review of the records     and, possibly, whether or not it succeeds.
    and the effectiveness of
    the program.
                                   EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS
    Grievance mechanism is         Even if affected communities per se are not identified, you should always



3
    fully implemented; how-        establish and maintain a publicly available and easily accessible channel for
    ever, there is not enough      stakeholders to contact you (e.g., phone number, website, email address, etc.).
    evidence of its effective-
    ness. No tracking of inter-    External stakeholders can provide valuable information, such as suggestions
    nal or external awareness;     on healthcare improvement, advance warning in critical situations, feedback
    limited tracking of cases.
                                   on interactions with your employees, and/or comments from regulators,
                                   NGOs and individuals regarding your facility’s environmental and social
                                   performance.




2
    Procedures and assigned        The procedure for external communication should include methods to (i)
    responsibilities for receiv-   receive, register and validate external communications and requests for infor-
    ing and handling com-
                                   mation from the public; (ii) screen and assess the importance of the issue raised
    plaints. Awareness is
    limited to those directly      and determine how to address it; (iii) provide, track, document and publish
    handling the complaints.       responses; and (iv) adjust the management program when appropriate.


                                   GRIEVANCE MECHANISMS



1
    Some basic procedures          The purpose of a grievance mechanism is to establish a way for individuals,
    for receiving complaints.      groups or communities affected by your facility to contact you if they have an
    Responsibility limited to      inquiry, a concern or a formal complaint.
    one person or unit.




0   No mechanism in place.




      54    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                           7. Ext. Communication and Grievance




                             In practice, a grievance mechanism should:

                               •	   Establish a way for people to contact you – openly or anonymously – to
                                    pose their questions, to express concerns or to file a complaint. Examples
                                    are suggestion boxes, a toll-free telephone hotline, an email address, and
                                    regular meetings arranged to discuss particular problem areas.
                               •	   Assign a person or team in your organization to be responsible for
                                    receiving, registering and processing all grievances.
                               •	   Establish procedures to register, screen, categorize, investigate and
                                    determine resolution and redress options.
                               •	   Establish a system to communicate decisions taken and progress on pend-
                                    ing actions. It is important that people know when they can expect a
                                    response.
                             Not all complaints can be resolved in the same way. Simpler issues, such as
                             an emergency vehicle running over chickens in the road, might be dealt with
                             by the same team responsible for registering the complaint. More complex
                             problems, such as allegations of widespread groundwater contamination,
                             might require immediate intervention by senior managers and more dedicated
                             resources for investigating, documenting and reporting. For complex and
                             recurring problems, consider reaching out to third-party facilitators that can
                             act as independent mediators.
 TIP
                                                            The more serious the claim is, the more indepen-
  Implementing a Grievance Mechanism                        dent the mechanism should be to determine the
                                                            resolution and options for redress.
  ••   Scale it to fit the level and complexity
       of social and environmental risks and
                                                            The most important thing is to make sure the griev-
       impacts identified in your organization.
                                                            ance mechanism is accessible and trusted. Tailor it
                                                            for the local community so that it is easy for them
  ••   Design the process to be easily                      to raise concerns. This requirement mandates hav-
       understandable, accessible, trusted                  ing the right people leading this effort inside your
       and culturally appropriate.                          organization. The grievance mechanism must be
                                                            accessible at no cost and without retribution to the
  ••   Publicize the availability of the
                                                            party that originated the complaint and should not
       grievance procedure so people know
                                                            impede access to judicial or administrative remedies.
       where to go and whom to approach.

  ••   Commit to a response time and keep to                Don’t underestimate the value of a well-implement-
       it as this will increase transparency and            ed grievance mechanism. The information you re-
       a sense of “fair process.”                           ceive can act as an early-warning system before the
                                                            problem becomes too costly and time-consuming
  ••   Keep records of each step to create a                to address.
       “paper trail.”




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                  55
7. Ext. Communication and Grievance



                                         Look at the Toolkit items Checklist for an Effective Grievance
                                         Mechanism and Grievances Log to get started.




                                          Seriousness
                                          of the claim
                                                                                     Independent
                                                                                     mediator

                                                             Multistakeholder group
                                                             including representatives
                                                             of Affected Communities,
                                                             NGOs, government


                                                Organization team                                       Independence of
                                                                                                        the mechanism



                                        TIP

                                         A Grievance Mechanism is

                                         UNDERSTANDABLE AND TRUSTED when:

                                         ••   affected communities understand the procedure to handle a
                                              complaint;

                                         ••   people are aware of the expected response time; and

                                         ••   confidentiality of the person raising the complaint is protected.

                                         CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE AND ACCESSIBLE when:

                                         ••   claims can be presented in the local language;

                                         ••   technology required to present a claim is commonly used (e.g.,
                                              paper, text messaging, internet); and

                                         ••   illiterate persons can present verbal complaints.

                                         AT NO COST when:

                                         ••   people don’t need to travel long distances to present a claim; and

                                         ••   the organization covers the costs of third party facilitation.




                                      For more information on how to develop and implement a Grievance
                                      Mechanism, refer to the Good Practice Note “Addressing Grievances from
                                      Project-Affected Communities,” IFC (2009), and the Advisory Note “A
                                      Guide to Designing and Implementing Grievance Mechanisms for Develop-
                                      ment Projects,” CAO (2008).


             56    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
        ELEMENT 8




       Ongoing Reporting to
                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                             Affected communities’
                                                                                             issues and concerns are
                                                                                             proactively addressed.
       Affected Communities                                                                  There is ongoing com-
                                                                                             munication to avoid risks
                                                                                             and impacts before new
       Affected communities will want to know what                                           projects as well as to
                                                                                             address existing issues.
       actions your organization has put in place to resolve


                                                                                                                         4
                                                                                             Reporting to affected
       the issues identified when engaging with them.                                        communities is regu-
                                                                                             larly implemented and
       Keeping affected communities informed of what you are doing is a critical             evidenced in documen-
       element for building and maintaining a good relationship. If people know              tation. Key units are
       when they will receive an update, it helps to build trust. It can also reduce the     involved in the review
       amount of time you spend responding to questions.                                     of the key issues.




                                                                                                                         3
       The frequency of this communication will be proportional to the scale of stake-       When applicable, con-
       holders’ concerns, but it should be at least annual. If your activities change or     sultation processes have
       new environmental and social risks emerge, you do need to contact stakehold-          been implemented.
       ers outside of the regular schedule to discuss these changes.                         External consultants are
                                                                                             involved as required. No
TIP                                                         You can also decide to           ongoing review.
                                                            report back to the wider
 Ongoing Communication
                                                            public on your progress




                                                                                                                         2
••    Provide an immediate update if new                    in meeting your commit-
                                                            ments to avoid, reduce           Procedures in place
      environmental or social risks emerge.                                                  for reporting, usually
                                                            and mitigate any negative
••    Report progress on implementation of                                                   assigned to E&S staff.
                                                            environmental or social
      your commitments.                                                                      Primarily reactive.
                                                            impacts from your organi-
••    Report monitoring results on issues that              zation’s activities. Sustain-
      interest the community.                               ability reporting initiatives,
                                                            guidelines, including



                                                                                                                         1
••    Use the opportunity to communicate the
      benefits generated by your facility.                  sector-specific guidelines,      Some basic communica-
                                                            and good practices are also      tions with affected com-
••    Translate information into local languages
                                                            rapidly emerging in this         munities, mostly limited
      and easily understandable formats.
                                                            area. The most notable           to meetings.
••    Try to maintain continuity in who deals               is the Global Reporting
      with the community.                                   Initiative (GRI).
••    Involve your employees as communication



                                                                                                                         0
      links to the community.
••    Consider conducting a stakeholder                                                      No reporting.
      survey to learn how your organization
      is perceived.


          Look at the Toolkit item Reporting to Affected Communities for
          examples of formats and venues you can use.


       Version 1.2 April 15, 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                 57
                                         ELEMENT 9


                                        Monitoring and Review


5
    Robust system of continual          We’ve talked about the relationship between
    learning and improvement.
    Senior management receives
    periodic reports about E&S          your ESMS and the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle of
    performance and progress
    toward E&S objectives and           continual improvement. Monitoring and review
    targets. All key project deci-
    sions consider E&S.                 are critical, because this is how you check and
    Monitoring, supervising and
                                        adjust the system.

4
    auditing activities are inte-
    grated and included in man-
    agement review. Includes
    consultation with workers,          So far, you’ve formed or assigned a team to
    customers and suppliers.
    E&S objectives and targets
    are included in job descrip-
                                        lead the effort. You have developed your ESMS
    tions and performance
    reviews.                            and started to implement your action plans in


3
    Routine review of monitor-          response to the risks and impacts you identified.
    ing and supervision activi-
    ties, including participation
    of workers. Corrective              You’ve started to train people. The next step
    actions routinely imple-
    mented. An E&S internal             is to monitor the effectiveness of your ESMS
    audit plan is in place.
                                        and your action plans and make the necessary


2
    Key E&S monitoring plans in
    place, with inspection and          adjustments.
    supervision activities. Pri-
    marily reactive and guided
    by external experts, custom-
    ers and investors.


                                                                               PLAN
                                                                                                        DO




1
    Few monitoring plans to sat-
    isfy regulatory requirements.
    No formal review activities.
    No systems awareness or       Monitoring is the CHECK
                                                                                 ACT




    repeatable processes            step of the PDCA cycle

                                              Review is the ACT                                    CHECK
                                           step of the PDCA cycle




0   No monitoring of E&S
    performance.



      58    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                           9. Monitoring and Review




                              TIP

                               Monitoring measures intent, implementation and effectiveness

                              Intent:
                                    1.	Are the nine elements of the ESMS in place?
                              Implementation:
                                    2.	Are the action plans being carried out?
                                    3.	Are procedures being followed?
                              Effectiveness:
                                    4.	Are you in compliance with laws and regulations?
                                    5.	Are you making progress toward your overall objectives
                                       and targets?
                                    6.	How is the environmental and social performance of the
                                       organization in general?


                             INDICATORS
                             A key aspect of monitoring is defining relevant indicators. These are quan-
                             titative or qualitative measures of progress against set goals. Some indicators
                             might focus on performance, evaluated against the criteria defined in your
                             environmental and social policy.

                             Some examples of key performance indicators could be:
                               •	 energy consumption;

                               •	   water consumption;
                               •	   volume of non-hazardous and hazardous waste disposal;
                               •	   liquid effluents discharge;
                               •	   emissions to air;
                               •	   facility indoor air quality;
                               •	   infection rates;
                               •	   number of need-stick and sharps injuries;
                               •	   absenteeism frequency;
                               •	   accidents (injuries, ill-health, property damage), incidents and near misses;
                               •	   lost time injury frequency, incidence, and severity rates;
                               •	   emergency response incidents;
                               •	   average working hours and wages paid;
                               •	   wage levels;
                               •	   incidences of disciplinary and discrimination complaints; and
                               •	   employee demographics matching access to training, jobs, and wages.

Version 1.2 April 15, 2015             ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                  59
9. Monitoring and Review




  Measuring and                          You can also use this information when reporting to a wider public on your
                                         ESMS performance. When selecting your key performance indicators, you may
  Improving                              refer to voluntary guidelines such as the Global Reporting Initiative.

  Remember, you                          Other indicators can look at the processes or inputs that you use to try to
                                         achieve performance.
  can’t improve what
                                         For example, in your action plan, you might have included worker training as
  you don’t measure.                     a necessary step to raise awareness among workers about OHS, so that they
                                         can help to identify and address key risks and hazards. In this case, you might
                                         evaluate your progress against the action plan by tracking the percentage of
                                         workers who have been trained, or the percentage of workers who can correctly
                                         describe the risk analysis procedure.

                                         Some examples of process indicators include:

                                           •	   procedures in place for chemical, fuel and hazardous waste handling,
                                                storage, and disposal;
                                           •	   processes analyzing for water and energy conservation;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain safe work practices;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the emergency response procedures;
                                           •	   percentage of workers trained on infection control; and
                                           •	   communications from stakeholders.
                                         It is helpful to have a mix of performance and process indicators, to get a
                                         deeper understanding of whether you are measuring the appropriate things and
                                         whether you are taking the appropriate actions. For example, a performance
                                         indicator such as “zero incidences of forced labour” does not tell the full story:
                                         Was this the result of effective procedures and training or was the system inad-
                                         equate in identifying and recording incidences?




                                         For environmental and OHS performance indicators and benchmarks
                                         relevant to your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at www.ifc.
                                         org/sustainability




                                           Look at the Monitoring Plans in the Toolkit for more examples of
                                           common key indicators.




             60    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                                                                     9. Monitoring and Review




                                             THE BASICS OF MONITORING
                             Visual observation                       Interviews
                             physical walk-throughs of your           consultations with workers,
                             facility and surrounding land.           managers and external stake-
                             Examples of what you might               holders. Examples of topics
                             observe: physical obstructions           you might discuss: Do workers
                             and blocked exits, fire detec-           and managers understand
                             tion, alarm and fighting equip-          the policies and procedures?
                             ment, infection control warning          How are they impacted? Are
                             signs, storage of hazardous ma-          there ideas for improvement?
                             terials, housekeeping, drinking          Do workers feel comfortable
                             water and sanitation facilities,         filing complaints? How are
                             information displayed on notice          external stakeholders
                             boards , worker and supervisor           impacted by the organization?
                             body language and interactions.          Are there ideas for improve-
                                                                      ment? Do external stakehold-
                                                                      ers feel comfortable filing
                                                                      complaints?

                             Measuring and testing                    Document review
                             checking using equipment that            looking through documents
                             is properly calibrated. Examples         and records. Examples of
                             of what you might check: emis-           what you might review: water
                             sions to air, effluents, indoor air      and energy bills, waste dis-
                             quality, ambient temperature,            posal records, staff injury log,
                             light levels.                            chemical use and discharges
                                                                      records, inspection records,
                                                                      OHS records, complaints logs,
                                                                      wage slips, time cards, poli-
                                                                      cies and procedures, training
                                                                      records.




                                       Look at the Toolkit item Auditing Guidance for guidelines
                                       on how to conduct an audit.



Version 1.2 April 15, 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	              61
9. Monitoring and Review



                                         Monitoring and auditing are words that are often
                                         used interchangeably, which can be confusing.
                                         Auditing is a formal, on-site evaluation against a
                                         specific set of criteria. Audits can be conducted
                                         internally by your own staff or by outside parties.
                                         Monitoring is an umbrella term that includes various
                                         methods for evaluating performance. These may
                                         include: visual observation, measuring and testing,
                                         questionnaires, surveys, interviews with employees
                                         and external stakeholders, and document review.
                                         It is important to design your monitoring program
                                         to obtain qualitative and quantitative information.
                                         It is also important that workers and managers are
                                         monitoring the workplace on an on going basis.

                                         MEASURING AND IMPROVING YOUR ESMS
                                         While your Action Plan monitoring looks at whether corrective actions are
                                         being implemented and are achieving the intended results, your ESMS moni-
                                         toring is looking at the maturity of your system development and implementa-
                                         tion. The Action Plan lists new actions you are taking to address risks. But for
                                         the new actions to be sustainable, you also need to improve your ESMS. The
                                         two need to be linked.

                                         This Handbook’s companion publication ESMS Self-Assessment and Improve-
                                         ment Guide provides you with a practical tool to monitor the maturity of your
                                         ESMS. For each of the nine ESMS elements, we provide self-assessment ques-
                                         tions that show you the level of your ESMS development and implementation
                                         on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is the highest). Conducting the ESMS self-assessment is
                                         an important first step that enables you to see where you stand now. The results
                                         form the basis of your ESMS Improvement Plan. The ESMS self-assessment
                                         responses should be based on Visual Observation, Measuring or Testing,
                                         Document Review and Interviews.

                                         Let’s take another look at the nine elements of the ESMS and maturity ratings.




             62    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                                           Purpose of Action Plan and ESMS
                                           Improvement Plan
                                           Action Plan: specific actions to correct
                                           environmental, labor and community
                                           problems and remediate negative impacts
                                           ESMS Improvement Plan: steps targeted to
                                           continually improve the management system to
                                           support activities in the Action Plan




                                                                                                                       Ongoing Reporting
               Risks and Impacts




                                                                     Preparedness and




                                                                                                      Communications
               Identification of




                                                                                                                                           Monitoring and
                                                    Organizational




                                                                                                      and Grievance
                                   Management




                                                                                                                       Communities
                                                    Capacity and




                                                                                        Engagement




                                                                                                      Mechanisms
                                                    Competency




                                                                                        Stakeholder




                                                                                                                       to Affected
                                                                     Emergency

                                                                     Response
                                   Programs




                                                                                                      External




                                                                                                                                           Review
     Policy




      Mature system implemented internally and with key supply chain partners – continual
 5
      improvement embedded in operations
 4 Systems well-developed and implemented internally – routine improvement projects
      Systems approach adopted, but development and implementation is inconsistent -
 3
      improvement sporadic
 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation – primarily reactive
 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes


LINKING YOUR ACTION PLAN AND ESMS IMPROVEMENT PLAN
It is important to understand the link between the Action Plan and the ESMS Improvement Plan. The
Action Plan lists specific projects and activities. The ESMS Improvement Plan is about making system
improvements needed to support the activities and to make the necessary changes in how the organization
operates.

Improving environmental and social performance and integrating it into your routine operations takes
time. The improvement plan for your ESMS needs to be practical. It needs to be designed with the
understanding that people have their core operating responsibilities in your organization. You cannot
improve everything at once. The ESMS Team plays the critical role of leading the improvement effort.
Prioritizing what to work on first is an important job for the team in coordination with senior manage-
ment. The ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide will help you to get started.



Version 1.2 April 15, 2015                      ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                                                      63
9. Monitoring and Review




                                         CONDUCTING AN EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT REVIEW
                                         The purpose of the management review is to routinely involve senior manage-
                                         ment in evaluating the development and implementation of the ESMS. The
                                         management review is led by the ESMS Team. In the beginning, we recom-
                                         mend conducting a management review every three to six months. Once the
                                         ESMS is well-established, once a year is usually fine. It is important to keep a
                                         written record (called minutes) during the meeting of the key topics discussed
                                         and the decisions made. The minutes should be kept in a central log.

                                         For the ESMS Team, the management review is an important opportunity to
                                         keep senior management involved. Remember, the sustainability of the pro-
                                         gram requires ongoing commitment from senior management.



                                         Typical Agenda for a Management Review:
                                           •	   Review progress on Action Plan

                                           •	   Review progress on ESMS Improvement Plan

                                           •	   Review compliance with environmental and labor
                                                laws and regulations

                                           •	   Review progress on environmental and social
                                                performance

                                           •	   Discuss possible adjustments in risk assessment

                                           •	   Prioritize activities for next three, six and 12 months

                                           •	   Review and approve needed resources by senior
                                                management




             64    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your Environmental and Social Management System
                             Additional References Consulted

                             1.	 Andrea Chambers and Cameron Mustard. March 2014. “Needlestick injury prevention:
                                  Lessons learned from three acute-care hospitals in Ontario.” Institute for Work & Health.

                             2.	 Susan Q. Wilburn. 2004. Needlestick and Sharps Injury Prevention Online Journal of
                                  Issues in Nursing. 9 (3)

                             3.	 Department of Health, Health Services and Clinical Innovation Division. July 2013.
                                  Management of food safety in Hospital and Health Service facilities: Guideline. Queensland.

                             4.	 Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America. 2014. “Hospital food safety measures
                                  reduce risk of contaminated hospital food.” ScienceDaily.

                             5.	 2010. “Wanted: 2.4 million nurses, and that’s just in India.” Bulletin of the World Health
                                  Organization 88 (5): 321-400.

                             6.	 US Department of Labor Occupational Safety & Health Administration. “Hospital eTool.”
                                  OSHA. https://www.osha.gov/SLTC/etools/hospital/index.html.

                             7.	 International Labour Office, International Council of Nurses, World Health Organization
                                  and Public Services International. 2002. “Framework Guidelines for Addressing Workplace
                                  Violence in the Health Sector.”

                             8.	 World Health Organization and International Labour Organization. 2014. “HealthWISE:
                                  Work Improvement in Health Services Action Manual.”

                             9.	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2014. “Emergency Preparedness and Response:
                                  Preparation and Planning.” Last updated September 30, 2014.
                                  http://emergency.cdc.gov/planning/.

                             10.	 OSHA. www.osha.gov




Version 1.2 April 15, 2015           ESMS Implementation Handbook - Health Care Facilities	                              65
Address:

2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Tel. 1-202-473-3800
www.ifc.org/sustainability




Copyright
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of
the content for educational purposes. Content from thispublication may be used freely
without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content
is not used for commercial purposes.



March 2015
