Environmental and Social
Management System
Implementation Handbook
GENERAL
    Although the environmental and social management system described in this
    Handbook is based on IFC Performance Standard 1, the process outlined herein
    may not provide for meeting all the requirements of IFC Performance Standard 1,
    or any other IFC Performance Standard. The purpose of this Handbook is to dem-
    onstrate a technical means of integrating environmental and social concerns into
    company management, so that a business can become more effective in reducing
    its impact on the environment, its workers and its neighboring communities.

    The Handbook is provided “AS IS,” and is provided without warranty of any kind,
    either express or implied, including, but not limited to, implied warranties of mer-
    chantability, fitness for a particular purpose, or non-infringement. Development of
    an environmental and social management system based on this Handbook does
    not imply any type of certification or compliance with any IFC Performance Stan-
    dards, including but not limited to IFC Performance Standard 1, nor does it imply
    endorsement by or affiliation or sponsorship with IFC.

    The Handbook is distributed with the understanding that neither the authors, nor
    the organizations and countries they represent, nor the publisher, are engaged
    in rendering technical advice. The information, policies and procedure templates
    comprising the Handbook are intended as a reference and for informational
    purposes only, and are not to be relied upon for operational or any other purposes.
    Implementation of the Handbook is solely the responsibility and risk of the final
    users. The material in the Handbook is set out in good faith for general guidance,
    and no liability can be accepted for any possible loss or expense incurred as a
    result of relying on the information contained herein. Neither IFC nor any other
    member of the World Bank Group shall be liable for any direct, indirect, incidental,
    special, consequential, punitive or exemplary damages, including, but not limited
    to, damages for loss of profits, goodwill, use, data or other intangible losses (even
    if IFC has been advised of the possibility of such damages) in any way arising or
    resulting from use or reliance on the Handbook or any such conclusion or deter-
    mination. The Handbook is distributed subject to the condition that it shall not by
    way of trade or otherwise be sold or otherwise circulated on a commercial basis
    without IFC’s prior written consent.

    IFC does not guarantee or provide any warranties as to the accuracy, timeli-
    ness, completeness, reliability or usefulness of this publication’s content, and is
    not responsible or liable for any such content or use thereof. The views, advice,
    opinions and other statements herein are not reviewed or endorsed by, and do not
    necessarily represent the views and opinions of IFC or its Board of Directors, the
    World Bank or its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.




2
Table of Contents
Welcome & How to Use This Handbook.....................................................................................4
Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System.....................................7
Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System................................... 11
     Overview...........................................................................................................................12
     Elements of an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS)..................................13
     System Development and System Implementation........................................................15
     Using The Handbook And Companion Publications To Develop And
     Implement Your ESMS......................................................................................................16
Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing
Your Environmental and Social Management System............................................................ 17
     1.	 Policy............................................................................................................................18
         Purpose of an Effective Policy............................................................................................18
         Modifying Your Existing Policy Statement or Creating a New One..........................................18
         Gaining Senior Management and Company Commitment.....................................................19
     2.	 Identification of Risks and Impacts..........................................................................20
         General Environmental and Social Risks................................................................................20
     3.	 Management Programs...............................................................................................25
         Identifying Preventive and Corrective Actions....................................................................26
         Writing an Effective Action Plan......................................................................................27
         Writing an Effective Procedure.........................................................................................28
         Short Cases......................................................................................................................28
     4.	 Organizational Capacity and Competency..............................................................40
         Roles, Responsibilities and Authorities to Implement the ESMS...........................................40
         Communication and Training..........................................................................................42
     5.	 Emergency Preparedness and Response....................................................................44
         OHS Hazards and Emergency Situations..........................................................................47
         Emergencies Caused by External Events.............................................................................47
     6.	 Stakeholder Engagement...........................................................................................48
         Mapping Your Stakeholders..............................................................................................49
         Developing a Stakeholder Engagement Plan......................................................................50
     7.	 External Communications and Grievance Mechanisms.........................................52
         External Communications................................................................................................52
         Grievance Mechanism......................................................................................................52
     8.	 Ongoing Reporting to Affected Communities.......................................................55
     9.	 Monitoring and Review.............................................................................................56
         Indicators........................................................................................................................57
         Measuring and Improving Your ESMS..............................................................................60
         Linking Your Action Plan and ESMS Improvement Plan...................................................61
         Conducting an Effective Management Review...................................................................62


Version 2.1      November 2015                   ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                                                  3
                      Welcome & How to
                      Use This Handbook
                      Environmental and social responsibility is becoming
                      more and more important in today’s global
                      economy. There are thousands of environmental
                      and social codes and standards in the world
                      today. The codes and standards define the rules
                      and the objectives. But the challenge is in the
                      implementation. An environmental and social
                      management system (ESMS) helps companies to
                      integrate the rules and objectives into core business
                      operations, through a set of clearly defined,
                      repeatable processes.

                      This Handbook is intended to be a practical guide
                      to help companies develop and implement an
                      environmental and social management system,
                      which should help to improve overall operations.




4   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                         In the current economic climate, companies are
                         under pressure to perform or even just survive.
                         New initiatives are often met with resistance as
                         people struggle to keep up with their day-to-
                         day responsibilities. Some people think that an
                         environmental and social management system
                         must be big, complicated and expensive. But that
                         is not really true. To be effective, a management
                         system needs to be scaled to the nature and size of
                         the company.

                         If a company has existing management systems for
                         quality or health and safety, this Handbook will help
                         to expand them to include environmental and social
                         performance. Our hope is that this Handbook
                         will accelerate a company’s journey of continual
                         improvement, for its own benefit and that of its
                         employees and stakeholders.




Version 2.1   November 2015     ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	     5
                       Quick Reference for Using this Handbook
                                                      These sections provide background on environmental and
                        Sections I – II
                                                      social management systems (ESMS).

                                                      This section provides step-by-step instructions on how to
                                                      develop and implement an ESMS. If you see a Toolkit icon,
                        Section III
                                                      it means that there is an accompanying tool in the ESMS
                                                      Toolkit.

                                                      This companion publication gives tools, including forms,
                                                      templates, checklists, and other useful documents, to help
                        ESMS Toolkit                  you develop and implement the systems described in the
                                                      Handbook. We suggest that you adapt each tool for your
                                                      company.

                        ESMS                          This companion publication contains a questionnaire,
                        Self-Assessment               maturity matrix, and improvement tips to help you
                        and Improvement               measure the maturity of your ESMS and develop a plan
                        Guide                         for improvement.




                      Acknowledgements
                      This Handbook was prepared by the Sustainable Business Advisory (SBA)
                      department with primary contributions from Irene Angeletti, Rob Horner,
                      Larissa Luy, and Jeremy Ansell.

                      The Handbook is based on primary contributions and technical expertise
                      from the Social Accountability International (SAI) team of Craig Moss,
                      Jane Hwang, and Rachel Kanter Kepnes, with key contributions from
                      Edwin Koster, D.K.S. Moorthy, Eileen Kaufman, Doug DeRuisseau,
                      Caroline Lewis and Yogendra Chaudhry. Additional resources include
                      United States Department of Labor Occupational Safety & Health
                      Administration training materials. Graphic design services were
                      provided by Pam Henry.

                      Photography courtesy of World Bank Photo Library




6   Welcome and How to Use this Handbook
                                I

                         Benefits of an Environmental
                         and Social Management System




Version 2.1   November 2015   ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	   7
“We are facing
intense global
competition and
declining spending
during the current               Benefits of an Environmental
global economic                  and Social Management
crisis. Improving our
                                 System For Your Company
environmental and
social management is
helping us to reduce             Today, companies are confronted with a number of significant environmental
                                 and social challenges. None of the challenges is insurmountable, but if not
material inputs,                 effectively assessed and managed, they will hurt your profitability, reputation,
minimize waste                   and prospects for future business.

and improve our                  Among these challenges are increasing energy and raw materials costs, the
                                 growing power and influence of environmental and labor regulatory agencies,
competitiveness and              and rapidly evolving consumer awareness and concerns about environmental
our profitability.”              and social issues. These risks are in addition to the primary risk of failing to
                                 meet your business goals or build brand and consumer confidence. All of these
CFO - Garment                    risks ultimately have financial consequences. Moreover, exports and interna-
manufacturer in                  tional exposure are vital to the success of many businesses; but exporting your
Southeast Asia                   goods and services also increases demands from international legislation, local
                                 industry standards, and consumer requirements. Many of these requirements
                                 are increasingly related to environmental and social practices. All of these risks,
                                 requirements, and pressures on your business are driving forces that should
                                 motivate you to implement a management system.




                                “We are seeing a direct correlation – the suppliers
                                with better social compliance consistently score
                                 higher in key performance indicators such as
                                 on-time delivery and quality.”
                                 Senior VP
                                 Multi-National Retailer




       8   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
    “As a leading crop producer and exporter, we operate in compet-
     itive, globalized and volatile markets. Our management system
     based approach towards quality, environment and social issues
     has helped us attract and keep our global clientele through un-
     compromising product quality; prompt, reliable delivery; and fair,
     transparent and ethical business practices.”
     Managing Director - A crop producer and exporter company in Latin America




                         A management system will enable you to consistently foresee and address
                         issues confronting your business so you can prevent potential risks from
                         becoming actual problems.

                         Implementing an environmental and social management system (ESMS) can
                         have direct business benefits. Conserving and using energy and materials more
                         efficiently helps to reduce production costs. Reducing waste and discharges,
                         and recycling can minimize costs of waste disposal, which have been steadily
                         increasing over time. In fact, you can convert certain organic waste into fuel or
                         energy to maximize sustainability and costs savings for your business. A man-
                         agement system can help you build processes to benchmark your expenditures
                         against industry standards and identify potential production and operational
                         cost savings.

                         The same tangible benefits can be realized on the social side. Clear, transpar-
                         ent human resource policies and procedures improve communication between
                         workers and managers. This helps to anticipate and avoid labor problems.
                         Effective occupational health and safety management procedures will enable



“Labor shortages had always been a challenge for us. Now,
thanks to our, ‘social and labor management system,’ not only
 are our employees happy and productive, but also they stay with
us longer.”
General Manager

Contractor to various large construction companies, Latin America




Version 2.1   November 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                             9
                          you to identify workplace and process hazards so you can eliminate them or
                          reduce their potential negative impacts. This can not only reduce injuries and
                          fatalities, but can also lead to bottom-line business benefits such as reduced
                          absenteeism and worker turnover, and lower insurance premiums for workers’
                          compensation.

                          Many companies already use management systems for quality control. An
                          environmental and social management system (ESMS) simply extends that ap-
                          proach to the management of your business’s impact on the environment, your
                          workers, and other external stakeholders.

                          Ultimately, your management systems should be integrated and centralized
                          in one comprehensive system, instead of having separate systems for quality,
                          occupational health and safety, and the environment. This handbook will help
                          you implement an integrated ESMS that is appropriate for the size and nature
                          of your company.




10   Section I: Benefits of an Environmental and Social Management System
                              II
                         Understanding an
                         Environmental and Social
                         Management System




Version 2.1   November 2015   ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	   11
Understanding an Environmental and
Social Management System
OVERVIEW


A management system is a set of processes and practices to
consistently implement your company’s policies to meet your business
objectives. The goal is to make sure that you have the appropriate
policies and procedures in place and that people consistently follow
them. The management system helps to assess and control your risks
and is the key to lasting improvement. A key feature is the idea of
continual improvement – an ongoing process of reviewing, correcting
and improving your system. The most common method is the Plan-
Do-Check-Act cycle (PDCA), described below.




Identifying and                                                                Developing and
analyzing the risks                                                            implementing a
and objectives                                                                 potential solution
                                 PLAN
                                                              DO




What is important for                                                          What actions will you
you as an organization                                                         take? Who, what,
and what are you going                                                         where, when and how?
to do about it?

                                                                               Measuring how effec-
                                    ACT




Implementing the                                                               tive the solution was,
improved solution
What will you change
                                                        CHECK                  and analyzing whether
                                                                               it could be improved
if results are not what
you expected?                                                                  Did you see the change
                                                                               you expected after imple-
                                                                               menting the actions?



12   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                                In the workplace, an effective management
                                system is comprised of trained, committed
                                people routinely following procedures.



ELEMENTS OF AN ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (ESMS)
A solid, functioning environmental and social management system (ESMS) is made up of interrelated parts.
Take a look at the nine elements of an effective ESMS. Each of these elements is important, because they
help you to assess, control and continually improve your environmental and social performance, as part of
the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle. The following section presents step-by-step instructions on how to develop
and implement a system using these elements.




Version 2.1   November 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                           13
MEASURING
AND IMPROVING

You can’t improve              Many companies already have management systems for quality. If your com-
                               pany already has one, you may already have certain elements of the ESMS in
what you don’t                 place, and you can build on your existing systems. In this Handbook’s compan-
                               ion publication, ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, we provide
measure.                       a self-assessment rating for each of the ESMS elements. The self-assessment will
                               allow you to measure your current level of system development and implementa-
                               tion. You will answer a series of questions and get your score for each element
                               in the ESMS on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is highest). The score measures the maturity
                               of your system. Once you understand the maturity of your system, it is easier to
                               target specific steps you can take to improve it.




                                        THE SYSTEM MATURITY LEVELS (5 = HIGHEST)
                                Level 5 Mature system implemented internally and with key supply
                                        chain partners – continual improvement embedded in opera-
                                        tions
                                Level 4 Systems well developed and implemented internally –
                                        routine improvement projects
                                Level 3 Systems approach adopted, but development and implemen-
                                        tation is inconsistent – improvement sporadic
                                Level 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation –
                                        primarily reactive
                                Level 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
                                Level 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes




     14   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                         REMEMBER
                         A carefully developed, detailed ESMS is only
                         valuable if it is well-implemented.

                         SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT AND SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION
                          One of the most important things to understand about a management system
                          is the difference between system development and system implementation. A
                          management system is comprised of trained, committed people routinely fol-
                          lowing procedures. If you break this statement down, you see that it talks about
                         “procedures.” Procedures are the step-by-step way that people follow your poli-
                          cies. Procedures are the heart of effective system development.

                          Now let’s look at the other part of the statement – “trained, committed people
                          routinely following procedures.” This is the implementation. There is a lot that
                          goes into making it happen. Of course, some training is important to make sure
                          that people are aware of the procedures and understand what they are supposed
                          to do on a routine basis. But you also need to find a way to get their commit-
                          ment.

                         One common observation is that large companies tend to be better at system
                         development. But they often have difficulty getting people in different loca-
                         tions or departments to consistently implement the procedures, despite having
                         well-documented systems. Small companies tend to be better at system imple-
                         mentation – if they have effective leadership. However, they are often weak at
                         developing the documentation needed to ensure continuity when people in the
                         organization change.

                         The approach of this Handbook and its companion publications, the ESMS
                         Toolkit and ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide, balances system
                         development and system implementation in each of the ESMS elements.



                              DEFINITIONS
                              System                 The documented policies and procedures.
                              Development
                              System                 Trained, committed people routinely follow-
                              Implementation         ing the procedures.




An ESMS does not need to be complicated, but it does need to be
documented and then put into practice. Some people mistakenly
think a management system is just documents. But that is only a part
of it. Management systems are about implementation and continual
improvement.

Version 2.1   November 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                            15
USING THE HANDBOOK AND COMPANION PUBLICATIONS
TO DEVELOP AND IMPLEMENT YOUR ESMS
The Handbook and companion publications are designed to help you measure
and improve the maturity rating of your ESMS. The illustration below shows
how you can use these three publications in a cycle of continual improvement.




                                                                       •	   Understand the benefits of an ESMS
                                                ESMS                   •	   Learn the nine fundamental
                                              HANDBOOK                      elements of an ESMS




                                           REDO this graphic
                                                                        ESMS SELF-
                            ESMS
                                                                      ASSESSMENT &
                           TOOLKIT
                                                                      IMPROVEMENT
                                                                          GUIDE


                •	   Use tools to implement                      •	   Measure the maturity of your ESMS
                     improvement plan
                                                                 •	   Prioritize elements and develop an
                                                                      overall ESMS improvement plan




16   Section II: Understanding an Environmental and Social Management System
                              III
                        Practical Guidelines for
                        Developing and Implementing
                        Your Environmental and Social
                        Management System

                        This section provides step-by-step instructions on
                        how to develop and implement an ESMS.

                        For each element of the ESMS, we offer a quick
                        way to measure where you are now.


                                When you find a toolkit icon, it means
                                there is a tool in the companion publication
                                Toolkit to make it easier to get started.




Version 2.1   November 2015    ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	        17
                                ELEMENT 1


                                Policy


5
    E&S policies and proce-
    dures clearly commu-
                                The cornerstone of your ESMS is your set of
    nicated internally and
    externally. Senior man-     policies. Your policies summarize the commitment
    agement commitment to
    continual improvement.      that your company has made to managing
                                environmental and social risks and impacts. They


4
    Full set of E&S policies,
    procedures and records,     establish the expectations for conduct in all related
    centrally maintained and
    routinely reviewed. Wide
    awareness in company.
                                aspects of your business.

                                PURPOSE OF AN EFFECTIVE POLICY



3
    Policies and procedures   Simply put, the policies are the rules. They tell everyone what is allowed and
    in place meeting selected what is not allowed when it comes to social and environmental issues such as
    E&S standards. Sporadic
                              labor and working conditions, resource efficiency and pollution prevention,
    communication, imple-
    mentation and review.     and community health, safety and security.

                                A good practice for writing the policies and making them understood is a Poli-
                                cy Statement. The Policy Statement communicates your company’s policies to
                                your management, staff, board, suppliers, contractors, customers and all other



2
    Policies in place meeting   stakeholders. It is important for everyone to have a common understanding
    selected E&S standards.
                                of the core values of the company, how you expect people to behave and how
    Sporadic, conflicting or
    confusing procedures.       external stakeholders can expect you to operate.


                                MODIFYING YOUR EXISTING POLICY STATEMENT OR
                                CREATING A NEW ONE



1
                                The Policy Statement should be clear and simple – it does not need to be long
    Limited E&S policies
    in place.                   and technical like a legal document. Many companies already have a corporate
                                code of conduct that serves as a Policy Statement and includes issues such as
                                ethics. You can expand your existing code to align with internationally recog-
                                nized environmental and social standards for issues relevant to your business,
                                such as the IFC Performance Standards for Environmental and Social Sustain-
                                ability.




0
    No E&S standards            It is important to think through the creation of the Policy Statement and tailor
    adopted. No related         it to your company operations. In developing your Policy Statement, be aware
    policies and procedures.    of the specific risks you face in your industry.



                                           Use the Toolkit item Checklist for Developing a Company
                                           Policy Statement to get ideas of what you could include in
                                           your policy.




    18   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                    1. Policy




GAINING SENIOR MANAGEMENT AND COMPANY
COMMITMENT
Modifying or adopting your Policy Statement will require senior manage-
                                                                                    For any change
ment support. In some companies, it may require approval from the Board of
Directors. A high level of senior management support is critical for integrating
                                                                                    initiative, think
environmental and social commitment throughout all levels of your company.
                                                                                    of three critical
Committing to environmental and social policies probably requires some
change in the behavior of your company, workers, contractors and suppliers.         stages:
This can be challenging. There are different strategies and different techniques
for changing organizational behavior, but experts agree that to create lasting      Awareness;
change, senior management must be committed to the effort.

The first step is building awareness. There are many issues that occupy your
                                                                                    Commitment; and
employees’ attention day-to-day. As just a written document, your Policy
Statement may not get their attention or seem relevant to their daily activities.   Implementation.
Senior management needs to make this Policy Statement come alive.

To do so, they need to communicate the importance of environmental and
social issues, by making them an ongoing part of high-level Board and man-          Your senior
agement discussions, public speeches, and messages to employees.

Once people are aware of the Policy Statement, the next step is building com-
                                                                                    management
mitment – also known as “buy-in.” You will probably meet resistance: “Why
do we need to do this? It is too much work. I’ve already got enough to do.          can help you to
How does this help our bottom-line?” Senior management needs to effectively
shape and communicate the message internally and externally. They need to           accelerate all
send a clear message that this is a long-term commitment by the company.
The key message is that this will contribute to the company’s success and that      three stages.
each person will benefit - but that they will also be held accountable.

Once you have convinced people that they need to do something, senior
management needs to drive implementation. They do not need to lead the
effort on a day-to-day operational level, but they do need to adopt the policy
and oversee the implementation plan. Resources will be necessary in order to
communicate the policy internally and externally, integrate new procedures
and train all relevant staff and suppliers.

Crafting the initial messages can be a good time to talk through the above
stages with your senior management. Consider accompanying the Policy
Statements with a message from the CEO.




              Use the Toolkit item CEO Letter Announcing the ESMS -
              Internal to get started.




Version 2.1     November 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                   19
                                    ELEMENT 2


                                   Identification of Risks
                                   and Impacts

5
    Mature system, routinely
    reviewed and updated
                                   The primary objective of a risk assessment is to
    as part of a continual
    improvement plan. Internal     identify the potential negative environmental and
    and external inputs. Proce-
    dures extended to contrac-     social risks so that you can develop the appropriate
    tors, subcontractors, third
    parties and supply chain
    as relevant.                   strategies to address the risks and their potential


4
    Systematic, documented
    identification and prior-
                                   impacts.
    itization of E&S risks
    and impacts. Routinely
    reviewed and updated
    across existing, new and
                                   In the following pages, we present the key issues
    changing activities. Wide
    awareness and engage-          that come up across different industries.
    ment in company.




3
    Awareness and engage-
    ment of staff in identifica-    GENERAL ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL RISKS
    tion and prioritization of
    E&S risks and impacts.
                                    AND IMPACTS
    External experts involved
    as required.                     1.	Environmental
                                      RISKS                                      POTENTIAL IMPACTS
                                      Release of air pollutants (air emis-       Pollution of air, land, and




2
                                      sions)                                      surface water
    Procedures in place for
    identification of E&S risks       Release of liquid effluents or con-        Surface water pollution
    and impacts across all key        taminated wastewater into local
    activities.                       water bodies or improper wastewa-
                                      ter treatment
                                      Generation of large amounts of             Pollution of land, and ground
                                      solid waste and improper waste              and surface water
                                      management
                                      Improper management of hazard-             Contamination of adjacent land



1
    Basic identification and          ous substances                              and water
    assessment of E&S risks
    and impacts, but limited
                                      Excessive energy use                       Depletion of local energy
    to a few activities.                                                          sources and release of combus-
                                                                                  tion residuals leading to air
                                                                                  pollution
                                      Excessive water use                        Depletion of water resources
                                      High or excessive noise levels             Negative effects on human
                                                                                  health and disruption of local



0
    No identification or                                                          wildlife
    assessment of E&S                 Improper or excessive land use             Soil degradation and biodiver-
    risks and impacts.                                                            sity loss




      20    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                    2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




    2.	Occupational Health and Safety
     RISKS                                             POTENTIAL IMPACTS
     Physical hazards
     Slips, trips, and falls                           Worker injury (sprains, strains, fractures)
     Falls when working at heights                     Worker injury or loss of life (fractures, life-
                                                        threatening trauma)
     Collision with moving equipment (vehicles,        Worker injury or loss of life (life-threatening
     forklifts, cranes)                                 trauma)
     Caught in by improperly enclosed, unguarded  Worker injury or loss of life (cuts, traumatic
     or moving machinery                                amputation)
     Exposure to high or excessive noise levels        Loss of hearing
     Exposure to extreme temperatures                  Hypothermia, heat stress, dehydration
     Contact with exposed or faulty electrical wires  Worker injury or loss of life (electrocution)
     Explosions or fire due to ignition of dust or     Worker injury or loss of life (asphyxiation,
     flammable materials                                burnings)
     Exposure to ionizing radiation (x-rays)           Worker injury or loss of life (skin lesions, radia-
                                                        tion sickness, cancer)
     Exposure to non-ionizing radiation (ultra         Worker   injury or loss of life (burns, blindness,
     violet, visible light)                             skin cancer)
     Chemical hazards
     Inhalation, skin contact, or ingestion of haz-    Worker injury or loss of life (irritation, damage
     ardous chemicals (e.g. pesticides, solvents)       to internal organs, intoxication)
     Inhalation of dust                                Worker illness (decreased lung capacity)
     Exposure to hazardous atmosphere in con-          Worker loss of life (asphyxiation)
     fined spaces
     Biological hazards
     Exposure to blood or bodily fluids from per-      Worker illness or loss of life
     sons or animals carrying pathogens
     Exposure to airborne or vector-borne diseases    
     (bacteria, viruses or mold/fungi)
     Exposure to poisonous plants, animals or         
     insects
     Lack of appropriate welfare facilities (e.g. po-  Worker ill-health
     table water, toilets, washing facilities)
     Ergonomic hazards
     Repetitive motions                                 Worker injury (strains and sprains to muscles
     Improper techniques for lifting heavy items        and connective tissues causing pain, inflamma-
                                                      
     Improperly designed or aligned work stations       tion, numbness or loss of muscle function)
     Standing for long periods of time




Version 2.1   November 2015           ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                            21
2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




                 3.	Labor
                  RISKS                                                 POTENTIAL IMPACTS
                   Lack of contracts, use of contracts not understood  Forced labor
                   by workers, or use of contracts with terms that are
                   different from actual working conditions
                   Exploitation of migrant or temporary workers         Forced labor
                   by labor contractors, including unlawful wage
                   deductions (e.g. excessive recruitment fees,
                   transportation/housing costs)
                   Low or insufficient wages                            Excessive overtime and perpetuation of poverty
                                                                         cycle for workers (which can also lead to child
                                                                         labor)
                   Excessive overtime                                   Worker fatigue leading to higher injury rates
                                                                         and illnesses
                   Exploitation of young workers or student             Child  labor
                   workers
                   Lack of freedom of association or grievance          Mistreatment of workers and workers with no
                   mechanisms                                            ability to voice concerns or submit complaints
                   Discriminatory hiring and promotion practices  Negative work environment and unequal access
                                                                         to opportunities and benefits
                   Verbal and physical (sexual) harassment              Worker dissatisfaction and trauma
                   Unsafe and unhygienic living quarters for            Workers ill-health
                   workers


                  4.	Community Health, Safety and Security
                  RISKS                                                    POTENTIAL IMPACTS
                     Release of pollutants and harmful dust into           Negative impacts on the community’s health
                     ambient air
                     Surface or drinking water contamination                   Negative impacts on the community’s health
                     Strain on local water supply                              Conflicts among competing water users
                     Exposure to hazardous substances                          Negative impacts on the community’s health
                     Spread of diseases due to the influx of workers           Negative impacts on the community’s health
                     Increase of disease vectors (e.g. mosquitoes, flies,      Negative impacts on the community’s health
                     rodents) from failure to manage liquid and solid
                     wastes
                     Release of unpleasant odors                               Negative impacts on the community’s health
                     Excessive noise                                           Negative impacts on the community’s health
                     Improperly controlled or trained security guards         Violence against local community members
                     Excessive or unregulated vehicle traffic near             Injury/death of community members due to
                     the facility and through communities at                    vehicular accidents
                     inappropriate times (e.g. children going to
                     school)
                     Poorly designed and constructed buildings and             Injury/death of community members and
                     infrastructure                                             damage to neighboring properties




                22     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                       2. Identification of Risks and Impacts




The following are key considerations for a robust
risk assessment system:

 •	   Cover environmental, OHS, labor and community risks.

 •	   Conduct at regular intervals – at least once a year.

 •	   Conduct any time there are significant changes to opera-
      tions.

 •	   Conduct any time there are external changes such as new
      laws or regulations.

 •	   Include input from all levels of workers and managers.

 •	   Include input from affected communities and other exter-
      nal stakeholders.

 •	   Use external consultants and experts for complex projects.

 •	   Assess and prioritize risks according to both their probabil-
      ity and the severity of negative impacts.

 •	   Link your monitoring plans to your prioritized risks.

 •	   Consider risks in your supply chain in addition to those in
      your company.

 •	   Scale as appropriate to the size and complexity of your
      business.




Version 2.1   November 2015     ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                     23
There are different                            Now that you have an understanding of the typical risks
ways to conduct                                across different industries, you can first use the Risk
a risk assessment.                             Identification Worksheet to identify your potential risks
                                               and negative impacts based on your operations and operating
One common                                     environment.
method is to
                                               Then you can use the Process Mapping or the Physical
map your facility                              Mapping tools to identify in more detail where problems are
and production                                 likely to arise within your production process.
processes –                                    Often it is not possible or practical for you to deal with every
this can highlight                             single environmental and social impact that your company
OHS and environ-                               could possibly have. You can use the Risk Assessment Form
                                               to prioritize which risks should be addressed first.
mental risks. A
common method
for labor risks is to
use a checklist of
risk factors , such
as employee demo-
graphics, regional
labor laws, con-
tracting arrange-
ments, etc.




                                   For more information on environmental, OHS and community risks
                                   and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at
                                   www.ifc.org/sustainability.


       24   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
  ELEMENT 3


Management
Programs

                                                                                                 5
Management Programs are centered on Action                         Verified progress against
                                                                   objectives and targets;
                                                                   significant improvements
Plans and improved procedures to avoid, minimize                   in E&S performance. Dem-
                                                                   onstrated commitment to
or compensate for the risks and impacts that were                  continual improvement
                                                                   using annual improvement
                                                                   plans.
identified.


                                                                                                 4
                                                                   Routine, consistent imple-
                                                                   mentation of actions/
For example, if you have a policy commitment                       activities to proactively
                                                                   manage E&S risks and
                                                                   impacts. Measurable com-
to avoid discrimination in the workplace and you                   pany-wide objectives and
                                                                   targets. Periodic review
have identified this as a risk factor based on the                 and update.




                                                                                                 3
lack of a system for employees to express their                    Actions/activities in place
                                                                   to manage E&S risks and
                                                                   impacts, following the
complaints, you may implement a complaint                          mitigation hierarchy –
                                                                   avoid, minimize, offset/
procedure as a way to minimize the risk of                         compensate. Proactive
                                                                   approach to managing
                                                                   issues.
discrimination. Or, if one of your policy objectives


                                                                                                 2
                                                                   Procedures and assigned
is the reduction of hazardous waste and you                        responsibilities to address
                                                                   and mitigate E&S risks
have identified this as a risk factor because of the               and impacts across all key
                                                                   activities. Primarily reac-
                                                                   tive.
high percentage of chemical waste produced in
your plant, you may take action by using fewer

                                                                                                 1
                                                                   A few informal programs
                                                                   or activities to mitigate
hazardous materials.                                               E&S impacts.




                                                                                                 0
                                                                   No process for mitigating
                                                                   E&S risks and impacts.




Version 2.1   November 2015   ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                     25
3. Management Programs




                                        IDENTIFYING PREVENTIVE AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
                                        It is good practice to emphasize preventive and proactive actions: (1) try to
                                        avoid causing social or environmental damage; (2) if not possible, then mini-
                                        mize the impact; (3) if not possible, then compensate or offset the damage.

                                    First, attempt to take actions to avoid or prevent the negative impacts. For
                                    example, suppose you are expanding operations and have identified potable
                                    water as a key risk. You might change your new facility location or design it
                                    differently, so that you avoid contamination of groundwater close to home-
                                    owners and communities. Or, suppose you have identified a certain produc-
                                               tion process that exposes workers to toxic chemicals and pollutes the
              Prioritizing Your Actions        local river system. You might change your production processes to
                                               avoid using these chemicals.
                        AVOID
                                               In many cases, complete avoidance is not possible – you may not
                                              be able to relocate or find alternative processes or materials. In these
                       MINIMIZE                cases, you should try to minimize the impact. For example, suppose
                                               that you are located in an area where women are traditionally given
                                              lower status and less access to education, and in the workplace they
               COMPENSATE/OFFSET               are often mistreated by male co-workers and supervisors. Given this
                                               cultural context, it is important to be clear in your recruitment,
                                               hiring and training procedures in order to make sure that women
                                    are hired on equitable terms and given equal access to training and promotion
                                    opportunities. You can also develop non-discrimination procedures to ensure
                                    that rules for recruitment, hiring and training are clear for everyone to follow.
                                    Additionally, you can conduct training to make sure that everyone is aware
                                    of and follows the procedures.

                                        In some cases, it may not be possible to completely avoid or minimize certain
                                        negative impacts. Then you should find ways to offset them with comparable
                                        positive impacts or provide compensation to those impacted. For example,
                                        suppose your operation uses a large amount of water. Despite taking action to
                                        minimize water consumption, there are still periods of the year when water be-
                                        comes scarce in the local community. You might collaborate with community
                                        leaders to dig new wells or provide alternate sources of drinking water.




            26   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                                3. Management Programs




                       WRITING AN EFFECTIVE ACTION PLAN
                       Whatever actions you decide to take, think of them as a continual improvement
                       process - you will need to set targets, set deadlines, measure the results, and ad-
                       just the plans if necessary. You need to assign responsibilities and start to involve
                       the right internal people and departments.

                       As you develop your Action Plans, these are the key questions that you need to
                       think about:

                         •	   What – environmental and social risks you want to address
                         •	   How – related actions and procedures to be implemented to address the risk
                         •	   Why – reasons (objectives) for the actions and procedures, and the expected
                              results (targets)
                         •	   When – timeframe and deadlines
                         •	   Who – responsible people



                         Use the Toolkit item Action Plan Chart to get started.

                       The above examples address risks from different industries. These are just some
                       of the actions that might be taken. You can adapt them to your situation and
                       add as needed – be flexible to meet your company’s specific situation. As you
                       tailor your action plans, consult with your workers and managers, experts and
                       external stakeholders, including your suppliers and community. They can offer
                       insight into important issues and effective actions. They can also help you obtain
                       commitment for plans you are trying to implement, and provide candid feed-
                       back about how well the plans are working. This will be critical to the continual
                       improvement of your systems.



                       For recommendations on how to address environmental, OHS and
                       community risks and impacts in your industry, consult the WBG EHS
                       Guidelines at www.ifc.org/sustainability.




Version 2.1   November 2015           ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                           27
3. Management Programs




                                        WRITING AN EFFECTIVE PROCEDURE
                                        Procedures serve as step-by-step instructions for workers, supervisors and
                                        managers. They allow for everyone to have a common understanding of how
                                        to behave. They enable the rules to be followed even when there is staff turn-
                                        over. Clear, detailed procedures help to embed your social and environmental
                                        policies into your daily operations.

                                        It is a good practice to document your procedures. The key is to make your
                                        procedures as clear and as brief as possible. You can use text, checklists,
                                        flowcharts, or simple illustrations. The format for your procedure can vary
                                        depending on the audience. A written procedure may be more appropriate for
                                        managers and supervisors, while illustrations may be useful when dealing with
                                        less literate or immigrant workers.




                                          Use the Toolkit item Outline of Procedure to get started.

                                        Simply documenting a procedure is not enough. Effective implementation is
                                        the ultimate goal. Most importantly, employees need to be aware that a new
                                        procedure exists and understand why it is important to follow. They need the
                                        skills and knowledge to be able to implement it. This is achieved through
                                        routine communication and effective training. You will learn more about this
                                        in the next chapter, Organizational Capacity and Competency.

                                        Finally, you must ensure that your employees have access to the current version
                                        of each procedure. Out-of-date documentation should be removed or clearly
                                        marked as outdated to ensure that no one unintentionally follows the old
                                        procedure.




            SHORT CASES

            Here we present several short cases that illustrate some of the
            actions that companies can take to avoid, minimize or offset/
            compensate common environmental and social key risks in various
            industries. Action Plans can be scaled to the size of your company
            and the nature of the risks you face.


            28   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                 3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: ETHIOPIA

Sheep and Goat Company
RISK: Use of large amounts of freshwater
Sheep and Goat Company (SGC) is a medium size commercial livestock company in Southern Ethiopia.
The main feed resources of the area are natural pastures (herbaceous vegetation composed mainly
of grasses and shrubs, tree leaves and pods), which show marked seasonal variation in availability and
quality based on variability of rainfall distribution. Productivity of animals in terms of milk produc-
tion, growth rate and reproductive performance is generally low. The company exports both live
animals and meat to various African countries, as well as the Middle East, where live animals are
demanded due to religious and cultural practices. In general the area is characterized by low avail-
ability of surface water. The sources of water in the region include wells (elas), ponds and bore holes.
The local villagers complain that due to high water consumption by SGC there is always a shortage of
water supply for the local communities. The shortage is more serious during the dry season and as a
result people are forced to travel long distance (up to 5 hours walk) in search of water.

  I M PAC T

  •	 Shortages of water for local communities

  AVO I D
  •	 Relocate operations to an area with higher availability of surface waters
  M I N I M IZE
  •	 Conduct a water audit: install water meters, collect data for 5-10 days, and compare with
    animal drinking needs to detect problems
  •	 Assess the diet; feeding a diet containing excessive protein or mineral levels results in increased
    thirst and water consumption
  •	 Minimize water losses from drinking devices:
      •	 adjust ball valves on troughs to prevent overflow;
      •	 use smaller troughs that require less water for cleaning;
      •	 replace troughs with on-demand drinkers;
      •	 fit drinkers with catch basins to retain overflow;
      •	 perform regular maintenance of water devices to prevent and repair leaks
  •	 Minimize water use for washing processes, by using:
      •	 broom and scrape before washing;
      •	 brush and bucket for some cleaning;
      •	 pressure washers instead of volume washers;
      •	 water-saving nozzles and/or trigger taps on hoses;
      •	 collected water trough overflow as cleaning water
  •	 Install low volume footbaths or mats (to replace footbaths) to reduce water consumption for
    disease control
  •	 Dry clean yards to maximum feasible extent; collect manure for composting
  •	 Store water used for cleaning the animals in treatment storage ponds and recycle for yard
    washing or irrigation
  O FF S E T
  •	 Engage with local communities and NGOs to rehabilitate elas and promote the adoption of
    rainwater harvesting technologies (e.g. roof water, ponds)
  •	 Distribute purchased potable water to affected communities during the dry season; provide
    containers for storage of delivered water




Version 2.1    November 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                       29
3. Management Programs
                                          CASE STUDY: BRAZIL

           Dairy Company
           RISK: Discharge of untreated or ineffectively
           treated wastewater
           A medium-sized multinational company operating from northern Brazil produces multiple food
           products, including skimmed milk powder, bottled fruit drinks and different chocolate brands.
           The company generates daily about 600 cubic meters (m3) of wastewater from its various pro-
           cesses, which include bottle-washing and other industrial processes. The water is treated and
           discharged into a nearby river. In recent months, there have been increased complaints from the
           downstream communities that the river water has turned black or very dark; there are fish kills;
           there is a foul smell coming from the river water; and the quality and quantity of fish is affected.
           The river water is not suitable for irrigation because it is plasticizing the soils and impacting irriga-
           tion activities. The company officials deny that these impacts are due to its operations, but have
           admitted some malfunctions have occurred in its wastewater treatment plant.


             I M PAC T

                 •	 Contamination of surface water/downstream river

             AVO I D

                 •	 Replace use of toxic or hazardous substances that may contaminate wastewater
                 •	 Adequately treat industrial wastewater and find alternative applications for the treated
                  wastewater instead of discharging to surface waters, such as raw water resource for other
                  local industry
                 •	 Reduce the overall load on the effluent treatment plant (ETP):
                   •	 Investigate and reduce all sources of wastewater and minimize non-consumptive water
                      usage;
                   •	 Replace water-intensive or wet processes with zero-water or water-efficient technolo-
                      gies;
                   •	 Collect nontoxic and uncontaminated concentrated liquid wastes for sale to pig farmers
                      or cattle farmers (if possible)




            30     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                             3. Management Programs




  M I N I M IZE

   •	 Optimize effective wastewater treatment by evaluating and improving the operations of
     the ETP:
     •	 Analyze the ETP “inlet” and “outlet” characteristics and other operating parameters;
     •	 Evaluate treatment works for hydraulic and/or organic slug flows such as bottle and
        equipment washing; adjust to an integrated flow rate that matches the design flow;
     •	 Minimize fluctuating loads on the ETP by having a collection and “equalization” sump
        before treatment or temporarary holding facility;
     •	 Schedule and stagger bottle washing and other water-intensive operations;
     •	 Install interlocking system to ensure ETP shutdown during any malfunction;
        convey untreated wastewater to a temporary holding facility to prevent discharge
        of untreated effluent;
     •	 Stop sludge bulking and overflow through adequate desludging and other manage-
        ment techniques;
     •	 Provide adequate training to the ETP operator and ensure the ETP is operated and
        maintained as per the recommended operating criteria (such as design flow)
   •	 Analyze treated wastewater for its compliance before its final discharge
   •	 Consider having separate treatment facilities for toxic/chemically contaminated wastewa-
     ter streams (e.g. wastewater from bottle washers contaminated with detergents or other
     chemicals)

  O FF S E T

   •	 Engage in active consultation/engagement with local communities, regulators and NGOs
     to address water concerns in the region




Version 2.1    November 2015       ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                    31
3. Management Programs
                                         CASE STUDY: ARGENTINA


            City Builders
            RISK: Construction waste disposal
            City Builders is a small company owned by a local business carrying out many demolition and con-
            struction jobs in Mendoza city. Currently the company is working on a contract in the heart of the
            city that involves demolition of an old office complex to build a multi-story housing complex. The
            local residents have complained frequently that the company has littered the entire area with con-
            struction debris potentially contaminated with asbestos and other hazardous materials. Demolition
            was started without any effort to rid the building of rodents and other vermin first. Unmanaged
            piles of construction rubble have accumulated resulting in harborage for rodents, extensive dust,
            presence of scavengers living in the vicinity, an unpleasant sight affecting property values and land
            contamination in the surrounding area from windborne dust. Putrescible wastes from the construc-
            tion crew are adding significantly to rodent problems in the area.

             I M PAC T
              •	 Improper disposal of construction wastes causing land contamination and impacting local
                 community

             AVO I D
              •	 Establish and implement a construction waste management plan for all construction sites
              •	 Establish and implement procedures for reuse, recycle, and safe disposal of construction
                 waste to a landfill site licensed to take such wastes
              •	 Train and periodically retrain all workers on proper demolition behavior and handling and
                 disposal of construction and putrescible wastes
              •	 Locate and remove hazardous facilities such as underground storage tanks prior to com-
                 mencement of demolition
              •	 Implement rodent elimination program prior to commencement of demolition
              •	 Conduct asbestos survey and if necessary prepare and implement an asbestos remediation
                 plan prior to demolition
              •	 Conduct air monitoring for asbestos removal activity and other demolition exercises
              •	 Implement needed measures to prevent fugitive dust migration offsite
              •	 Deploy containers for collection and safe disposal of solid waste from the site
              •	 Deploy pest (rodent proof) containers for collection and safe disposal of putrescible waste
                 from the site
              •	 Remove building demolition rubble and recyclable materials at least daily
              •	 Employ water mist to reduce production and offsite transport of dust and particulate from
                 building demolition; have this effluent drain to suitable collection points or to municipal
                 sewers after being pre-treated to acceptable levels
              •	 Transport dust generating wastes in covered vehicles; periodically monitor effectiveness of
                 dust covers during transport

             MINIMIZE
              •	 Develop and deploy a grievance mechanism for local area residents to facilitate understand-
                 ing of impacts and issues in a timely manner

             OFFSET
              •	 Compensate local residents negatively affected by uncontrolled activities
              •	 Provide physical and other health-related examinations for individuals claiming physical harm
                 from demolition activity




            32    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: GHANA


Cocoa export company
RISK: Improper use of equipment and PPE
The African Future Cocoa Company was established in 1988 in Ghana to produce cocoa for the
local market and to create the basis for a future export industry. The company’s most recent
audit by a social/environmental organization reported that the use of machetes, axes, harvesting
hooks, pruners, ladders and chain saws are posing hazards to farm workers. Most farming tools
are designed for men and do not meet the physical needs of women and young people. The most
common injuries sustained by farm workers include: cuts when weeding, harvesting and breaking
pods; broken bones and other bodily injuries when falling from ladders. In addition, common
complaints from cocoa farmers include general body and back physical distress and discomfort
caused by frequent contorting, twisting, bending and carrying heavy loads. When injured, farm
workers often have limited access to first aid or lack money for medical care.



  I M PAC T

  •	 Bodily injuries including abrasions, strains, wounds and bone fractures sustained by farm
    workers

  AVO I D

  •	 Participate in industry sector initiatives to design and install equipment that eliminates
    hazards of cocoa farming activities, such as cocoa pod splitting machines

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Regularly purchase and distribute appropriately sized farming tools to male, female and
    young workers
  •	 Define ergonomically correct use of cocoa farming tools; train farmers in these methods

  •	 Define, issue and train workers in correct use and maintenance of personal protective
    equipment (PPE)
  •	 Mandate adequate rest periods

  •	 Restrict working hours to the legal limit to avoid workers’ fatigue and likelihood of
    accidents
  •	 Conduct frequent tool box training (orientation to specific assignment and equipment)
    before work shifts to refresh workers’ knowledge of hazards and accident avoidance
  •	 Train farm workers in the identification of hazards and procedures to control them, such as
    handling of sharp tools, lifting of heavy loads, use of chainsaws only by trained operators,
    zero tolerance of alcohol and prescription and non-prescription narcotics
  •	 Put in place a team of experienced farm workers responsible to do regular OHS training
    to all workers and monitor accident rate

  O FF S E T

  •	 Retroactively identify injured workers and provide injury-related health care and
    rehabilitation
  •	 Work with local authorities to expand coverage of the local health center to adequately
    treat workers who experience occupational injuries




Version 2.1    November 2015       ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                       33
3. Management Programs
                                           CASE STUDY: BULGARIA

            Metal Cutting Company
            RISK: Worker exposure to metalworking fluids
            Best Metalworks is a medium-sized metal cutting company in Bulgaria that produces a variety
            of different metal parts for medical devices. The company has seen increasing rates of employee
            turnover and employee absenteeism due to health issues. Many workers are complaining of skin
            irritation, difficulty breathing and other respiratory conditions, such as asthma and bronchitis. A
            group of workers recently quit after only six months on the job because of health problems and
            a worker who has been with the company for decades was recently diagnosed with cancer. These
            issues have been traced to exposure to metalworking fluids (MWFs). MWFs are used to decrease
            heat and friction in metal production operations and remove small metal particles from grinding
            and other processes. Workers can be exposed to MWFs by inhaling the vapor or mist or through
            skin contact (e.g. from splashed liquid). The company asserts that all workers are instructed to
            wear personal protective equipment (PPE) to limit their exposure. However, workers have to pay
            for their own PPE. As a result, many workers do not actually use the PPE and are vulnerable to
            MWF exposure. Many workers also do not remember any training on proper handling of MWFs.

                 I M PAC T
             •	 Negative health impacts on workers

             AVO I D
             •	 Obtain Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDS) from suppliers to learn about MWFs’ composi-
                 tion and associated hazards; select and use MWFs with the lowest amount of toxic materials
             M I N I M IZE
             •	 Install ventilation systems and maintain them regularly to ensure they are working properly
             •	 Develop and implement procedures for the proper handling of MWFs and maintenance of
                 equipment to reduce MWFs contamination
             •	 Develop and implement a training program for all metalworking personnel about the
                 hazards of MWFs and techniques to avoid and limit exposure, including:
                   •	 regular housekeeping and proper cleaning techniques;
                   •	 use of personal protective equipment (PPE);
                   •	 good hygiene practices (e.g. regular hand-washing and changing contaminated clothes)
             •	 Based on a risk assessment, provide personnel with appropriate protective equipment free
                 of charge (e.g. “resistant to oil” or oil-proof respiratory protection, goggles, face shields,
                 gloves, chemical-resistant clothing)
             •	 Place washing stations close to the work area to encourage good washing practices
             •	 Install emergency showers near working areas
             •	 Regularly assess workers’ exposure to MWFs:
                   •	 Identify high exposure tasks and monitor them through the appropriate air sampling
                      strategy (e.g. personal air sampling);
                   •	 Review monitoring results to determine if engineering and work practice controls are
                      effective
             •	 Periodically conduct medical screenings of workers exposed to MWFs to facilitate early diag-
                 nosis and treatment of associated diseases
             •	 Maintain records of all MWF-related accidents and worker’s medical screenings; conduct
                 regular review and root-cause analysis
             O FF S E T
             •	 Provide medical care and timely assistance to affected workers.
             •	 Compensate for work-related health impacts and loss of ability to work according to local
                 and national regulations.


            34     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                  3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: ECUADOR


Ecuador Poultry Farms
      
RISK: Excessive overtime due to short term work demand
Ecuador Poultry Farms is a well-known poultry company operating in the outskirts of Guayaquil City,
Ecuador. The company is one of the oldest in the country, engaged in raising chickens both for eggs
and for meat. The company has over 300 employees and is undergoing a rapid expansion program
with the aim to double production in the next 2-3 years. The expansion plan includes purchasing and
installing additional hatchery equipment and a complete up-grading of the ventilation system. Since
this expansion program was not planned in advance, management is facing a shortage of skilled
workers required for equipment commissioning and other specialized work related to the ventila-
tion system. The engineering and maintenance employees who are the skilled workers have com-
plained twice in the last two weeks that they are being forced to work excessive hours. One accident
last week was attributed to fatigue due to long working hours. Upon further investigation, some
workers have claimed that they have been working for two shifts every day for the last 10 days.

  I M PAC T

  •	 Workplace injuries/illnesses caused by workers’ fatigue due to excessive overtime

  AVO I D

  •	 Establish Human Resources procedures addressing company policies on terms of employment
    and working conditions
  •	 Communicate revised HR procedures to managers, supervisors and workers in dedicated
    training sessions
  •	 Ensure that the revised HR procedures stipulate that workers may not be required to work
    more than a 48-hour work week or a 60-hour work week including overtime for more than
    two weeks and one day off in seven
  •	 Ensure that all future expansion programs are planned in advance and that suitable numbers
    of skilled manpower are available before commencing a new project
  •	 Maintain a list of pre-approved, qualified contractors to cater to short term or unexpected
    work demands
  •	 Increase the project timeframe or target completion date to prevent excessive overtime if
    sub-contracting is not feasible

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Increase awareness among senior management, supervisors and worker representatives on
    labor regulations regarding working hours and linkages between excessive overtime and
    increased risk of workplace illnesses/injuries
  •	 Monitor working hours and OHS records; take corrective actions where excessive overtime is
    recorded
  •	 Implement an employee grievance mechanism and complaint resolution procedures for
    addressing worker concerns on excessive working hours and other issues
  •	 Ensure overtime bonus is paid

  O FF S E T

  •	 Retroactively compensate workers for overtime work at the established overtime rate
  •	 Provide health checks and medical assistance to workers suffering from fatigue or work-
    related stress due to excessive working hours
  •	 Provide medical assistance for cases of workplace related injury/illnesses
  •	 Compensate injured workers for wages lost, loss of ability to work and loss of life due to
    workplace injuries/illnesses


Version 2.1    November 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                      35
3. Management Programs
                                           CASE STUDY: UNITED STATES

            Ready-made salads processing plant
            RISK: Use of third party migrant workers
            A vegetable processing plant in the United States has 100 permanent workers and 300 contract
            workers. The contract workers are placed at the factory by a recruiting agency. The factory man-
            agement prefers this arrangement since the plant is in an area where it is hard to find workers
            willing to take seasonal work. The agency employs migrant workers to fill the demand. It is
            responsible for recruiting and transporting the workers, and for training and paying them. The
            factory supervisors and permanent workers are from the local area and speak English. They are
            well aware of their rights under US labor law and feel that the factory is a good place to work.
            They feel that there is a challenge in working with many of the contract workers, who only speak
            Spanish and do not seem to have the same level of skills and awareness of their rights.


                 I M PAC T

                  •	 Discrimination against contract or migrant workers
                  •	 Forced labor/human trafficking

                 AVO I D

                  •	 Decrease company’s reliance on temporary workers
                  •	 Use only legally accredited recruitment agencies
                  •	 Develop adequately defined hiring and remuneration policies and terms of employment
                    for contract/migrant workers; communicate policies to workers, supervisors, managers and
                    recruitment agencies
                  •	 Ensure organizational labor policies are understood by the recruitment agencies; make
                    policies contractually binding under the service agreement with recruitment agencies
                  •	 Periodically monitor and audit recruitment agencies’ labor performance as per the organi-
                    zation’s own policies and procedures and local law

                 M I N I M IZE

                  •	 Make sure that contract/migrant workers are informed (in all applicable languages)
                    on their rights including wages, benefits and deductions
                  •	 Agree with recruitment agencies on reasonable, at-cost deductions for housing,
                    transport and other services provided to contract/migrant workers (workers should
                    not be responsible for paying recruitment fees)
                  •	 Make sure all contract/migrant workers receive contracts and periodic clear records of
                    pay calculations in their native language
                  •	 Implement a grievance mechanism accessible to both permanent and temporary workers
                  •	 Periodically talk to contract/temporary workers on complaints and opportunities

                 O FF S E T

                  •	 Make sure that workers are reimbursed for illegal deductions made by recruitment
                    agencies
                  •	 Retroactively pay workers whose compensation did not meet legal minimum wage (or
                    agreed contract value if higher than legal minimum)




            36     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                3. Management Programs
CASE STUDY: PHILIPPINES

Community Hospital
RISK: Contamination of indoor air

Country Hospital is one of the oldest hospitals in Antipolo City, Philippines. The 150 bed hospital is
owned by a local Trust and has been known for providing quality health care services to the local
community for more than a century. For the last several months, hospital employees and patients
have been complaining of poor air quality, stuffiness, and unpleasant odors, accompanied by symp-
toms of eye, nose, and throat irritation and nausea. Absenteeism among the staff is on the rise, which
often results in the disruption of essential services during outpatient department hours. Concerned
with the growing patient complaints and disruption in essential medical services, the Hospital
Administrator recently consulted the Maintenance Manager, who suggested that the problem may
be due to HVAC system inadequacies, such as a deficiency of air exchanges, poor air distribution, poor
thermal control, and inadequate maintenance procedures. The Maintenance Manager created a team
to further investigate the issue and implement suitable control measures. Upon careful investigation,
the team discovered several other issues including cross contamination from the underground parking
garage, infectious disease wards, food preparation area, sterilization units, and operating rooms.
These issues are contributing to the indoor air quality problems in the hospital.


  I M PAC T

  •	 Negative health impacts on personnel and patients due to poor indoor air quality

  AVO I D

  •	 Implement an inspection and preventive HVAC maintenance program to prevent re-occurrence
  •	 Develop and implement procedures related to the cleaning and servicing of the HVAC system:
    regularly drain, clean and replace HVAC components (e.g. drain pans, ducts, etc.) to minimize the
    potential for microbial growth or contamination
  •	 Review and modify the orientation of air intakes and exhausts to eliminate cross-contamination
    from local pollution sources, such as underground parking garage and infectious disease wards
  •	 Relocate intake points or consider adding specialized filtration, such as activated carbon
  •	 Ensure that the minimum outside air damper settings are enough to provide adequate amounts
    of outside air and that these are not being closed inappropriately for energy efficiency
  •	 Determine pressure relationships within the facility and implement engineering controls (air flows
    from positively pressurized to negatively pressurized spaces)

  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Train appropriate personnel to monitor air quality levels regularly and make the necessary adjust-
    ments in the HVAC system as required:
     •	 Monitor carbon dioxide levels regularly and determine the adequacy of the outside air supply;
     •	 Monitor carbon monoxide levels regularly as an indicator of the infiltration of combustion
        byproducts;
     •	 Monitor respirable suspended particles as an indicator of filtration effectiveness

  O FF S E T

  •	 Provide timely medical treatment to affected personnel and patients




Version 2.1    November 2015        ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                      37
3. Management Programs
                                          CASE STUDY: INDONESIA


           Textile Mill
           RISK: Lack of Fire Safety
           A mill in Indonesia produces wovens and non-wovens for industrial purposes. A couple of weeks
           ago a fire broke out in a similar factory nearby. During the fire 18 workers were seriously injured.
           This accident has brought fire safety to the top of the agenda for the management of the mill.
           They suddenly realize this could happen to them as well. The workers of the mill are also aware of
           the risks. They started to ask management questions about the fire safety in their factory. They
           realize they do not know what to do or where to go in case of a fire. Clients also expressed their
           concerns.

              I M PAC T

              •	 Life and health risks due to lack of fire safety programs

              AVO I D

              •	 Conduct a risk assessment and review your building’s design and operation to identify
                 how it can be upgraded towards compliance with contemporary local and internationally-
                 accepted fire safety codes, with particular attention to:
                  •	 Fire prevention (e.g. electrical installations, storage of flammable materials away from
                     ignition sources and hot surfaces, etc.);
                  •	 Means of egress (e.g. at least two - but not less than the number prescribed for build-
                     ing size and occupancy - clearly marked and unlocked emergency exits per floor, back
                     up battery powered emergency lights, appropriately sized stairs with handrails and
                     non-slip trading, etc.);
                  •	 Fire detection and alarm systems (e.g. smoke detectors, visual and audible alarms);
                  •	 Compartmentalization to limit the spread of smoke and fire;
                  •	 Fire suppression and control (e.g. type, number and location of fire extinguishers, fire
                     hoses and other equipment to extinguish fires)
              •	 Undertake weekly/daily inspections to confirm that emergency evacuation routes and
                 emergency exit doors are clearly marked, well lit (even in the event of a power failure at
                 night), unobstructed and unlocked
              •	 Annually conduct a fire and emergency risk assessment to evaluate root causes such as
                 electrical wiring, circuit breaker cabinets/fuse boxes, boilers, combustible dust, stored ma-
                 terial, etc.
              •	 Contract a certified and competent company for annual inspection, testing and mainte-
                 nance of fire detection, alarm and suppression systems
              •	 Establish, communicate and implement fire safety and emergency preparedness and re-
                 sponse policies and procedures through joint worker/manager safety/OSH committee




            38    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                               3. Management Programs




  M I N I M IZE

  •	 Assemble and regularly train fire fighting and emergency response teams; the number of
    fire fighters and emergency responders must be proportional to the total workforce and
    there should be at least one for each section of the factory
  •	 Provide identification of fire fighters and emergency responders (e.g. brightly coloured
    armband, color coded hard hats, badges)
  •	 Conduct emergency drills at least every month; drills must be conducted in all work shifts

  •	 Have staff practice emergency evacuation procedures regularly; ensure that new and
    temporary workers are trained on emergency evacuation procedures as part of their
    induction training
  •	 Maintain records of accidents and incidents; have appropriate parties (e.g. engineering,
    maintenance, insurance manager) and joint management-worker health and safety com-
    mittees regularly review records to confirm that appropriate actions to prevent reoccur-
    rence have been taken
  •	 Ask workers about hazardous conditions they notice and reward them for alerting
    management to them

  O FF S E T

  •	 Provide medical care for people who are injured in the workplace

  •	 Compensate for loss of life and loss of ability to work

  •	 Ensure that the workers continue to receive their salary until relocation/re-opening of a
    factory damaged by fire




Version 2.1    November 2015        ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                      39
                                     ELEMENT 4


                                    Organizational Capacity
                                    and Competency
    All levels of the company
    are trained and engaged –
                                    A well-implemented ESMS is ultimately about


5
    multiple units and workers
    as well as managers. E&S        trained, committed people. How do you make
    staff has implementation
    authority. Management           that happen?
    commitment is reflected
    in resources devoted to
    E&S management and
    training.
                                    ROLES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND AUTHORITIES TO
                                    IMPLEMENT THE ESMS
                                    First, you need senior management commitment. Senior management



4
    Multiple units have E&S
                                    commitment starts with adopting the ESMS policies, but it must go
    responsibilities, and senior
    management is involved.         beyond that. Senior management support is critical to implementing a
    E&S is managed as an            sustainable ESMS. It is the responsibility of senior management to lead
    inte- grated system. New        the effort. They don’t have to lead the effort on a day-to-day basis, but they
    staff receives some E&S         do need to send a clear message, to all employees at all levels, that this is a
    management guidance.            long-term commitment by your company.

                                    Beyond senior management commitment, you need a team that takes
                                    responsibility for the ESMS. This does not need to be a full-time job for




3
    All levels of the company       anyone, but senior management needs to ensure realignment of reporting
    are involved in aware-          duties, allocation of appropriate time and authority to carry out the work
    ness training. E&S roles        involved.
    and responsibilities are
    assigned and part of daily      A well-balanced ESMS Team is a prerequisite for meaningful engagement
    operations. E&S staff is        with your peers and colleagues. It should include knowledgeable profes-
    trained and competent.
                                    sionals from environment, health and safety, operations or production,
                                    contracts and purchasing, human resources, for example.
    E&S roles are defined and



2
    assigned. Each issues is        In fact, the success of a management system depends on departments that
    handled only by one func-       have traditionally been seen as beyond the reach of environmental and
    tional area. Some aware-
                                    social issues, such as human resources, production, procurement and main-
    ness training is provided
    at orientation and addi-        tenance. For example, human resources manages training needs related to
    tional training is provided     the labor aspects; production focuses on the more efficient use of resources
    for EHS staff.                  and the reduction of waste; procurement manages the qualifications and
                                    performance of suppliers and contractors; and maintenance ensures that the
    No assigned staff with          equipment runs efficiently and that spills, leaks and other emergency situa-



1
    E&S management respon-          tions are minimized.
    sibilities. Some limited
    awareness and E&S roles         The ESMS Team should not work in isolation when identifying risks and
    and responsibilities start-     defining actions to address them. To be truly effective, the ESMS Team
    ing to get defined.             needs to consult with people from all levels of the company, including su-
                                    pervisors and workers, as they are key frontline identifiers of problems.




0
    No internal awareness
    and no formally assigned
    responsibility for E&S.




    40    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                  4. Org. Capacity and Competency




                         As with the overall management system, the team should be scaled to the size
                         and complexity of your company. Your organization might not have multiple
                         departments with distinct roles; maybe a few people cover several functions.
                         The key is to involve people across the range of functions. If a team already
                         exists in your company (e.g. fire safety team, health and safety committee)
                         consider building your ESMS Team upon it.

                         Once the ESMS Team is selected, the team members need to select a team
                         leader. This is an important role, especially in the beginning. The team leader
                         needs to set the tone for the group and keep people motivated. All new initia-
                         tives in a company face hurdles, and developing and implementing an ESMS is
                         no exception. The team leader needs to help the team overcome the inevitable
                         hurdles, and should have direct access to senior management.




                              Take a look at the Toolkit item Roadmap and Time Estimate for
                              Developing and Implementing an ESMS in the Toolkit for a list
                              and sequencing of activities to develop and implement an ESMS.




Version 2.1   November 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                        41
                                                           EXAMPLE OF AN ESMS TEAM




                                                                                           Quality
                                                                   Human
When selecting a                                                  resources
                                                                                           control


team leader, look                                                                                Environmental
                                                                                                 health & safety
for someone who                                 Production


has the following                                                            Select a
                                                                           team leader
qualities:
  •	 communicator;                                                                          Procurement/
                                                           Worker
                                                                                              Sourcing
  •	 problem-solver;                                    Representatives


  •	 project manager;
  •	 pragmatic; and                 COMMUNICATION AND TRAINING
  •	 respectful to all.             Now that you have identified the actions to be taken and updated your proce-
                                    dures, you need trained, committed people who follow the ESMS procedures.
                                    This is the end goal of communication and training.

                                    There are three key steps that build on each other:

                                    1.	They need to be aware of the ESMS.
                                       •	 What is it?
                                       •	 What are its goals?
                                       •	 What do I need to do?

                                    2.	 They need to understand that the ESMS is necessary and will improve
                                        the company.
                                       •	 How does this help our company?
                                       •	 How does it help my department?
                                       •	 What will change?
                                       •	 What is in it for me?

                                    3.	They need to obtain the skills and knowledge to be effective in
                                       their roles.
                                       •	 What are the new policies and procedures?
                                       •	 What exactly do I need to do?
                                       •	 How do I do that?
                                       •	 What will happen if I don’t do it?




        42   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                        4. Org. Capacity and Competency




      TIP
                                                         Your ESMS Team needs detailed training to
      Effective Communication and Training
                                                         develop the necessary knowledge and skills. They
                                                         will need to understand the basics of the Plan-Do-
      Ask yourself if the goal of this specific com-
                                                         Check-Act cycle and know the nine elements of
      munication or training module is to build
                                                         an ESMS. This Handbook provides the informa-
      awareness, to gain commitment and/or give
                                                         tion they will need, but additional help may be
      people the knowledge and skills needed to
                                                         necessary. In addition to the detailed training of
      implement.
                                                         the team, everyone will need to receive awareness
                                                         training so there is a shared understanding of the
                                                         goals of the ESMS.

                              The chapters in this Handbook provide an easy way to structure efficient
                              general training. You can give everybody an overview about what you have
                              learned here about developing and implementing an ESMS.

                              You may also need to provide training that is specifically related to your Ac-
                              tion Plan and new operating procedures.

                              Examine the specific actions and who is going to be involved. This is a quick
                              way to determine what training will be needed by the various departments
                              and people in your company. Ask yourself what knowledge and skills do
                              people need to effectively implement new procedures, carry out allocated
                              responsibilities and complete the action plan.



                                  Use the Toolkit item Training Plan Worksheet as template and
                                  tie it to your Action Plans and improved procedures.




AWA REN ESS                  CO M M ITM ENT                    I M PLEM ENTATI O N




    Version 2.1   November 2015         ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                               43
                                      ELEMENT 5


                                     Emergency Preparedness
                                     and Response

5
    Regular engagement with          Even when you have considered all the risks and put
    local community and gov-
    ernment for onsite and
    offsite emergency plan.
                                     the appropriate management programs in place,
    Formal resource-sharing
    agreements with neighbor-        accidents and emergency situations can happen.
    ing companies.

                                     Your business is a dynamic operation, and many

4
    Senior management and
    all units and shifts, includ-
    ing contract and tempo-          things change from day to day – people go in and
    rary workers, participate
    in emergency risk assess-        out of your workforce, materials and suppliers enter
    ment, preparedness plan-
    ning and mock drills.            and exit your supply chain, facilities and equipment
    Continual improvement.
                                     are added to and removed from your production


3
    All onsite and off-site
    emergency issues have            line. A management system will help to maintain
    been identified and an
    effective preparedness
    plan is in place. The plan
                                     continuity and consistency throughout these
    meets the local regulatory
    requirements and the local       changes. However, there may be a momentary lapse
    industry best practices.
                                     or gaps in the system (e.g. someone not properly


2
    The emergency prepared-
    ness plan is in place, but       trained, someone not following the procedures,
    there is no evidence of
    consistent implementa-           a machine breakdown), or an external force (e.g.
    tion. Some trainings are
    provided to the workers on       natural disaster) that can lead to an accident or
    emergency requirements.
                                     emergency situation at your facility. While it is not


1
    Emergency management
    planning is not effective,       always possible to prevent such situations, you can
    as all emergency risks
    have not been identified.        be prepared to respond effectively to prevent and
    Occasional trainings are
    provided to workers.             minimize any harm to your workers, community and
                                     the environment.

0
    Very limited emergency
    control and personal pro-
    tective equipment. No for-
    mal plan in place.




      44    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                       5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                         The key to effective response is effective preparation. The following steps will
                         help you to anticipate the possible scenarios and prepare accordingly:

                              •	 Identifythe areas where accidents and emergency situations may occur,
                                and communities and individuals that may be impacted. This should
                                begin during your overall risk and impact assessment, through your
                                process analysis, physical mapping and consultations with workers,
                                experts and the community.
                              •	 Develop  response procedures for each identified emergency situation that
                                clearly explain what actions need to be taken. These need to be detailed
                                clearly for everyone in your company to understand what he or she needs
                                to do.
                              •	 Providethe necessary equipment and resources to effectively implement
                                the response plans. A stockpile of fire extinguishers does not put out fires,
                                unless people can effectively find and use them when needed. Think
                                about equipment that is easy for people to use and is located where it can
                                be immediately accessed during accidents and emergencies.
                              •	 Assignresponsibilities so that each activity has people responsible for
                                carrying it out. Also designate people who will routinely analyze how
                                well the system is working and update the risk assessment and plans.
                              •	 Communicate   so that everyone in your company understands the
                                importance of the emergency preparedness and response system and is
                                encouraged to help monitor and improve its effectiveness. Also include
                                people in the community who may be affected.
                              •	 Provide periodic training so that everyone in your company has an
                                overview of the system, and knows the response plans. Don’t just
                                lecture about what to do – ask for and obtain input on what needs to
                                be addressed and what can be improved. Even with the most detailed
                                procedures and plans, people will need to exercise individual judgment
                                and adapt to quickly changing situations. This is more likely to happen
                                if you engage people in all aspects of the system beforehand.
                              •	 Work  with government agencies and community groups to identify areas
                                where you can collaborate to respond effectively to internal and external
                                situations.
                              •	 Conduct  periodic checks and drills to test how well the system is working
                                and to re-assess the risks to reflect changing conditions. Incorporate your
                                findings to continually improve your system.
                              •	 Remember,   it is essential that the emergency response plan be site
                                specific. Even if you have similar operations at two different sites, it
                                does not mean that the same emergency plan would be effective at
                                both locations. An emergency response plan at each site should be
                                independently reviewed for its suitability and effectiveness.

                          Look at the Sample Fire Response Procedure and Sample Chemical
                          Spill Response Procedure for examples.




Version 2.1   November 2015           ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                             45
5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




                                      An Emergency Preparedness and Response Plan
                                      should include:

                                        •	   identification of potential emergencies based on
                                             hazard assessment;

                                        •	   procedures to respond to the identified emergency
                                             situations;

                                        •	   procedures to shut down equipment;

                                        •	   procedures for rescue and evacuation;

                                        •	   list and location of alarms and schedule of maintenance;

                                        •	   list and location of emergency response equipment (fire-
                                             fighting, spill response, first aid kits, personal protection
                                             equipment for emergency response teams);

                                        •	   protocols for the use of the emergency equipment and
                                             facilities;

                                        •	   schedule for periodic inspection, testing and
                                             maintenance of emergency equipment;

                                        •	   clear identification of evacuation routes and
                                             meeting points;

                                        •	   schedule of trainings and drills, including with local
                                             emergency response services (fire fighters);

                                        •	   procedures for emergency drills;

                                        •	   emergency contacts and communication protocols,
                                             including with communities when necessary, and proce-
                                             dures for interaction with the government authorities;

                                        •	   procedures for periodic review and update of
                                             emergency response plans.




            46    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                      5. Emerg. Preparedness and Response




OHS Hazards            Occupational health and safety (OHS) hazards in the workplace can be di-
                       vided into four categories: physical, chemical, biological, and ergonomic and
and Emergency          psychosocial.
Situations             You should identify the specific hazards that are relevant to your company’s
                       operations during your risk assessment, using methodologies such as job safety
                       reviews or job hazard analyses. Based on those results, define action plans to
                       eliminate the hazard or mitigate the risk.

                       Your management program should seek to first avoid negative impacts from
                       each hazard, by eliminating or substituting the equipment, material, or work
                       activity that is causing the hazard. If it is not possible to eliminate the hazard,
                       you should seek to minimize the impacts of hazards by instituting engineering
                       controls (e.g. by installing machine guards or active ventilation) and admin-
                       istrative controls (e.g. job rotation, clear work instructions, warning signage).
                       You should also provide technically appropriate personal protective equipment
                       (PPE) and train your personnel on the appropriate use and maintenance of
                       supplied PPE. Usually a combination of all controls is used and integrated un-
                       der OHS programs, such as a confined spaces program.

                       OHS emergency situations often occur because of gaps in a company’s man-
                       agement system. Thus, even though accidents may seem to be very different,
                       (e.g. slips and falls due to spilled liquids versus exposure to radiation) they
                       are often the result of the same root cause – ineffective implementation of the
                       ESMS – such as an incomplete risk assessment, the lack of safety procedures,
                       and insufficient worker training. You should identify gaps in your own system
                       to determine potential root-causes of problems during your risk assessment.



Emergencies             In addition to emergencies that may result from workplace hazards, all
                        workplaces are also vulnerable to emergencies caused by external events.
Caused by
                        During your risk assessment, you should identify the emergencies that are most
External Events         likely to occur in your area and create a comprehensive emergency preparedness
                        plan so you can respond properly to the unplanned event and minimize damage
                        to your company and workers in case of an emergency.

                        The following list includes possible manmade and natural disasters, all of
                        which can result in significant worker injury or death, as well as disruption of
                        operations, destruction of property, and severe financial losses.

                           •	 Storms, including tornados, typhoons, and hurricanes (many can result in
                              flooding);
                           •	 Flooding, earthquakes and associated tsunamis, and volcanic eruptions;
                           •	 Local and regional fires;
                           •	 Explosions, including accidental, military or terrorism; and
                           •	 Civil unrest.




 Version 2.1   November 2015            ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                             47
                                     ELEMENT 6


                                     Stakeholder Engagement


5
    Stakeholder engagement           Your company may have an impact on the lives
    is part of regular activities.
    Awareness and engage-
    ment at senior levels. Flu-
                                      of many people and organizations. All of these
    ent and inclusive commu-
    nication and consultation         people and organizations are your stakeholders
    process with stakeholders.
                                     - they have a stake in your company’s financial,
    Multiple and ongoing
    public consultation and
                                      environmental and social performance.

4
    participation in a cultur-
    ally appropriate manner.          Look at the diagram below and think about how your company interacts
    Stakeholder feedback
                                      with each group. Your relationship with each group is different, and you
    is actively considered.
                                      need to adapt the way you engage with each of them to mitigate risks to
    Reporting to communities
    and effective grievance           your business.
    mechanism is evidenced            Systematically engaging with affected communities in the identification
    by formal records.                and management of the impacts that negatively affect them contributes
                                      to building trust, credibility and local support. Engaging with them also
    Stakeholders have been



3
                                      provides the opportunity to highlight the positive aspects of the company’s
    identified and engaged
    in several events with            presence. This lowers the risk of anti-company sentiments that could lead
    effective dialogue. Some          to costly litigation or disruption of company operations.
    procedures and assigned
    responsibility for engaging
    with stakeholders.
                                                                                    FINANCIAL
                                                                               S   COMMUNIT Y
                                                                            ER                   AC
                                                                    U   M
    Some public events, lim-                                     NS                             G R TIV




2
                                                            CO                                     OU IS
    ited ongoing engagement                                                                           PS T
    process. Sporadic and
                                                       ES




    selective responses
                                                UN D
                                                   ITI
                                            M M C TE




    when approached by
                                          CO F F E




                                                                                                                         NGO




    stakeholders.
                                            A




                                                                                                                           s




    Limited channels in place.                                                 COM PA N Y


1
                                          ERS




    A few meetings and
                                                                                                                                 S/
                                                                                                                     O R NION
                                           WO R K




    discussions, but not an
                                                                                                                              NS
                                                                                                                     C IA E R
                                                                                                                         TI O




    ongoing process yet.
                                                                                                                        EU
                                                                                                                         K
                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                   W
                                                                                                                  SO
                                                                                                           TR
                                                    ST




                                                                                                               AS
                                                    O OW
                                                     CK N




                                                                                                               T
                                                       H ER




                                                                                                          EN
                                                        O




0
                                                                                                      M
                                                          LD S




                                                                                                   RN
                                                            ER




    Little or no transparency                                                  SUPPLIERS/     VE
                                                               S/




                                                                                            GO
    with stakeholders.                                                        CONTRACTORS




     48    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                    6. Stakeholder Engagement




                         Other stakeholders such as activists and NGOs may not be directly affected
                         by your operations but may have an interest in what you do. Keeping these
                         groups informed and maintaining an open communication channel may lower
                         the risk of negative campaigns that could affect your company’s reputation.


                         MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
                         The first step in building a relationship with your stakeholders is to identify
                         them. To start, look back at your risk assessment and the areas of potential
                         negative impacts and identify who would be directly or indirectly impacted.

                         Once you have identified your stakeholders, you should prioritize the differ-
                         ent groups based on the nature and severity of the impacts, and the ability of
                         these groups to influence your business. Engagement should be stronger and
                         more frequent with those groups that are more severely affected, as well as with
                         those that have a greater ability to influence your business.

                         Also, as you identify your stakeholders and the issues that may affect or interest
                         them, you can tailor your communication material and methods to effectively
                         engage with each of them.




                          INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS

                              Workers are an important internal stakeholder group. They also
                              need to be involved in the identification of risks that affect them
                              and be consulted when developing action plans and procedures.
                              However, the methods of engagement with them will differ from
                              those used for external stakeholders.




                          Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Map and Impact Zoning
                          Tool for Affected Communities to get started.




Version 2.1   November 2015          ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                              49
For effective                         DEVELOPING A STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT PLAN
                                      After mapping your stakeholders, the next step is to develop a plan for how to
consultation
                                      engage with the groups that you have identified. Your stakeholder engagement
with affected                         plan can be simple, but it should be based on two-way communication.

communities :                         If your operations negatively affect communities and other stakeholders, you
                                      need to actively engage them in consultation, regularly disclosing clear and
                                      meaningful information on your potential impacts, and providing them with
•	 Start early;
                                      opportunities to express their suggestions and concerns.
•	 Disclose meaningful                In the case of potentially significant adverse impacts to individuals and com-
   and accurate                       munities, you should engage them in a process of Informed Consultation
                                      and Participation (ICP). Compared to a consultation process, an ICP should
   information;                       ensure a more in-depth exchange of information and a higher level of partici-
                                      pation from affected stakeholders in decision-making, so that their proposed
•	 Use culturally                     mitigation measures are incorporated into the company’s action plans.
   appropriate means to               Regular communication with the various stakeholder groups is an excel-
   reach them;                        lent way for you to understand how company operations affect them and to
                                      get early warnings of potential problems. In all your efforts to reach out to
•	 Provide opportunities              stakeholders, ensure that you do so early on – relationship-building takes time.
                                      Don’t wait until a crisis arises to act, as it will be more difficult without those
   for two-way dialogue ;             relationships in place to manage the problem.
•	 Document to keep
   track of issues raised;
   and
•	 Report back on how
   their input has been
   used and considered




                                                                  Use the Toolkit item Stakeholder Engagement
                                                                  Plan Worksheet to record how you will engage
                                                                  with the important stakeholder groups.




          50   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                  6. Stakeholder Engagement




                          TIP

                              Effective Stakeholder Engagement

                              ••   Be strategic and prioritize which stakeholders to approach –
                                   you may not have the resources to engage them all at once.

                              ••   Update your stakeholder map regularly and in the case of
                                   significant events (e.g., changes to your business, government
                                   elections, natural disasters, etc.).

                              ••   Be aware of what issues are important to each group.

                              ••   If you are dealing with a representative for the group, make
                                   sure that he/she legitimately represents the interests of the af-
                                   fected groups and communities.

                              ••   Engage with stakeholders in their own communities and places
                                   where they feel comfortable.

                              ••   Reach out to vulnerable and marginalized groups.

                              ••   Recognize that your employees are a good link to stakeholders
                                   in the “outside world.”

                              ••   Keep a record of questions, comments and suggestions. Records
                                   provide important information that should be used to adapt
                                   your Action Plans and improve your ESMS.

                              ••   Be prepared to respond to stakeholders, and do not generate
                                   expectations that cannot or will not be fulfilled.




 DEFINITIONS

  Stakeholder                 Any person or organization that has an interest in or is affected by
                              your company

  Affected                    People or communities who are subject to company-related ad-
                              verse impacts on their environment, infrastructure, way of life,
  Communitites
                              personal safety, health or livelihood.




                         For more information on how to develop and implement a Stakeholder
                         Engagement Plan, refer to the Good Practice Handbook “Stakeholder
                         Engagement,” IFC (2007).



Version 2.1   November 2015           ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                         51
                                   ELEMENT 7


                                   External Communications
                                   and Grievance Mechanisms

5
    Proactive and responsive
    external communication
                                   If your company has social and environmental
    and grievance mechanism.
    Stakeholders are consulted     impacts in the community, inquiries, concerns and
    on ESMS effectiveness
    and are part of the regular    complaints are bound to arise. How you respond
    review process.
                                   to and manage these issues will have significant


4
    Effective grievance mecha-
    nism is evidenced by           implications for how your business is perceived and,
    formal records. There is
    routine review of records      possibly, whether or not it succeeds.
    and the effectiveness of
    the program.
                                   EXTERNAL COMMUNICATIONS
    Grievance mechanism is         Even if affected communities per se are not identified, you should always



3
    fully implemented; how-        establish and maintain a publicly available and easily accessible channel for
    ever, there is not enough      stakeholders to contact you (e.g., phone number, website, email address, etc.).
    evidence of its effective-
    ness. No tracking of inter-    External stakeholders can provide valuable information, such as suggestions
    nal or external awareness;     on product improvement, advance warning in critical situations, feedback
    limited tracking of cases.
                                   on interactions with your employees, and/or comments from regulators,
                                   NGOs and individuals regarding your company’s environmental and social
                                   performance.




2
    Procedures and assigned        The procedure for external communication should include methods to:
    responsibilities for receiv-
    ing and handling com-            •	   receive, register and validate external communications and requests for
    plaints. Awareness is                 information from the public;
    limited to those directly
    handling the complaints.         •	   screen and assess the importance of the issue raised and determine how to
                                          address it;
                                     •	   provide, track, document and publish responses; and
                                          adjust your management program when appropriate.



1
                                     •	
    Some basic procedures
    for receiving complaints.
    Responsibility limited to      GRIEVANCE MECHANISM
    one person or unit.
                                   The purpose of a grievance mechanism is to establish a way for individuals,
                                   groups or communities affected by your business to contact you if they have an
                                   inquiry, a concern or a formal complaint.



0   No mechanism in place.




     52     Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                          7. Ext. Communication and Grievance




                           In practice, a grievance mechanism should:

                              •	   Establish a way for people to contact you – openly or anonymously – to
                                   pose their questions, to express concerns or to file a complaint. Examples
                                   are suggestion boxes, a toll-free telephone hotline, an email address, and
                                   regular meetings arranged to discuss particular problem areas.
                              •	   Assign a person or team in your company to be responsible for receiving,
                                   registering and processing all grievances.
                              •	   Establish procedures to register, screen, categorize, investigate and deter-
                                   mine resolution and redress options.
                              •	   Establish a system to communicate decisions taken and progress on pend-
                                   ing actions. It is important that people know when they can expect a
                                   response.
                           Not all complaints can be resolved in the same way. Simpler issues, such as a
                           company truck running over chickens in the road, might be dealt with by the
                           same team responsible for registering the complaint. More complex problems,
                           such as allegations of widespread groundwater contamination, might require
                           immediate intervention by senior managers and more dedicated resources for
                           investigating, documenting and reporting. For complex and recurring prob-
                           lems, consider reaching out to third-party facilitators that can act as indepen-
                           dent mediators.
 TIP
                                                           The more serious the claim is, the more indepen-
  Implementing a Grievance Mechanism                       dent the mechanism should be to determine the
                                                           resolution and options for redress.
  ••   Scale it to fit the level and complexity
       of social and environmental risks and
                                                           The most important thing is to make sure the griev-
       impacts identified in your company.
                                                           ance mechanism is accessible and trusted. Tailor it
                                                           for the local community so that it is easy for them
  ••   Design the process to be easily un-                 to raise concerns. This requirement mandates hav-
       derstandable, accessible, trusted and               ing the right people leading this effort inside your
       culturally appropriate.                             company.
  ••   Publicize the availability of the griev-            Don’t underestimate the value of a well-implement-
       ance procedure so people know where                 ed grievance mechanism. The information you re-
       to go and whom to approach.                         ceive can act as an early-warning system before the
  ••   Commit to a response time and keep                  problem becomes too costly and time-consuming
       to it as this will increase transparency            to address.
       and a sense of “fair process.”

  ••   Keep records of each step to create a
       “paper trail.”




Version 2.1   November 2015              ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                                 53
7. Ext. Communication and Grievance



                                         Look at the Toolkit items Checklist for an Effective Grievance
                                         Mechanism and Grievances Log to get started.




                                          Seriousness
                                          of the claim
                                                                                   Independent
                                                                                   mediator
                                                          Multistakeholder group
                                                          including representatives
                                                          of Affected Communi-
                                                          ties, the company, and
                                                          other groups such as NGOs,
                                                          academia, and/or local
                                                          authorities

                                                Company team                                     Independence of
                                                                                                 the mechanism




                                       TIP

                                         A Grievance Mechanism is

                                         UNDERSTANDABLE AND TRUSTED when:

                                         ••   affected communities understand the procedure to handle a
                                              complaint;

                                         ••   people are aware of the expected response time;

                                         ••   confidentiality of the person raising the complaint is protected.

                                         CULTURALLY APPROPRIATE AND ACCESSIBLE when:

                                         ••   claims can be presented in the local language;

                                         ••   technology required to present a claim is commonly used (e.g.,
                                              paper, text messaging, internet);

                                         ••   illiterate persons can present verbal complaints.

                                         AT NO COST when:

                                         ••   people don’t need to travel long distances to present a claim;

                                         ••   the company covers the costs of third party facilitation.




                                      For more information on how to develop and implement a Grievance
                                      Mechanism, refer to the Good Practice Note “Addressing Grievances from
                                      Project-Affected Communities,” IFC (2009), and the Advisory Note “A
                                      Guide to Designing and Implementing Grievance Mechanisms for Develop-
                                      ment Projects,” CAO (2008).



             54   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
ELEMENT 8




Ongoing Reporting to
                                                                                                                5
                                                                                    Affected communities’
                                                                                    issues and concerns are
                                                                                    proactively addressed.
Affected Communities                                                                There is ongoing com-
                                                                                    munication to avoid risks
                                                                                    and impacts before new
Affected communities will want to know what                                         projects as well as to
                                                                                    address existing issues.
actions your company has put in place to resolve


                                                                                                                4
                                                                                    Reporting to affected
the issues identified when engaging with them.                                      communities is regu-
                                                                                    larly implemented and
                                                                                    evidenced in documen-
Keeping affected communities informed of what you are doing is a critical           tation. Key units are
                                                                                    involved in the review
element for building and maintaining a good relationship. If people know
                                                                                    of the key issues.
when they will receive an update, it helps to build trust. It can also reduce the
amount of time you spend responding to questions.



                                                                                                                3
                                                                                    When applicable, con-
The frequency of this communication will be proportional to the scale of stake-     sultation processes have
holders’ concerns, but it should be at least annual. If your company’s activities   been implemented.
change or new environmental and social risks emerge, you do need to contact         External consultants are
stakeholders outside of the regular schedule to discuss these changes.              involved as required. No
                                                                                    ongoing review.

 TIP




                                                                                                                2
  Ongoing Communication                                                             Procedures in place
                                                                                    for reporting, usually
 ••    Provide an immediate update if new environmental or social                   assigned to E&S staff.
       risks emerge.                                                                Primarily reactive.
 ••    Report progress on implementation of your commitments.
 ••    Report monitoring results on issues that interest the community.




                                                                                                                1
 ••    Use the opportunity to communicate the benefits generated by
       your company.                                                                Some basic communica-
                                                                                    tions with affected com-
 ••    Translate information into local languages and easily under-
                                                                                    munities, mostly limited
       standable formats.                                                           to meetings.
 ••    Try to maintain continuity in who deals with the community.
 ••    Involve your employees as communication links to the community.




                                                                                                                0
 ••    Consider conducting a stakeholder survey to learn how your
       company is perceived.
                                                                                    No reporting.



              Look at the Toolkit item Reporting to Affected
              Communities for examples of formats and venues you can use.



Version 2.1    November 2015           ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                         55
                                         ELEMENT 9


                                        Monitoring and Review


5
    Robust system of continual          We’ve talked about the relationship between
    learning and improvement.
    Senior management receives
    periodic reports about E&S          your ESMS and the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle of
    performance and progress
    toward E&S objectives and           continual improvement. Monitoring and review
    targets. All key project deci-
    sions consider E&S.                 are critical, because this is how you check and
    Monitoring, supervising and
                                        adjust the system.

4
    auditing activities are inte-
    grated and included in man-
    agement review. Includes
    consultation with workers,          So far, you’ve formed or assigned a team to lead
    customers and suppliers.
    E&S objectives and targets
    are included in job descrip-
                                        the effort. You have developed and started to
    tions and performance
    reviews.                            implement your action plans and procedures in


3
    Routine review of monitor-          response to the risks and impacts you identified.
    ing and supervision activi-
    ties, including participation
    of workers. Corrective              You’ve started to train people. The next step is
    actions routinely imple-
    mented. An E&S internal             to monitor your ESMS and make the necessary
    audit plan is in place.
                                        adjustments.


2
    Key E&S monitoring plans in
    place, with inspection and
    supervision activities. Pri-
    marily reactive and guided
    by external experts, custom-
    ers and investors.


                                                                                PLAN
                                                                                          DO




1
    Few monitoring plans to sat-
    isfy regulatory requirements.
    No formal review activities.
                                      Monitoring is the CHECK
                                                                                  ACT




                                        step of the PDCA cycle

                                              Review is the ACT                          CHECK
                                           step of the PDCA cycle




0
    No monitoring of E&S
    performance.




      56   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                                          9. Monitoring and Review




                          TIP

                              Monitoring measures intent, implementation and effectiveness

                          Intent:
                                   1.	Are the nine elements of the ESMS in place?
                          Implementation:
                                   2.	Are the action plans being carried out?
                                   3.	Are procedures being followed?
                          Effectiveness:
                                   4.	Are you in compliance with laws and regulations?
                                   5.	Are you making progress toward your overall objectives
                                      and targets?
                                   6.	How is the environmental and social performance of the
                                      company in general?



                         INDICATORS
                         A key aspect of monitoring is defining relevant indicators. These are quan-
                         titative or qualitative measures of progress against set goals. Some indicators
                         might focus on performance, evaluated against the criteria defined in your
                         environmental and social policy.

                         Some examples of key performance indicators could be:

                              •	   energy consumption;
                              •	   water consumption;
                              •	   volume of solid waste disposal;
                              •	   liquid effluents discharge;
                              •	   emissions to air;
                              •	   accidents (injuries, ill-health, property damage) and near misses;
                              •	   lost time injury frequency, incidence, and severity rates;
                              •	   emergency response incidents;
                              •	   average working hours and wages paid;
                              •	   wage levels;
                              •	   incidences of child labor;
                              •	   incidences of disciplinary and discrimination complaints; and
                              •	   employee demographics matching access to training, jobs, and wages.



Version 2.1   November 2015              ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                            57
9. Monitoring and Review




  Measuring and                          Other indicators can look at the processes or inputs that you use to try to
                                         achieve performance.
  Improving
                                         For example, in your action plan, you might have included worker training as
  Remember, you                          a necessary step to raise awareness among workers about OHS, so that they
                                         can help to identify and address key risks. In this case, you might evaluate your
  can’t improve what                     progress against the action plan by tracking the percentage of workers who
                                         have been trained, or the percentage of workers who can correctly describe the
  you don’t measure.
                                         risk assessment procedure.

                                         Some examples of process indicators include:

                                           •	   procedures in place for chemical, fuel and hazardous waste handling,
                                                storage, and disposal;
                                           •	   processes analyzing water and energy efficiency;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the grievance mechanism;
                                           •	   percentage of workers who can explain the health and safety procedures;
                                           •	   percentage of workers trained on labor standards requirements; and
                                           •	   communications from stakeholders.

                                         It is helpful to have a mix of performance and process indicators, to get a
                                         deeper understanding of whether you are measuring the appropriate things and
                                         whether you are taking the appropriate actions. For example, a performance in-
                                         dicator such as “zero incidences of child labor” does not tell the full story: Was
                                         this the result of effective procedures and training or was the system inadequate
                                         in identifying and recording incidences?




                                         For environmental and OHS performance indicators and benchmarks
                                         relevant to your industry, consult the WBG EHS Guidelines at www.ifc.
                                         org/sustainability




                                           Look at the Monitoring Plan Template in the Toolkit to get started.




             58   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                                                         9. Monitoring and Review




                                      THE BASICS OF MONITORING
                        Visual observation                 Interviews
                        physical walk-throughs of          consultations with workers,
                        your facility and surrounding      managers and external stake-
                        land. Examples of what you         holders. Examples of topics
                        might observe: fire detection,     you might discuss: Do workers
                        alarm and fighting equipment,      and managers understand
                        use of PPE, warning signs,         the policies and procedures?
                        storage of hazard­   ous materi-   How are they impacted? Are
                        als, drinking water and sani-      there ideas for improvement?
                        tation facilities, information     Do workers feel comfortable
                        displayed on notice boards         filing complaints? How are
                        (e.g. policies and regulations,    external stakeholders
                        salary scales, wages), worker      impacted by the company?
                        and manager body language          Are there ideas for improve-
                        and interactions.                  ment? Do external stakehold-
                                                           ers feel comfortable filing
                                                           complaints?

                        Measuring and                      Document review
                        testing                            looking through documents
                        checking using equipment           and records. Examples of
                        that is properly calibrated.       what you might review: water
                        Examples of what you might         and energy bills, waste dispos-
                        check: water and energy            al records, chemical use and
                        consumption, emissions to air,     discharges records, inspection
                        effluents, noise decibel levels,   records, OHS records, com-
                        dust levels, ambient tempera­      plaints logs, wage slips, time
                        ture, light levels.                cards, policies and procedures,
                                                           training records.




Version 2.1   November 2015       ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                   59
9. Monitoring and Review



                                         Monitoring and auditing are words that are often
                                         used interchangeably, which can be confusing.
                                         Auditing is a formal, on-site evaluation against a
                                         specific set of criteria. Audits can be conducted
                                         internally by your own staff or by outside parties.
                                         Monitoring is an umbrella term that includes various
                                         methods for evaluating performance. These may
                                         include: visual observation, measuring and testing,
                                         questionnaires, surveys, interviews with employees
                                         and external stakeholders, and document review.
                                         It is important to design your monitoring program
                                         to obtain qualitative and quantitative information.
                                         It is also important that workers and managers are
                                         monitoring the workplace on an on going basis.

                                                     Look at the Toolkit item Auditing Guidance for guidelines
                                                     on how to conduct an audit.




                                         MEASURING AND IMPROVING YOUR ESMS
                                         This Handbook’s companion publication ESMS Self-Assessment and Im-
                                         provement Guide provides you with a practical tool to monitor the maturity of
                                         your ESMS. For each of the nine ESMS elements, we provide self-assessment
                                         questions that show you the level of your ESMS development and implemen-
                                         tation on a scale of 0 to 5 (5 is the highest). Conducting the ESMS self-
                                         assessment is an important first step that enables you to see where you stand
                                         now. The results form the basis of your ESMS Improvement Plan. The ESMS
                                         self-assessment responses should be based on Visual Observation, Measuring or
                                         Testing, Document Review and Interviews.

                                         Let’s take another look at the nine elements of the ESMS and maturity ratings.




             60   Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
                                          Purpose of Action Plan and ESMS
                                          Improvement Plan
                                          Action Plan: specific actions to correct
                                          environmental, labor and community
                                          problems and remediate negative impacts
                                          ESMS Improvement Plan: steps targeted to
                                          continually improve the management system to
                                          support activities in the Action Plan




                                                                                                                  Ongoing Reporting
              Risks and Impacts




                                                                Preparedness and




                                                                                                 Communications
              Identification of




                                                                                                                                      Monitoring and
                                               Organizational




                                                                                                 and Grievance
                                  Management




                                                                                                                  Communities
                                               Capacity and




                                                                                   Engagement




                                                                                                 Mechanisms
                                               Competency




                                                                                   Stakeholder




                                                                                                                  to Affected
                                                                Emergency

                                                                Response
                                  Programs




                                                                                                 External




                                                                                                                                      Review
     Policy




      Mature system implemented internally and with key supply chain partners – continual
 5
      improvement embedded in operations
 4 Systems well-developed and implemented internally – routine improvement projects
      Systems approach adopted, but development and implementation is inconsistent -
 3
      improvement sporadic
 2 Limited system development with sporadic implementation – primarily reactive
 1 Little systems awareness or repeatable processes
 0 No systems awareness or repeatable processes


LINKING YOUR ACTION PLAN AND ESMS IMPROVEMENT PLAN
It is important to understand the link between your Action Plans and the ESMS Improvement Plan.
Action Plans list specific projects and activities to manage risks. The ESMS Improvement Plan is about
making system improvements needed to support the activities and to make the necessary changes in how
the company operates.

Improving environmental and social performance and integrating it into your routine business operations
takes time. The improvement plan for your ESMS needs to be practical. It needs to be designed with
the understanding that people have their core operating responsibilities in your company. You cannot
improve everything at once. The ESMS Team plays the critical role of leading the improvement effort.
Prioritizing what to work on first is an important job for the team in coordination with senior manage-
ment. The ESMS Self-Assessment and Improvement Guide will help you to get started.




Version 2.1   November 2015                    ESMS Implementation Handbook - General 	                                                                61
9. Monitoring and Review




                                         CONDUCTING AN EFFECTIVE MANAGEMENT REVIEW
                                         The purpose of the management review is to routinely involve senior manage-
                                         ment in evaluating the development and implementation of the ESMS. The
                                         management review is led by the ESMS Team. In the beginning, we recom-
                                         mend conducting a management review every three to six months. Once the
                                         ESMS is well-established, once a year is usually fine. It is important to keep a
                                         written record (called minutes) during the meeting of the key topics discussed
                                         and the decisions made. The minutes should be kept in a central log.

                                         For the ESMS Team, the management review is an important opportunity to
                                         keep senior management involved. Remember, the sustainability of the pro-
                                         gram requires ongoing commitment from senior management.



                                         Typical Agenda for a Management Review:
                                           •	   Review progress on ESMS Improvement Plan

                                           •	   Review progress on Action Plans

                                           •	   Review compliance with environmental and labor
                                                laws and regulations

                                           •	   Review progress on environmental and social
                                                performance

                                           •	   Discuss possible adjustments in risk assessment

                                           •	   Prioritize activities for next three, six and 12 months

                                           •	   Review and approve needed resources by senior
                                                management




            62    Section III: Practical Guidelines for Developing and Implementing your ESMS
Address:

2121 Pennsylvania Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20433 USA
Tel. 1-202-473-3800
www.ifc.org/sustainability




Copyright
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of
the content for educational purposes. Content from thispublication may be used freely
without prior permission, provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content
is not used for commercial purposes.



November 2015
