                                                     99461

Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA)


         Swachh Bharat Mission - Gramin




               Executive Summary




                      DRAFT




               Prepared by The World Bank
Executive Summary
1.      Government of India (GoI) has recently launched Swachh Bharat Mission-Gramin (SBM-
G) campaign and program to accelerate efforts to achieve universal sanitation coverage, improve
cleanliness and eliminate open defecation in rural India by 2019. The proposed World Bank
support to the program will enable GoI, in collaboration with State governments, to achieve the
goals of SBM-G. The project development objective (PDO) is to reduce open defecation in rural
areas and strengthen MDWS’s capacity to manage the national program.

2.      The World Bank support will concentrate on four key result areas that contribute to
achievement of the PDO including (i) increased access to safe and functional sanitation facilities;
(ii) achieving and sustaining community-wide ODF status; (iii) improved solid and liquid waste
management (SLWM) services; and (iv) strengthened capacity of MDWS in program
management, advocacy, monitoring and evaluation.

The ESSA Scope and Methodology

3.       An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) of the proposed Operation
was undertaken by the World Bank to understand the environmental and social risks, benefits,
impacts and opportunities of the existing sanitary policy and practices on the ground. The
assessment is also part of the World Bank’s preparation in line with the requirements of OP/BP
9.00. The assessments were carried out through a comprehensive review of relevant government
policies, legislation, institutional roles, program procedures, assessment study of earlier national
programs in five states and an analysis of the extent to which these are consistent with Bank
OP/BP 9.00. Further, actions to address gaps to enhance risk mitigation were identified and
detailed. The ESSA methodology included analysis of information/data on GoI's Swachh Bharat
Mission - Gramin (SBM-G) Program, field reviews, and consultations with all key stakeholders
at the level of the five state governments and the national government.

4.      The key findings of this assessment are based on surveys and consultations carried out in
the five states of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal and Odisha. The status
as observed in the States are reflective of the performance of the predecessor programs of SBM-
G and many of those gaps have now been addressed by the SBM-G guidelines, as launched in
2015. The current SBM-G guidelines have been taken into account while proposing the action
and implementation plan under this Operation.

Environmental Systems

5.     The risk screening suggests that the overall environmental impact of the Project is likely
to be positive. Reduction in open defecation will reduce the risk of transmission of disease
through the fecal-oral route. Similarly, improved SLWM will also have a positive impact on
water quality and human health. Well designed, executed and managed systems and structures
will result in overall human and environmental wellbeing and reduce risks of water
contamination and environmental degradation.

6.    However, environmental risks could arise in some places during implementation due to
improper location, planning, execution and management of schemes, especially in areas subject

                                                                                                  1
to climate vulnerability and disasters like drought, high ground water table, areas prone to
cyclones, and proximity to protected natural areas and monuments. The risks likely to arise are:
(i) contamination of groundwater supplies due to poorly designed/managed sanitation facilities
(ii) incomplete technical and O&M knowledge and guidance to PRIs and GP/village level
implementing institutions about the domestic, institutional sanitation facilities and SLWM
systems may pose general environmental and health problems, (iii) potential impacts on natural
resources, and natural and cultural heritage sites located nearby, (iv) potential occupational and
public safety risks for sanitation workers in the villages.

Social Systems

7.       The assessment reviewed the social policies and procedures (both at National and State
level) and found them to be adequate. The assessment finds an enabling policy and legal
framework that will promote: decentralized planning, implementation and monitoring, active
participation and safeguarding the interests of vulnerable sections (women, scheduled caste and
scheduled tribe communities) be it through targeting or membership in local governance
institutions or in community level groups. However, challenges were observed at the level of
implementation though impact of the identified social benefits overweighs the program related
social risks. Most of these risks are manageable and can be mitigated through proper
implementation, better local oversight and accountability.

Key Findings

Environmental Issues
8.      The key findings of ESSA on environmental systems are:
(a) The national and states governments have a well-developed environment legislations.
    However, the implementation setup to address environmental challenges of SBM-G Program
    needs to be strengthened.
(b) IHHL designs for different onsite conditions have been promoted through GoI guidelines.
    Non-adherence to guidelines during planning and implementation of the IHHLs resulted in
    significant environmental risks and vulnerability in the past. Therefore, the states need to
    ensure that designs being implemented are demand responsive and suitable across all socio-
    economic strata and appropriate for onsite conditions.
(c) The past approach was mainly focused towards toilet construction to improve coverage and
    access. The SBM-G focuses on usage also. However, post construction management of
    toilets and black water management needs to be strengthened.
(d) Although, GoI’s guidelines include Solid Liquid Waste Management (SLWM) as a part of
    the Program, the success level of such schemes at village level has been variable due to
    different geographical size, population density and cultures in villages. Accumulation of grey
    and black water in low lying areas, burning of solid waste and dumping of solid waste in
    common land or water bodies creates health risks, contaminates water resources and risks
    local flooding during rains.
(e) Moreover, inadequate planning and technology selection may affect groundwater quality,
    Program sustainability and infrastructure usability.
(f) The Program's existing institutional systems needs further strengthening for environmental
    management along with a framework for environmental monitoring.


                                                                                                2
Social Issues
9.     The key findings on social systems are:
a) Policy: The National Acts1 applicable to developmental work related to sanitation along with
   the corresponding State Acts articulates the “processes? to be followed for decentralized
   planning, social inclusion, participation, transparency and accountability. Additionally, right
   to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition and Rehabilitation and
   Resettlement Act of 2013 ensure that in case of land diversion/acquisition related matters do
   not marginalize the vulnerable.
b) Institutional mechanisms: The five tier institutional structure ensures that institutional
   structure is available for planning, monitoring, and implementation of SBM at national, state,
   district, block and GP level2. The corresponding key units are assisted, supported and guided
   by a whole range of other units/institutions like Program Monitoring Unit & Sanitation
   Support Organization, Capacity and Communication Development Unit, Support
   Organizations, Technical Support Units/Cells, Resource Groups, Gram Panchayat, Gram
   Sabha and Ward Sabha. However, there are gaps in staffing on social expertise at some levels
   in the sample states. Such staffing gaps needs to be addressed to ensure decentralized
   planning, social inclusion, participation, transparency etc.
c) Procedures and Processes:
    Capacity: The key functionaries responsible for implementing SBM have limited
   perspective on social aspects of SBM. Also there are huge challenges especially at the village
   level as the coverage and targets are high but staff for social mobilization, decentralized
   planning, transparency, accountability is extremely limited.
    Land management: SBM is not a land intensive program and currently no land related
   disputes were observed as the focus in on IHHL for which families use their existing land or
   Panchayat diverts its land for the landless. However, as the progression moves to community
   complexes, public toilets and village level SLWM, local laws related to
   ownership/management should be followed if land is needed and documented via the
   monitoring.
    Decentralized Planning: The GP level overall plans of sanitation are supposed to be a
   consolidation of Gram sabha/ward level plans and are expected to be made through an
   inclusive participatory process. However, local planning needs to be further strengthened.
    Social inclusion, participation, transparency and accountability: In principle, the
   SBM has macro-level mandate with a community saturation approach, whereby everyone
   within the village gets coverage. This ensures that the program covers everyone irrespective
   of a households’ vulnerability status (i.e. with respect to caste, gender, disability etc.).
   However, historical and baseline data shows that despite the past sanitation programs of the
   government, vulnerable BPL and APL households still lack access to toilet facilities at an
   alarming rate (47% and 44% respectively). This is seen to be 20 percentage point lower than
   access rates for non-vulnerable APL households. Therefore, to ensure that SBM’s saturation


1
  73rd Constitutional Amendment Act of 1993, Panchayat Extension to Scheduled Areas (PESA) Act of 1996, Scheduled Tribes
and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest Rights) Act of 2006, Right to Information Act 2005; National Rural
Employment Guarantee Act 2005.
2
  The SBM has a 5-tier structure at the National/State/District/Block/Village level- with National Swachh Bharat Mission (G) –
NSBM (G) at the centre; the overall planning and implementation is the prerogative of State Water and Sanitation Mission
(SWSM), District Water and Sanitation Mission (DWSM), Block Water Mission and Block Sanitation Mission (BSM) and
Village Health Water and Sanitation Committee at the respective levels.

                                                                                                                             3
   approach bridges that gap in practice, sound systems of social accountability and monitoring
   needs to be developed.
    Monitoring: As was observed during the surveys, apart from physical and financial
   progress, the monthly Progress Report had provisions for tracking SC/ST/BPL beneficiaries.
   The states also had defined system for social audit for specific centrally sponsored scheme
   though implementation remained a challenge. Moreover, sanitation programs were not within
   its ambit.
   Most of these concerns have been taken care of by the new SBM-G guidelines. SBM-G has
   provisions for ODF verification, social audits, overall progress (physical and financial) etc.
   These provisions can be further strengthened to ensure SBM-G’s sound principles are carried
   out in action during implementation.
    Grievance redressal: The existing grievance management system is mostly inaccessible
   for economically vulnerable and those living in remote areas where access to both mobile
   and internet services is limited. This is mainly because the system is only available in English
   and there is lack of awareness. The existing system needs to be strengthened to make it more
   responsive and approachable for all sections of the population.
    Operation and maintenance: The survey and consultations found instances where
   O&M of IHHL reinforces traditional cultural practices that increases the work load of
   women. Responsibility for Community assets such as sanitary complexes, SLWM projects
   and overall cleanliness of the village come under VWSC/panchayat but continues to be seen
   as job to be done by specific communities. While SBM-G clearly lays out that O&M
   responsibilities (particularly pertaining to community toilets) are collective responsibility of
   the community, there remains a need for community sensitization and monitoring of
   maintenance and usage to ensure that caste or gender based discrimination are not prevailing.

Key Operation Actions

10.     Key actions agreed with GoI to address the environmental and social risks and gaps
identified in ESSA, though PforR component of the Operation, mainly encompasses:

Capacity Building: Strengthening capacity for environment and social management, as required
(a) Environment: Strengthening of guidelines, procedures and monitoring framework for
    improved environmental management of the program
(b) Social: Strengthen monitoring and grievance redressal systems (including use of ICT and
    GIS tools, as needed) and track access and usage across social groups, undertake thematic
    audits to understand progress and gather citizen feedback and undertake staffing, training and
    sensitization of human resources

11.      Detailed Environmental Operation Actions:
(a) Exclusion of high-risk interventions: Criteria to exclude certain interventions from the
    Operation that may impact ecologically sensitive/important/notified wetlands, and protected
    monuments;
(b) Strengthening the existing GoI system for environmental management. The Operation Action
    Plan focuses on strengthening GoI’s procedures and capacity including
    strengthening/preparing guidelines for technical options for variable socio-economic, onsite
    conditions and disasters, and integrating environmental management of the Program with
    these guidelines.

                                                                                                 4
(c) Building institutional capacity to address environmental issues for monitoring and due
    diligence.

12.     The proposed Action Plan under the Operation shall strengthen the existing guidelines
with sustainable technological options for onsite sanitation and SLWM, thereby reducing the risk
of contamination of water resources and improving the current sanitation conditions in rural
areas. Any water extracted from the water sources for construction activities and for maintenance
of infrastructure constructed under the Operation is not envisaged to be significant to adversely
affect any riparian’s possible water use. Therefore, considering the Operation’s focus on
reduction in open defecation and overall rural village sanitation, it is the Team’s assessmen t that
the activities under the proposed Operation shall (i) not adversely change the quality and quantity
of water flows to the other riparian, and (ii) not be adversely affected by other riparian’s
possible water use.

13.      Detailed Social Operation Actions:
(a) Inclusive Planning: SBM in principle addresses the risk of social exclusion through its tenet
    of Community Saturation and emphasizes on collective action – thus ensuring coverage to
    everyone irrespective of vulnerability status. In order to maximize the benefit of this tenet
    and to ensure that the planning process is demand driven, community participation and
    ownership needs to be emphasized upon.
(b) Monitoring: Analysis of baseline data for 2012 shows that despite the government’s past
    efforts to “target? vulnerable households and provide them access to IHHL, significant gaps
    still exist. Only 44% and 47% of vulnerable APL and BPL households have access to IHHL
    respectively. This is in contrast to a 64% (on average) access rate for non-vulnerable APL
    households. Annexure 3 documents the detailed analysis.
    The SBM has adequate scope of addressing the existing gaps via its Community Saturation
    principle, provided its implementation is effectively tracked. In this context, it is important to
    enhance the national government’s existing monitoring system to ensure that social
    indicators related to sanitation - like inclusion of the vulnerable in plans and design, usage of
    toilets by different social groups (based on age, gender, caste); tracking citizen’s feedback,
    grievance management, land management issues covered and documented as required.
    Monitoring system will also be enabled to track the reduced incidence of open defecation
    across different vulnerable groups as well as expenditure on inclusion of different social
    groups.
(c) Citizen’s Feedback: Thematic Social Audits to be conducted with focus on inclusion,
    participation, transparency, expenditure tracking and quality control. Role and functioning of
    VWSCs and local groups not to be surpassed and support to be provided by committees at
    block, district and state level. Results from the same will be used for mid-term remedial
    actions if required.
(d) Grievance Redressal: Considering the scale and targets of SBM, there is a need for specific,
    approachable and responsive grievance redressal mechanisms for timely and efficient
    redressal.

Implementation Support – Environment and Social




                                                                                                    5
14.    Successful completion of the key Operation actions pertaining to Environment and Social
aspects will be facilitated by the IPF component of the Operation. This will mainly assist all
Operation management and capacity building needs.

Implementation Support for Environmental Aspects

15.     Development of implementation support tools: To support implementation that ensures
environmentally appropriate actions, appropriate guidance for Program implementation would
need to be developed. This may include an Operation Manual that has checklists, standard
operating procedures (SOPs) and other guidance to ensure adherence to good environmental
practices and existing environmental legislation.

16.     Culturally appropriate demand creation and awareness strategies and material for both
onsite sanitation and SLWM is required. Guidelines for strengthening existing IEC/BCC material
focusing on improving skills and awareness of beneficiaries and GPs for planning, monitoring
and management.

17.      Capacity Building of Implementing Authorities: MDWS has a capacity building plan into
which environmental management may also be added. Capacities need to be created across the
institutional setup. MDWS would need to create environmental focal points/nodal persons to
ensure Program related environmental actions and impacts are appropriately addressed in the
Program. The nodal officers will also ensure Program actions comply with existing
environmental regulatory environment. To ensure required capacity is built at the various levels,
a suggested list of capacity building actions is given below.

                       Table 1: Capacity Building for Environmental Aspects
Broad areas          Topics                                            Building Capacities for
Awareness       on   Government of India and state environmental       All key project stakeholders, at National,
guidelines     and   guidelines, safeguards and legislation, and       State and district (implementing officials) and
legislation          project guidelines.                               other agencies implementing various project
                                                                       components.
Environmental        Identification of environmental impacts from      Key stakeholders implementing project –
impacts      and     construction, location and design issues of       including district implementing agency, and
mitigation           onsite sanitation and SLWM actions, possible      environment nodal points
                     mitigation actions
SLWM     system      Identification of SLWM concerns in                Key stakeholders involved in project design
development          GP/villages, actions and appropriate options,
                     including     technological   options     for
                     management and disposal
Construction         Environment issues during construction and        Stakeholders involved in construction
supervision          material     sourcing,    construction   site     supervision, including district staff and GP
                     management, public and worker safety              members
                     concerns, disposal of construction waste
Toilet               Management of toilets to keep clean and use,      Beneficiaries
management           including disposal of waste once pit cleaned,
                     identification of issues of leakages, breakages
                     etc.
Management      of   Management of sanitary complex, levying of        Stakeholders     identified     for     system

                                                                                                                     6
Broad areas          Topics                                            Building Capacities for
sanitary complex,    fee, cleaning and waste disposal, SLWM            management in GP
SLWM systems         systems cleaning, management and waste
                     disposal


18.     Monitoring and surveillance mechanisms: Monitoring of environmental impacts from the
Project need to be identified. Comprehensively Operation implementation monitoring, to ensure
major environmental parameters are addressed under SBM-G needs to be developed. This should
include water quality and management of developed systems. This may include monitoring of
more water points and systems, sanitary surveys, and convergence with other departments
monitoring water quality.

19.    Environmental Audit to ensure compliance of environmental policies and procedures
shall be undertaken as part of Annual Sanitary Survey. Results shall be used for mid-term
remedial actions, if required.

20.    In order to implement identified actions discussed in this section, implementing actions
and a plan has been identified to be implemented by MDWS. This is given in the table below.

                      Table 2: Implementation Plan for Environment Actions
Sub-action description              Deadline                  Completion measurement
                                                              Environment rules and actions identified and formally
Strengthen technical guidelines
                                    Identification of and     endorsed by nodal department and implementing
while              incorporating
                                    plan         developed    agencies. Institutional structure for implementation of
environmental       management
                                    beginning first year      environmental action at GP level identified and
rules and procedures.
                                                              recognized.
Capacity       building       for
environmental       management      Starting in first year,
                                                              Detailed training calendar, modules and material
(State and district team PRI        ongoing throughout
                                                              developed. Training undertaken as per calendar.
institutions and other identified   project period.
implementing partners)
Monitoring        plan     for      Identification of and
                                                              Indicators endorsed by implementing agencies and used
environmental       management      plan         developed
                                                              to track environmental management of SBM-G
along with indicators               beginning first year


Implementation Support for Social Aspects

21.     Capacity Building: MDWS has a capacity building plan into which social management
may be integrated. Across the 5 levels of institutional set-up, enhancement of capacity is
envisaged. Need based increment of positions and specialists (social) in planning, social
mobilization for collective behavioural change towards achieving ODF status is required. A
capacity development plan (detailed in the Operation Manual and in the Community Operational
Manual) has to be devised for key implementing institutions (PMU, WSSO, Water and
Sanitation Units at all three tiers, Technical support units) that regularly updates their skills,
perspectives on community led sanitation, gender sensitization, decentralized decision making,
transparency, and accountability.


                                                                                                                   7
22.     The capacity building plan for social aspects will target three broad areas – Perspective
level, Skill level and Mobilization and Behaviour change. The perspective level trainings will be
catered to administrators, elected officials, representatives of technical and support units and will
cover topics of Cultural practices; sensitivity to habits; existing class, caste and gender
hierarchies in sanitation practices. Skill training will cater to Staff at district, block and GP level
as well as elected representatives and will cover topics on planning, monitoring, targeting,
inclusion, participation, grievance redressal. Behavioural trainings will be targeted at
Beneficiaries, GP representatives, SHGs, Anganwadis and implementation staff at the village
level and will discuss Campaigns and information dissemination.

23.    The capacity building component will also be used to train the relevant GoI counterparts
on ICT tools and modules that can be seamlessly integrated with GoI’s existing monitoring
system and used for effective tracking of program implementation progress.

24.     Development and Implementation of Program Manuals, Guidelines: Assist development
of detailed checklists, standard operating procedures, guidelines etc. to ensure adequate social
inclusion, fair land diversion (when public land is not available), transparency and accountability
pertaining to all identified social aspects of the project.

25.     In order to successfully implement the identified programmatic and IPF actions in this
section, the following Action Plan has been identified to be implemented by MDWS:

                           Table 3: Implementation Plan for Social Actions
Sub-action description            Building Capacities for    Completion measurement                  Deadline
Implement strengthened social     Enhance perspective and    Formal        endorsement         of    Formal
management       rules     and    skill      levels    of    strengthened social management          endorsement
procedures to enhance the         administration, elected    rules and procedures included in the    by appraisal;
guiding principles - inclusion,   representatives,           Operation Manual and Community          Implementation
participation,   transparency,    technical and support      Operational Manual                      starting in First
and      accountability    and    units                                                              Year
grievance management
Capacities Augmented on           Enhance skill levels of    Finalization of the Organigram for      Staffing
Social Management (Creating       administration, elected    SBM support and its approval by         recruitment by
new and building existing         representatives,           appropriate sanctioning committee.      State govt. at
institutional and individual      technical and support      Formal communication from hiring        the end of the
capacities within the program,    units                      unit confirming hiring of specialists   first year; On-
mainstreaming social issues in                               and support agency to facilitate        going, starting
IEC/BCC/formal trainings)                                    implementation        of      social    in First Year
                                                             management rules and procedures.
Strengthening          social     Enhance skill levels of    Training on the basis of a detailed     On-going,
component of formal Trainings     district, block and GP     training calendar.                      starting in First
strategies/plans                  level administration as                                            Year
                                                             Different set of training designs in
                                  well       as    elected
Impart      training   to   all                              place for different set of
                                  representatives
stakeholders for strengthening                               stakeholders; Training modules
institutions to deliver the                                  finalized     incorporating    social
program that is grounded in                                  issues;     Key     STIs/    enlisted
the “guiding principles.?                                    institutions have acquired necessary
                                                             capacities to deliver quality
Enhancement in institutional
                                                             trainings that address social
capacity of key State Training

                                                                                                                    8
Sub-action description            Building Capacities for     Completion measurement              Deadline
Institutes                                                    management issues.
Develop and IEC material; and     Bring about mobilization    IEC implemented on the basis of a   On-going,
existing BCC/IEC of the           and behavior change in      detailed IEC calendar.              starting in First
program    for  PRIs      and     beneficiaries,        GP                                        Year
community                         representatives, SHGs
                                  and                other
Develop Indicators to measure     implementation staff in a   Developed based on IEC material     On-going
if IEC & communication                                        and key messages                    starting in First
                                  sustainable manner
messages     are      reaching                                                                    year
community        &       being
understood
Manuals, resources and experts to be made available for assisting and facilitating the above


26.     A separate Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet (ISDS) has been prepared for the IPF
component. The IPF Component consists primarily of consultancy services, evaluation studies
and capacity building to ensure efficient implementation of the identified Environment and
Social Action Plans. Therefore no significant, long term or adverse environment or social issues
are anticipated from the proposed interventions/activities.

27.     Social safeguard issues, including any significant, long term or adverse impacts or risks
are not anticipated due to activities/interventions proposed under this IPF component. OP 4.12 is
not triggered as no resettlement is envisaged due to the implementation of the activities under the
IPF Component. OP 4.10 is not triggered as no adverse impact on tribal communities are
envisaged.

Stakeholder Consultations

28.     Consultations with officials from the sample states (at state HQ, district level and two
blocks per district and 4-6 GPs per block) in each of 5 states of Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, West Bengal and Odisha were undertaken as part of Environmental and Social
Systems Assessment (ESSA). Consultations at national level including MDWS officials, state
officials, NGOs, civil societies, etc., will be undertaken after disclosure of draft ESSA and before
appraisal of the Operations.

Disclosure

29.    MDWS is required to disclose draft ESSA on their website before stakeholder
consultations at the national level. The final ESSA, incorporating comments from stakeholder
consultations, shall be disclosed by the MDWS before or after appraisal of the Operation. The
World Bank will disclose ESSA in Infoshop after receiving NOC for disclosure from MDWS on
both occasions.

Conclusion

30.     Overall, the ESSA shows that the state’s Environmental and Social systems are adequate
for the Program implementation, with implementation of the identified actions to address the
gaps and to enhance performance during implementation.

                                                                                                                 9
10
