                                                                                                         99504




     RUSSIAN FEDERATION AGING PROJECT
     PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN
                 RUSSIA:
                    W ORKING L ONGER AND M ORE P RODUCTIVELY


                                         V ICTORIA L EVIN *‚Ä†
                                           September 12, 2015




* Corresponding author. Social Protection and Labor Global Practice, World Bank. Email:
vlevin@worldbank.org.
‚Ä† This paper was prepared as a background note for the World Bank report ‚ÄúSearching for a New Silver Age in

Russia: The Drivers and Impacts of Population Aging.‚Äù We thank Irina Denisova, Emily Sinnott, Tamara
Maximova, Johannes Koettl, Gady Saiovici, Oleksiy Sluchinskiy, and Nithin Umapathi for their contributions to
this note. The team greatly benefited from comments by Edmundo Murrugarra, Gonzalo Reyes, and Birgit
Hansl. The team also thanks Michal Rutkowski, Ana Revenga, Alberto Rodriguez, Roberta Gatti, and Omar Arias
for their guidance in the preparation of this paper.
                                                              PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA           1
Content

Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................................................ 2
I.       Introduction ..................................................................................................................................................................... 3
II.      The Future of Russia‚Äôs Labor Force ........................................................................................................................ 3
III. Individual Determinants of Working and Retiring in Russia..................................................................... 11
IV. Social Insurance Policies, Labor Institutions, and Incentives to Work Longer .................................. 20
V.       Policies to Enhance Active Aging in Russia ....................................................................................................... 27
      Preserving the Human Capital of Older Adults ...................................................................................... 28
      Incentives to Encourage More Active Aging ............................................................................................ 32
References ................................................................................................................................................................................ 37
Appendix ................................................................................................................................................................................... 41




                                                                                                            PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA                                            1
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

A shrinking working-age population will be the Russian Federation‚Äôs biggest demographic challenge
in coming decades. With workers increasingly scarce, sustainable future economic development
depends on Russia‚Äôs ability to bring into the labor force currently under-utilized groups, such as
young mothers and older people, and to maximize the productivity of every worker. This study
assesses the projected dynamics of the working-age population and how changes in labor force
participation may affect the future workforce. It also assesses the potential contribution of individual
factors to either facilitate or deter the participation of older Russians in the labor force. A review of
disincentives for labor force participation in current social insurance programs and labor institutions
is followed by policy proposals to help prolong the working lives of older adults.




                                                           PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA          2
    I.      INTRODUCTION

Increased life expectancy makes a longer working life possible. In the next several decades,
Russia‚Äôs total population will age and the working-age population will shrink. These dynamics are
troubling in terms of maintaining economic growth and the sustainability of pension and health care
systems, which can be expected to have a larger clientele and lower social security contributions. Yet
the increased longevity that drives Russia‚Äôs future population aging can be recast as an economic
boon if it enables people to stay in work longer. Indeed, in an aging society the concept of ‚Äúworking -
age‚Äù need not end with the statutory retirement age (currently 60 for men and 55 for women); it can
instead be redefined as the ability to make a productive contribution to the economy. Given an
appropriate incentives structure and a dynamic and well-functioning labor market, more Russians
can engage in productive work, especially those in groups that currently have lower labor force
participation, such as young women and older people.

The productivity of each worker is becoming progressively more important as the population
ages. Since the number of workers in Russia is expected to shrink, if economic growth is to be
sustained, the productivity of the remaining workers must rise. There is scope to attain higher
productivity by investing more in the human capital of Russia‚Äôs workers‚Äînot least by enabling them
to stay healthy and to build skills throughout their working lives (see the companion study on adult
education in Russia, Nellemann et al. 2015). As has been seen in other countries, offering employers
economic incentives for using the current labor force can also bring process and product innovations
that facilitate greater use of the skills and experience of older workers and help them to stay
productive.

This study examines individual factors and incentives for more active aging in Russia: (1) It
analyzes the projected dynamics of the working-age population and assesses how changes in labor
force participation can affect the size of the workforce. (2) It assesses how individual factors may
either facilitate or deter the labor force participation of older Russians. (3) It analyzes current social
insurance policy and labor institutions with respect to explicit or implicit disincentives for labor force
participation and retirement and suggests policy options that can help to enhance active aging in
Russia.



    II. THE FUTURE OF RUSSIA‚ÄôS LABOR FORCE
A shrinking working-age population will soon be Russia‚Äôs main demographic challenge. The
population in Russia is aging more slowly than in its Eastern European neighbors. As of 2010,
Russians aged 65 and older constituted 13.1 percent of the total population‚Äîhigher than the average
in the Europe and Central Asia (ECA) region and lower than in EU-11 or EU-15 countries; by 2050,
this share is expected to reach 20.5 percent but would still be lower than in either EU group (UN
Population Division 2012). At the same time, Russia‚Äôs working-age (15-64) population is predicted
to drop from 72 percent of the population in 2010 to 62 percent in 2050, a loss of almost 28 million



                                                            PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA          3
people. That much shrinkage of the working-age population, while lower than in EU-11 group,
parallels the dynamics in EU-15 countries, and exceeds that in all other regions (Figure 1). The
precise extent of this challenge in Russia depends on the fertility, mortality, and migration
assumptions underlying the estimates of the UN and the Russian Federal State Statistics Service
(Rosstat), which differ significantly (Box 1).

 Figure 1. Population Aging and Work Force Shrinkage in Russia and Comparator Countries

                                       Share of 65+                        Change in working-age population share,
                                                                                          2010-50
                                  40
    Percent of total population




                                  30                                       10




                                                      Percentage points
                                  20                                        5
                                  10                                        0
                                   0                                       -5
                                                                          -10
                                                                          -15



                                        2010   2050

Source: UN Population Division data (2012 revision).
Note: AFR=Africa; SAR=South Asia; MENA=Middle East and North Africa; ECA=Europe and Central Asia;
LAC=Latin America and Caribbean; EAP=East Asia and Pacific; Non-EU OECD=Non-European Union countries
of Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; EU=European Union.

Russia has a fairly high and growing rate of labor force participation; more than 68 percent of
15‚Äì72-year-olds are economically active. While precise international comparisons are made
difficult by data differences (most countries calculate the labor force participation rate [LFPR] based
on those aged 15 and older, with no upper age limit), Russia‚Äôs working-age population stands out as
relatively active. With more than 68 percent of adults aged 15‚Äì72 participating, Russia‚Äôs LFPR is
comparable to that of Nordic countries and significantly above the averages for the EU-11 and the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD; Figure 2). Although Russia has a
history of even higher LPFRs‚Äîfor example, 70.3 percent recorded in 1992‚Äî (Breev 2005), in 2003‚Äì
13, growth in this indicator was almost monotonic (Figure 3).




                                                                           PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA          4
Box 1. Russia‚Äôs Population Projections and Assumptions

Two sources of population projections are used in this study, UNPD and Rosstat. Each relies on certain
assumptions about the main determinants of population dynamics‚Äîfertility, mortality, and immigration‚Äî
to arrive at final estimates. Even small differences in these assumptions can result in large discrepancies in
projection estimates, so it is important to understand what lies behind each set of projections and what
may be driving the differences between them. This study uses one set of UNPD projections (medium-
fertility variant) and two sets of Rosstat projections (low and medium scenarios).

Total Fertility: The medium scenarios of the UN and Rosstat both exhibit an increasing trend and are quite
close to each other, with the UN predicting slightly higher fertility until 2040 (Figure B1.1). The more
pessimistic Rosstat (low) scenario has fertility falling until 2025, then gradually increasing ‚Äîbut never
back to 2015 levels.

                                Figure B1.1 Total Fertility Rate in Russia

                        2.0

                        1.8

                        1.6                                            Rosstat-Low
                                                                       Rosstat-Medium
                        1.4
                                                                       UN-Medium
                        1.2

                        1.0
                              2015    2025     2035    2045

Births and Deaths: For the most part, the medium-variant UN projection lies between Rosstat‚Äôs medium
and low scenarios of births and deaths. While the gap between the two Rosstat scenarios of deaths is largely
constant, the gap in births expands significantly, due perhaps to the different age structure implicit in the
fertility rate assumptions. The UN projection of births starts off closer to the Rosstat-medium projection
but diverges from it after 2040. For deaths, the UN starts closer to the Rosstat-low projection but its
dynamics are very different, with deaths dropping throughout the period, which brings it to the Rosstat-
medium level by 2040.

                                Figure B.1.2. Births and Deaths in Russia

                      2400

                      2200

                      2000                                               Rosstat-births
                                                                         (medium)
                      1800                                               Rosstat-deaths
                                                                         (medium)
                      1600                                               UN-births
                                                                         (medium)
                      1400                                               UN-deaths
                                                                         (medium)
                      1200                                               Rosstat-births
                                                                         (low)
                      1000                                               Rosstat-deaths
                                                                         (low)




                                                                  PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA               5
  Net Migration: Finally, the three projections assume very different dynamics for future migration flows.
  Rosstat‚Äôs medium scenario is very optimistic, expecting a continuous increase in the net number of
  immigrants to Russia, from 325,000 in 2015 to 405,000 in 2050. Both the UN and Rosstat-low scenario
  assume that net immigration will decrease, but the magnitude of the decrease differs dramatically: while
  Rosstat‚Äôs low scenario expects a decrease of a third, the UN projects a decrease of more than a half.

                                 Figure B1.3. Net Immigration into Russia

                    450
                    400
                    350
                    300
                    250
                    200
                                                                           Rosstat-medium
                    150
                    100                                                    UN-medium
                     50
                                                                           Rosstat-low
                      0




Given the reliance of the Rosstat-medium scenario on very optimistic migration projections, the study will
focus on the UN-medium and Rosstat-low scenarios. However, as stimulating greater migration can
potentially address some of the challenges posed by population aging, project ions based on Rosstat‚Äôs
medium scenarios will also be discussed.




                                                             PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA            6
 Figure 2. Labor Force Participation, Russia                                   Figure 3. Trends in Labor Force Participation
 and Selected Comparator Countries, 2012                                                    in Russia, 2003‚Äì13

                                80                                                                             69

                                70
                                                                                                               68
                                60
    Labor force as percent of
    working-age population




                                                                                Percent of people aged 15-72
                                50                                                                             67

                                40
                                                                                                               66
                                30
                                                                                                               65
                                20

                                10                                                                             64

                                0
                                     Sweden Russian Finland   OECD     EU-11                                   63
                                             Fed.
                                     15-74   15-72   15-74    Mostly   15+                                     62
                                                               15+                                                  2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

 Source: ECA Employment Monitor Database - Labor                               Source: Rosstat data.
 Market Indicators (based on ILO Short-term Indicators).

Yet even with this LFPR, Russia is expected to lose more than 20 million workers through 2050
because the working-age population is shrinking fast. To understand how demographic
processes underway in Russia can affect the size and age structure of the future labor force, an
analysis was carried out that integrated demographic projections with LFPRs. The data on
demographic trends for age-gender combinations came from Rosstat and the UN Population Division
(UNPD), and LFPRs disaggregated by age and gender are from the International Labour Organization
(ILO). Assuming no changes in LFPR profiles between 2030 and 2050, Russia‚Äôs labor force could
shrink by 20‚Äì23 million workers between 2010 and 2050 (based on the Rosstat-low and UN-medium
demographic projections; FIGURE 4). Some shrinkage of both younger (15‚Äì39) and prime-aged (40‚Äì
64) workers is expected by 2020. A much more drastic decrease is projected to occur in the 2020s,
with Russia losing more than 7 million younger workers because the cohorts born during the 1990s
transition years that will be entering the workforce are small. Although the prime-age labor force will
still increase, this will be the first real decade of labor force aging as the median age of workers rises
significantly and the total workforce shrinks by about 5 million people. The plunge in young workers
during the 2020s will reverberate through the age pyramid in the 2030s and 2040s with the
subtraction of almost 10 million older workers during those decades. Although the number of
younger workers does go up in the 2030s, the gain is minimal (less than a million), and in the 2040s
this group again begins to shrink because of the way the fertility dynamics of the 2000s play out (see
companion study on family policies, Elizarov and Levin 2015).




                                                                                                                    PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA                    7
                            Figure 4. Labor Force, by Age Group and Period, 2010s through 2040s

                             UN (medium-variant)                                            Rosstat (low scenario)
                       6                                                               6

                       4                                                               4

                       2                                                               2
    Million workers




                                                                    Million workers
                       0                                                               0

                       -2                                                              -2

                       -4                                                              -4

                       -6                                                              -6

                       -8                                                              -8

                      -10                                                             -10
                            2010s      2020s        2030s   2040s                           2010s      2020s        2030s   2040s

                                    15-39   40-64   65+                                             15-39   40-64   65+


Source: Methodology in Koettl 2008.

There is considerable scope for making better use of the declining working-age population,
particularly by enhancing the labor force participation of women and older people. Female
labor force participation in Russia is significantly below that of males during the childbearing years
(late 20s through 30s) and after women‚Äôs statutory retirement age of 55 years (FIGURE 5a). This
gender gap could be closed with proactive policies that enable women to better combine family and
work and that give older women incentives to remain in the labor force past the official retirement
age. Since Russian women aged 55‚Äì59 have about 18 years of health-adjusted life expectancy (HALE)
compared to men‚Äôs 13.5 years at the same age, health does not appear to be a constraint on bridging
the labor force gender gap for older Russians (IHME 2010). Indeed, other countries have been able
to achieve a much higher LFPR for older individuals. The extreme example is Iceland, the country
with the highest LFPR in Europe, which in 2010 had 74.5 percent of its adult population (15+ years)
in the labor force, compared to Russia‚Äôs 63 percent. A large part of the difference is due to Iceland‚Äôs
significantly higher LFPR of those 50 and over (FIGURE 5b). While 40 percent of men and about a
quarter of women in Russia are active beyond 60, in Iceland these figures are 85 percent of men and
73 percent of women; for men, the gap can be attributed in large part to differences in HALE (there
is a HALE gap of about 6 years between Russia and Iceland for 50‚Äì54-year-olds, for example), such
differences for women are fairly small (2.5 years for those aged 50‚Äì54). Thus, at least in principle
there appears to be substantial scope to lengthen the working life of Russians; admittedly, attaining
such a high LFPR would only be possible if many other constraints (for example, on health, skills, and
mobility) are removed.




                                                                                      PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA              8
                       Figure 5. Scope for Increasing Labor Force Participation in Russia

                    (a) By Closing the Gender Gap                       (b) By Activating Older Individuals
               Labor force participation rate by gender                 Labor force participation rate by age in
                       and age in Russia, 2010                                 Russia and Iceland, 2010
              100                                                     100

              80                                                      80
    Percent




                                                            Percent
              60                                                      60

              40                                                      40

              20                                                      20

               0                                                       0



                             Men        Women                                        Russia         Iceland

Source: ILO data.

Can increases in labor force participation solve Russia‚Äôs problem of a diminishing workforce?
To address this question, four alternative projections of the future labor force were calculated using
different participation scenarios, all of which presuppose significant policy reforms. All scenarios use
ILO projections of labor force participation between 2010 and 2030. From 2030 to 2050, the baseline
scenario assumes constant participation rates, so that the age-gender profile of labor force
participation continues as it is in 2030. Scenario 2 assumes convergence of all age-gender LFPRs to
the levels in Iceland, the European country with the most active workers. This scenario implies
increases in labor force participation across the board but especially among women and older
individuals, where there are the greatest gaps in participation. Scenario 3 assumes convergence of
female labor force participation to that of males in all age groups. Given the different statutory
retirement ages in Russia, this scenario also implies a considerable increase in labor force
participation by older women. Scenario 4 simulates a 10-year increase in the average working life for
each gender. Of course, achieving any of the alternative scenarios would necessitate significant
reforms in pensions and in labor market, tax, and skills policies.

Raising labor force participation in Russia would help to mitigate, though not eliminate, the
impending problem of a shrinking and aging labor force. Of the three scenarios simulating higher
LFPRs, convergence of Russia‚Äôs age-gender labor force participation profile to that of Iceland would
have the greatest impact. Attaining this scenario would reduce the decline in workforce by two-
thirds, using Rosstat-low projections, and by one-half, using UN-medium projections (Figure 6). Both
the young and the prime-aged workforce would still experience substantial decreases, but the older
workforce (over 65) would gain close to 4 million workers. The other two scenarios‚Äîconvergence
of female to male LFPR and increase of work life by 10 years‚Äîhave less impact on the aggregate
labor force. The relatively low impact is due to structural demographic factors, such as Russia‚Äôs low
fertility in the 1990s, which is still percolating through the age pyramid and resulting in smaller
cohorts.




                                                                  PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA                 9
Figure 6. Change in the Russian Labor Force under Different Scenarios, by Age Group, 2010‚Äì
                                            50

                                       UN (medium-variant)                                                                       Rosstat (low scenario)
                             15                                                                                     15
                             10                                                                                     10
   Million workers




                             5                                                                                       5




                                                                                                  Million workers
                             0                                                                                       0
                             -5                                                                                      -5
                      -10
                                                                                                                    -10
                      -15
                                                                                                                    -15
                      -20
                                                                                                                    -20
                                   Constant Convergence to Female to male Increase in
                                                                                                                               Constant       Convergence to    Female-to-male    Increase in
                                  participation benchmark   convergence work life by 10                                   participation rates    Iceland         convergence     worklife by 10
                                      rates      countries                   years                                                                                                   years

                                               15-39     40-64   65+                                                                          15-39     40-64     65+


 Source: Methodology from Koettl 2008.

Increases in labor force participation coupled with a proactive immigration policy can bring
work- force gains. The Rosstat-medium scenario is more optimistic than either Rosstat-low or the
UN-medium scenarios not only on future fertility and mortality rates but also on the ability of Russia
to attract ever-increasing net inflows of migrants (Box 1). Based on Eurostat data on immigration to
Russia in 2007, 82 percent of immigrants were of working age (15‚Äì64 years) and 55 percent were
aged 15‚Äì39. Assuming a similar age profile of future net immigrants gives a significant bump up in
workforce numbers; immigration together with more optimistic projections of fertility and mortality
combine to produce a relatively small loss of 2 million workers through 2050. Applying the same
alternative scenarios to the Rosstat-medium projection yields significant gains in the workforce, with
again the greatest impact attained by converging Russia‚Äôs labor force participation profile to that of
Iceland (Figure 7). Of course, in determining the impact on productivity that can be attained through
immigration, it is necessary to consider differentials in the educational attainment of immigrants
joining the labor force.

Figure 7. Changes in the Russian Labor Force, Different Scenarios, Rosstat-medium
Demographic Projections, 2010‚Äì50

                              8

                              6
           Million workers




                              4

                              2

                              0

                             -2
                                        Constant           Convergence to        Female-to-male                      Increase in worklife
                                   participation rates        Iceland             convergence                            by 10 years

                                                                 15-39   40-64    65+

 Source: Methodology from Koettl 2008.




                                                                                                                     PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA                                         10
    Although higher LFPRs can help to sustain economic development in the short term,
    sustained productivity growth will be required to put the country on a stable growth path
    through the next demographic transition. Using the under-tapped potential of women and older
    adults through higher LFPRs can support Russia‚Äôs economic output and growth, but there is a
    natural limit to such gains. The future of Russia‚Äôs development will depend on its ability to obtain
    higher productivity from each worker, which underscores the importance of investing in skills
    throughout the life cycle. The good news is that attaining both longer working lives and higher
    productivity at older ages is a feasible goal, given the projected doubling in Russia‚Äôs high-educated
    older (65+ years) population from 2000 to 2050, even at constant enrollment ratios (FIGURE 8).1

                                           Figure 8. Tertiary Education for Older Russian Adults, 2000‚Äì50

                                      30
        Percent of persons aged 65+




                                      25

                                      20

                                      15

                                      10

                                       5

                                       0
                                           2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050


     Source: IIASA 2010 data.




      III. INDIVIDUAL DETERMINANTS OF WORKING AND
           RETIRING IN RUSSIA

Greater utilization of older workers is essential to achieve prosperous aging. As Russia‚Äôs labor
force ages and shrinks, promotion of active aging, with workers remaining in productive employment
for longer periods, can help Russia take full advantage of increased life expectancy. This section
examines factors that drive separation from the labor force and factors that encourage some Russian
pensioners to continue working. It also reviews the incentives and disincentives inherent in current
social insurance policies that can influence retirement decisions.




1Estimating the projected contributions of higher labor force participation and productivity is outside the
scope of this study, but see companion papers by Matytsin et al. 2015 and Balaev et al. 2015).


                                                                                   PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA   11
While statutory retirement ages in Russia are low, pensioners are not penalized for working.
The age at which most workers can qualify for old-age labor pensions in Russia is 60 for men and 55
for women, although eligibility for social pensions comes later, at 65 for men and 60 for women. Since
pensioners can collect full pensions while working past the statutory retirement age, the average
effective retirement ages are somewhat higher: 60 for women and 63 for men. Even so, they are
below OECD averages, and while the average male effective retirement age has been converging to
the OECD benchmark since 1997, the female average lags far behind (Figure 9).

    Figure 9. Average Effective Retirement Age, Russia and OECD, by Gender, 1997‚Äì2012

             66
             64
             62
             60
             58
             56
             54
             52



                                    Men - Russia         Women - Russia
                                    Men - OECD           Women - OECD


Source: OECD data.

Both push and pull factors figure in the decision of Russian older adults to remain in the
workforce past retirement age. Previous studies on employment correlates for elderly Russians
suggest that the decision to work is based on both necessity (push factors) and opportunity (pull
factors). Looking at data from the late 1990s, Kolev and Pascal (2002) found that low pensions as
well as pension arrears provided an income imperative for pensioners to work on both the extensive
(probability of employment) and intensive (hours worked) margins, while access to subsistence
farming and higher human capital (in terms of both education and health) allowed them to find and
retain jobs. Gerber and Radl (2014) analyzed the labor force participation and earnings of elderly
Russians and confirmed Kolev and Pascal‚Äôs finding that economic need pushed some pensioners to
remain in the labor force, with more educated pensioners having more opportunities to work.
Interestingly, Gerber and Radl found no evidence that the elderly were disproportionately blocked
from employment: the trend in the employment rate for this group was stable or positive from the
mid-1990s on.

Analysis based on more recent household survey data extends the evidence on potential
drivers of labor market activity and retirement. The analysis uses rich panel data from the Russia
Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS), focusing on the years since the 2008/09 financial crisis.
Specifically, it examines predictors of the move to retire in the four survey waves studied and the
characteristics of working pensioners in 2012 compared to nonworking peers. Box 2 provides more
details on data and the methodology of this analysis.



                                                          PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA       12
Box 2. Analysis of Older Russian Workers‚Äô Retirement and Working Decisions

Data
The analysis of older Russian workers‚Äô retirement and working decisions uses data from the 2009‚Äì12
waves of the Russian Longitudinal Monitoring Survey (RLMS), which covers a representative sample
of Russian households.

The analysis of working pensioner characteristics focuses on the 2012 wave of RLMS and includes a
nationally representative initial sample of 1,304 males aged 60 and over and 3,611 females aged 55
and over, about 21 percent of both groups being employed. Figure B2.1 shows that at the official
retirement age, about 60 percent of Russian women and 50 percent of Russian men were still
employed, but this share fell to below 20 percent by the mid- to late sixties.

Figure B2.1. Retirement Ages

                                               Men, 2012                                                    Women, 2012
                            100                                                             100

                            80                                                               80

                            60                                                               60
   %




                            40                                                          %    40

                            20                                                               20

                             0                                                                0
                                  50      55    60    65        70      75    80                  50   55     60    65        70      75    80

                            Wage employed       Self-employed        Unemployed             Wage employed     Self-employed        Unemployed


The analysis of exit from employment into retirement utilizes the RLMS panel structure, defining the
sample as people 10 years before statutory retirement age and up to 72 (i.e., women aged 45‚Äì72 and
men 50‚Äì72) who were employed in the first period in which they appear in RLMS waves 18‚Äì21 (for
years 2009‚Äì12) or who re-enter the labor force at any point during the period studied. The dependent
variable in this analysis is an indicator for whether the individual becomes ‚Äúretired‚Äù or not by the next
survey wave. The initial sample covers 3,870 observations of 1,765 males and 7,080 observations of
3,038 females. About 5 percent retired during the observation period. As demonstrated in Figure B2.2,
the retirement hazard rate (i.e. the probability of exit into retirement) increases around the statutory
age (55 for women, 60 for men), and then picks up significantly after 67 for both genders.

                            0.5
   Retirement hazard rate




                            0.4

                            0.3

                            0.2

                            0.1

                              0
                                       45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72
                                                                             Age of last employment

                                                                             Men        Women




                                                                                         PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA                        13
    Methodology

    The following probit model specification examining distinguishing characteristics of working
    pensioners (as opposed to retired pensioners) was estimated separately for men and women on the
    2012 cross section of the RLMS:

Ì†µÌ±åÌ†µÌ±ñ = Ì†µÌªº + Ì†µÌ±øÌ†µÌ≤ä Ì†µÌªΩ + Ì†µÌ±∑Ì†µÌ≤ä Ì†µÌºÉ + Ì†µÌ±ØÌ†µÌ≤ä Ì†µÌªø + Ì†µÌ±≥Ì†µÌ≤ä Ì†µÌºÉ + Ì†µÌ±¢Ì†µÌ±ñ                                                                        (1)

where

Y            Indicator for employed status (=1 if employed, =0 if not employed)

X            Respondent characteristics (age, education, marital status, life satisfaction, self-reported health,
             disability status, chronic health conditions);

P            Partner characteristics (employment, self-reported health, disability status);

H            Household characteristics (presence of children under 18, household income per capita net of
             respondent‚Äôs labor income);

L            Location (settlement type, region).

    The model also includes a stochastic idiosyncratic shock ( ui). The model is estimated using sample
    weights and with robust standard errors clustered by PSU.

    The analysis of exit into retirement was conducted separately for men aged 50-72 and for women
    aged 45-72 using 2009-2012 waves of RLMS via a random-effects probit, and was of the following
    form:

Ì†µÌ±åÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±°+1 = Ì†µÌªº + Ì†µÌ±øÌ†µÌ≤äÌ†µÌ≤ï Ì†µÌªΩ + Ì†µÌ±±Ì†µÌ≤äÌ†µÌ≤ï Ì†µÌºÜ + Ì†µÌ±∑Ì†µÌ≤äÌ†µÌ≤ï Ì†µÌºÉ + Ì†µÌ±ØÌ†µÌ≤äÌ†µÌ≤ï Ì†µÌªø + Ì†µÌ±ÖÌ†µÌ±úÌ†µÌ±¢Ì†µÌ±õÌ†µÌ±ëÌ†µÌ±° + Ì†µÌ±ÖÌ†µÌ±íÌ†µÌ±îÌ†µÌ±ñÌ†µÌ±úÌ†µÌ±õÌ†µÌ±ó + Ì†µÌ±ÜÌ†µÌ±íÌ†µÌ±°Ì†µÌ±°Ì†µÌ±ôÌ†µÌ±íÌ†µÌ±öÌ†µÌ±íÌ†µÌ±õÌ†µÌ±°Ì†µÌ±† + Ì†µÌ±¢Ì†µÌ±ñ   (2)

    where

Y            Indicator for exit from employment into retirement in the subsequent period (=1 if the
             respondent‚Äôs labor force status is ‚Äúretired‚Äù in the next wave, =0 if still employed)

X            Respondent characteristics (age, old-age pension eligibility, education, marital status, life
             satisfaction, self-reported health, disability status, chronic health conditions);

J            Respondent‚Äôs job-related characteristics (public sector, part-time employment, working from
             home, salary cut in the last 12 months, job satisfaction with job overall and its aspects);

P            Partner characteristics (employment, self-reported health, disability status);

I            Household characteristics (presence of children under 18, household income per capita net of
             respondent‚Äôs labor income);

    The model for exit from employment into retirement also includes a full set of settlement type, region,
    and round (i.e. survey wave) controls, in order to account for location-specific and time-specific
    factors, as well as a stochastic idiosyncratic shock (ui).

    It is important to note that the results of the analysis reflect correlations and not necessarily causation.




                                                                                                PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA      14
Quantitative analysis is complemented by qualitative evidence collected in recent focus
groups with employers, employees, and retired pensioners, which were part of the background
analysis for the ECA Regional Pensions Report, The Inverting Pyramid (Schwarz et al. 2014). They
provide an in-depth look at what drives separation at or after retirement age, reasons for remaining
in the labor force, constraints on finding employment at older ages, and how employers and other
employees perceive older workers. (Details on the main messages from focus groups are presented
in Box 3.)

Health-related concerns can push older Russian workers, especially women, into retirement.
There is a negative association between poor health or disability on the one hand and working past
retirement age on the other (Figure 10a). Moreover, poor health is a significant precursor of Russian
women‚Äôs exit into retirement (Figure 10b). For men, self-assessed poor health is not a significant
predictor of employment separation, but diagnosed chronic heart disease is associated with
retirement onset. These findings using self-reported health measures are corroborated by an analysis
based on the World Health Organization (WHO) Study on global AGEing and Adult Health (SAGE)
data, which finds that relative to peers who do not work, older Russians who have jobs perform better
on objective functional tests, such as a walking test, and have lower incidence of such health
conditions as hypertension, coronary disease, stroke, and arthritis (Maximova 2014). Finally,
qualitative evidence from the focus groups suggests that health reasons are the leading cause of
separation from employment for older workers, both at their own initiative and at the initiative of
employers. The vast majority of Russian companies have not yet felt the same economic pressure to
use their aging workforce as firms in other countries, such as Germany‚Äôs BMW (Loch et al. 2010),
which has adjusted workplaces to reduce the physical strain on older workers (see Box 5 later in the
study). Indeed, one employer from Yaroslavl questioned the fairness of making adjustments for older
workers: ‚ÄúA person works at a certain place and performs a certain job, which requires a certain level
of physical and mental abilities, and gets money for this job. Why should we provide any other
conditions?‚Äù

Higher human capital enables Russians to lengthen their working life. In 2012, Russian
pensioners with university education were more likely to be employed (with an increased
probability of working for those having tertiary education being 4 percentage points for women and
13 percentage points for men. For men, secondary and professional/vocational education are also
associated with a higher probability of working past retirement age. For women, education also
matters at the margin in the decision to remain in or leave employment: thus, women with university
education are 6 percentage points less likely to retire in the next period than less-educated but
otherwise similar women. Evidence from focus groups also points to obsolete skills as a significant
predictor of employer-initiated employment separation for older workers and to a substantial skills
mismatch in the labor market for Russian pensioners.




                                                          PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA       15
Box 3. Qualitative Evidence on the Work and Retirement Decisions of Older Russians

As part of background work for the World Bank Europe and Central Asia Pensions Report (Schwarz et
al. 2014), focus groups with employers, older employees, and pensioners were conducted in Russia
and several other countries in Europe and Central Asia (ECA), in order to identify what drives
separation of older workers from the labor force, constraints on continued employment and reentry,
attitudes toward older employees, and perspectives on willingness to work past the legal retirement
age.

Methodology

In June 2012, 14 focus groups were conducted in two locations in Russia, Moscow and Yaroslavl; 10 of
these, totaling 80 participants, were conducted with older employees and pensioners:

  ÔÇ∑ 4 groups of workers with five or less years to legal retirement age (men aged 55‚Äì59, women aged
    50‚Äì54)
  ÔÇ∑ 2 groups of working pensioners (men aged 60‚Äì64, women aged 55‚Äì60)
  ÔÇ∑ 4 groups of non-working pensioners (men aged 60‚Äì64, women aged 55‚Äì60 years)

Four other focus groups consisted of a total of 28 employers, assigned by type of firm ownership
(private and public) and firm age (founded before and after 2000).

Results

ÔÇ∑ Drivers of retirement: Health was the main factor driving full retirement, from both the employee
and employer perspective. Retirement for health reasons is initiated about as often by the employer
and the employee. The second most common reason for retirement is informal care demands on older
workers‚Äô time, closely followed by employers‚Äô perception of a mismatch in skills between the job and
the worker.
ÔÇ∑ Factors promoting continued work: Most older workers are ready to continue working after legal
retirement age, and most non-working pensioners would be willing to reenter work, for financial
reasons and to continue feeling useful and engaged. Flexible work arrangements (part-time, seasonal,
occasional); less physically demanding working conditions; and having more childcare and eldercare
options available can stimulate pensioners to continue working. According to employers, later
retirement can be achieved with pension incentives, wage subsidies for hiring older workers, or
benefits targeted to working pensioners.
ÔÇ∑ Constraints in the labor market: Employees and pensioners are pessimistic about their ability to find
a good job post-retirement, believing that the only options would be unskilled routine and physically
demanding low-paid jobs. Age-related discrimination, job search difficulties, and skill mismatches are
obstacles to post-retirement reemployment. According to employers, while age is generally not
considered explicitly, they are hesitant to hire older job seeks because they have higher health risks
and less capacity for learning and adjusting to new approaches and teams.
ÔÇ∑ Perceptions of older workers: Employers, employees, and pensioners all perceive older workers to be
more responsible and reliable, have a more positive attitude to work, and demonstrate more relevant
skills and ability to draw on greater work experience than younger workers. In general, both
employers and employees agreed that older workers can do the same or even a better job at lower cost
than younger workers. Nevertheless, older workers are considered by both employees and employers
to have unstable health and diminishing physical and mental abilities. Social tensions between younger
and older workers are rare in Russia because most older workers have jobs that younger workers do
not want; instead, older workers are more likely to compete with informal low-skilled guest workers.

Source: MB ARMI-Marketing Company 2012.




                                                           PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA           16
Russian couples have a strong preference to retire together. As observed in studies of retirement
decisions in East Asian countries (Giles et al. 2012), decisions on whether to keep working or retire
from the labor force are often made at the level of the couple rather than by each spouse separately.
Thus, in 2012 having a working wife was associated with a statistically and economically significant
13 percentage point increase in the probability that a pension-age husband would still be employed;
the corresponding association for pension-age wives is smaller but a still highly significant 9
percentage points. Moreover, a partner‚Äôs decision to retire is correlated with a 7‚Äì8 percentage point
higher probability of retirement by the respondent. This implies that equalization of retirement age
for men and women can not only give women a longer working life but may also, through the
observed preference for joint retirement, have the indirect effect of increasing the average effective
retirement age for men.

                             Figure 10. Work and Retirement Decisions of Older Russians, Correlates

                             a) Characteristics of working                                                         b) Exit from employment into
                                   pensioners (2012)                                                                   retirement (2009‚Äì2012)

                                                             **                                                      Old-age pension eligibility                                ***
                                       Poor health                                                                                                                            ***
                                                             **

                                                                                                                                   Poor health                       *
                                                           ***
                                                                                             Respondent info

                                          Disabled
                                                             **
   Respondent info




                                                                                                                         Chronic heart disease
                                                                                                                                                                         **
                                                                         **
                              University education
                                                                                  ***
                                                                                                                          University education        *

                          Professional / vocational
                                 education                                       ***                                 Married or living together                          **


                             Secondary education                                                                            Working part-time                        **
                                                                                   *


                        Married or living together                                                                        Working from home ***
                                                                                             Job info




                                                                         ***
   Partner info




                                                                               ***                                    Dissatisfied with the job
                           Partner in employment                                                                                                                          **
                                                                                  ***
                                                                                                                 Dissatisfied with professional                      **
                                                                                                                             growth
                                                                      ***
                                  Partner disabled
                                                                                                                                                                               ***
                                                                                             Partner info




                                                                                                                  Partner retired in next wave
                                                                                                                                                                                ***
                     Log real HH income net of R's ***
   Household info




                             labor income            ***                                                                      Partner disabled                       *
                                                                                         Househ
                                                                                         old info




                                                             **                                                Log per capita HH income net of
                     Presence of children under 18
                                                            ***                                                        R's labor income                              **

                                                  -0.15 -0.1 -0.05 0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2                                                            -0.10 -0.05 0.00   0.05      0.10
                                                      Marginal effect on P(employed)
                                                                                                                               Marginal effect on P(retirement before next wave)
                                    Women (N=2,634)        Men (N=969)                                                    Women (N=3,753)           Men (N=1,814)

Source: RLMS data.
Note: Marginal effects reported; significance levels: *** <1%, ** <5%, * <10%. Other coefficients included in the regressions
are suppressed due to space constraints (see Tables A.1 and A.2 for full estimates of the regressions).




                                                                                                               PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA                                  17
Many older Russians feel a strong income imperative for remaining in employment. Similar to
the findings of Kolev and Pascal (2002) and Gerber and Radl (2014), the analysis reveals that for
people of pensionable age, household income per capita (calculated net of any labor income earned
by the respondent) is 10 percentage points lower for working women and 7 percentage points lower
for working men than for their nonworking peers. Income is also positively associated with the
decision of Russians to retire, although statistically these estimates are somewhat less precise.
Qualitative evidence confirms that many older workers report necessity as the driving force for
continued employment, because work enables them to supplement their low pensions and thus
allows them both ‚Äúto avoid poverty‚Äù and to remain independent and ‚Äúnot to be a burden on children.‚Äù

Working pensioners have less likelihood of living with children under 18 and, for women,
greater life satisfaction. The presence of children under 18 in a pensioner‚Äôs household is negatively
correlated with the probability of that pensioner, male or female, being employed. The negative
relationship could be due to the demand for grandparents to provide childcare, which was also the
second most-cited driver of employment separation after health by all focus groups. Moreover,
individual focus group members cited the availability of good daycare options for children, elderly,
and disabled family members as the third most important factor (behind flexible employment and
less physically demanding jobs) that could lengthen employee working lives. Female pensioners who
work have a significantly higher probability of being either ‚Äúmostly satisfied‚Äù or ‚Äúabsolutely satisfied‚Äù
with life). It is not clear, of course, whether life satisfaction increases the probability of employment
beyond retirement age or whether staying employed enhances satisfaction with life. It could also be
that it is not employment per se that correlates with higher satisfaction with life but the income
obtained from employment that has this hedonic return. While data availability problems mean that
the analysis cannot distinguish voluntary from involuntary retirement, evidence from other
countries suggests that involuntary retirement can have a negative effect on the subjective well-being
of pensioners, who would have preferred to attain a larger consumption basket by working (Bonsang
and Klein 2012, cited in Schwarz et al. 2014).

Flexible work arrangements and opportunities for professional growth matter in Russian
women‚Äôs retirement decisions. For older Russian women, the ability to work from home seems to
be correlated with postponing retirement; perhaps this is due to the possibility of combining work
and fulfillment of care obligations. In focus groups flexible employment options (part-time, seasonal,
backup jobs) were cited as the most important factor that could persuade older workers to stay in
their current job after reaching retirement age. Interestingly, for some women part-time employment
was positively associated with the decision to retire; it may be that women use part-time
employment as an intermediate stage in the transition from full-time employment to retirement. Job
satisfaction, either overall or with some aspects of the job, also figures in the retirement decision:
older men who are dissatisfied with their jobs (either ‚Äúmostly‚Äù or ‚Äúabsolutely‚Äù) are 5 percentage
points more likely to be retired within a year‚Äôs time.2 For older women, overall job satisfaction is less
important than satisfaction with opportunities for professional growth; dissatisfied women are 2
percentage points more likely to retire. This echoes the frustration reported by older Russians in
focus groups with the fact that the only ‚Äúnon-prestigious‚Äù unskilled routine jobs are available for


2   No difference was found between public and private sector employees in terms of exit into retirement.


                                                                PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA            18
pensioners, which do not call upon their skills or mental abilities. Indeed, about one in five working
pensioners (20.5 percent of those aged 60‚Äì72 years) is working in the informal sector, according to
Rosstat (2013) estimates; that kind of employment may provide needed income support and
flexibility but is likely to under-utilize the potential productivity of pensions.

Societal assumptions about the right to jobs may be pushing older Russians out of the labor
market. In Russia as in many other countries, there is a widespread perception that older workers
are keeping younger ones from finding jobs. A 2009 Eurobarometer survey found that 56 percent of
respondents in European Union (EU) countries thought that longer working lives could mean fewer
jobs for the young (Schwarz et al. 2014). Although there are no similar data for Russia, the
Generations and Gender Programme (GGP) survey, conducted in several European countries in the
2000s (2004‚Äì08 in Russia), asked whether respondents agreed with the statement: ‚ÄúWhen jobs are
scarce, younger people should have more right to a job than older people.‚Äù Russians were more likely
to agree with this statement (Figure 11) than respondents in many other countries (except for
Bulgaria and Georgia). This is called the ‚Äúlump-of-labor‚Äù fallacy because it assumes that there is a
fixed number of jobs, an idea that has been refuted time and again. For example, the OECD (2011a)
found a positive correlation between the employment rates of younger and older people across OECD
members (Figure 12). Also, within countries, a strong positive correlation has been found between
employment of 55‚Äì64-year-olds and 20‚Äì24-year-olds (Gruber and Wise 2010, as cited in Schwarz et
al. 2014). Finally, national experiments in Denmark, France, and Germany found no evidence that
earlier exit from employment by older adults increases job opportunities for youth (Schwarz et al.
2014). The positive correlation observed between the employment rates of younger and older
workers arises from higher aggregate demand: a higher employment rate of older workers generates
higher output, which stimulates demand and leads to better job opportunities of younger workers
(and vice versa).

 Figure 11. Agreement with Lump-of-Labor                              Figure 12. Correlation in Employment of
      Argument, Russia and Selected                                  Younger and Older People, OECD Countries,
           Benchmarks, 2004‚Äì08                                                          2009

                                             90
    scarce, younger people have more right
    Percent who agree that "When jobs are




                                             80
                                             70
           to jobs than older people"




                                             60
                                             50
                                             40
                                             30
                                             20
                                             10
                                              0
                                                       Germany
                                                           Russia




                                                          Austria
                                                       Romania



                                                            Total




                                                         Norway
                                                          Poland




                                                          France
                                                       Lithuania




                                                        Belgium
                                                         Georgia




                                                        Hungary



                                                  CzechRepublic
                                                        Bulgaria


                                                         Estonia




 Source: GGP Wave 1 survey data (http://www.ggp-                    Source: OECD (2011a).
 i.org/online-data-analysis.html).                                  Note: Regression line shown (heteroskedasticity-adjusted
                                                                    standard errors in parentheses) is employment rate of 55 ‚Äì
                                                                    59-year-olds = 36.84 (6.671) + 0.4565 (0.1402) x



                                                                            PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA              19
                                                          employment rate of 20‚Äì24 years. R2 of the regression is
                                                          0.2381.


Finally, negative employer attitudes toward older workers may be a major barrier to longer
working lives. Although qualitative evidence (Box 3) suggests that some Russian employers
perceive older workers to be more reliable than younger workers and to have more positive work
attitudes, others are more concerned about diminishing physical and mental abilities among older
workers and about potential social tensions between younger and older workers. Moreover, there
is some focus group evidence that workers over 40‚Äì45 are not even considered for competitive
vacancies. This suggests a perception that older workers are less productive than their younger
colleagues, when in reality what older workers lose in some skills (such as mental speed and
physical strength), they gain in other capacities (such as verbal skills, enhanced social skills, and
greater reliance on experience) (Bussolo et al. 2015).



      IV. SOCIAL INSURANCE POLICIES, LABOR
          INSTITUTIONS, AND INCENTIVES TO WORK
          LONGER

Certain features of a country‚Äôs social protection system can shape decisions about whether to
remain in or withdraw from the labor force. Becoming eligible for an old-age pension in Russia is
significantly associated with retirement for both men and women (Figure 10b).3 Theoretically, the
labor force participation decision of an older worker can be affected by the design of social protection
benefits through two channels: income and substitution (OECD 2006). The income effect implies that
the more generous the benefits to individuals, the less incentive they have to work. The substitution
effect implies that the incentive to work decreases if receiving benefits is conditional on ceasing work,
as one source of income is substituted for another (as it is, for example, in Ireland in order to receive
a state pension at 65) or if pension benefits have an earnings test (as in Japan, where the pension is
reduced if the combined pension and salary for working pensioners aged 60‚Äì69 exceeds certain
thresholds). Moreover, since the decision to retire is often made by a couple rather than the
individual, the age difference between partners can interact with gender differences in eligibility
criteria for social insurance benefits. Finally, availability of early retirement options through the
pension system, disability, or unemployment can also facilitate early withdrawal from the labor force.

Other than having relatively low retirement ages with generous provisions for early
retirement, Russia‚Äôs current multi-pillar pension system contains no explicit disincentives for
early withdrawal from the labor force. The official ages of eligibility for old-age pensions are quite
low by international standards, 60 for men and 55 for women, with the minimum contribution to the
Pension Fund of five years. The ages of eligibility for social pensions are slightly higher, 65 for men
and 60 for women. Such relatively low eligibility ages are sometimes justified by low life

3   This is true even though the model specification includes a quadratic function of age.


                                                                  PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA           20
expectancies: 64 for Russian men and 76 for women, as of 2011, based on the World Development
Indicators database. However, the more relevant life expectancy indicator for pension-related issues
is measured not at birth but at the age of retirement. Based on the actuarial forecast of the Pension
Fund of the Russian Federation, in 2010 average life expectancy was 14.3 years for 60-year-old men
and 23.9 years for 55-year-old women. This implies that the expected duration of pension receipt in
Russia may be below the OECD average of 17 years for men, but it is significantly above the OECD
average of 20.3 years for women (OECD 2011b). Still, since there is no income test for receiving
pension benefits, many Russians continue to work past the pension-eligibility age. Indeed, the
effective age of leaving the labor force is 63.3 for men and 60 for women, which is below the OECD
averages (OECD 2014; Figure 13). Nonetheless, many people become eligible for full old-age pensions
at an even earlier age if they are employed in certain occupations with hazardous or demanding
working conditions, including many workers in social services (such as all individuals with 25 years
of experience in education or 30 years of experience in health care). According to RLMS estimates,
almost half of early pension recipients continue working because there is no explicit disincentive to
do so.

                  Figure 13. Expected Years in Retirement for Women and Men, 2012
                    Panel A. Expected years in retirement, women (‚Üò), 2012                                                Panel B. Expected years in retirement, men, 2012
         Life expectancy at
         effective age at labour           Years in retirement          Effective age at                         Effective age at labour     Years in                    Life expectancy at
         labour force exit                                               force exit                                force exit            retirement                 effective age at labour
                                                                                                                                                                                  force exit
           87.4                               27.4                              60.0               France            59.7                    22.6                      82.3
                85.2                              26.6                            58.7            Belgium           59.6                    21.8                     81.4
             86.7                              26.1                           60.5                   Italy             61.1                    21.6                     82.6
               85.5                              26.1                            59.4              Austria               61.9                  20.4                    82.3
                85.2                             25.6                            59.6           Luxembourg       57.6                     23.4                      81.0
                 85.0                           24.6                           60.3               Greece                 61.9                  20.4                    82.3
                 84.9                           24.3                          60.6                Slovenia                 62.9                18.3                  81.2
            87.1                            24.2                          62.9                    Australia                    64.9                 19.3                   84.2
              86.1                            24.2                          61.9                  Finland                61.8                 20.1                    81.9
           87.3                            24.1                          63.2                       Spain                 62.3                 20.5                     82.8
               85.4                            23.8                         61.6                 Germany                 62.1                 19.9                     82.0
              86.3                           23.8                          62.5                   Canada                     63.8                 19.6                    83.4
           87.2                            23.3                         63.9                    Switzerland                      66.1                18.1                  84.2
               85.5                           23.1                         62.3                 Netherlands                 63.6                18.8                   82.3
                     83.0                          23.1                         59.8          Czech Republic               63.1              16.7                 79.9
                    83.2                          23.1                         60.2                Poland                 62.3              17.0                 79.2
                       81.8                          23.1                         58.7        Slovak Republic          60.9              16.6                77.6
          89.5                      22.7                         66.7                               Japan                            69.1                16.0                85.1
                85.3                         22.7                     62.6                         Ireland                   64.6                 18.0                  82.5
               85.5                          22.5                    63.0                           OECD                    64.2                 18.1                  82.2
                       82.0                        22.4                    59.6                   Hungary             60.9               16.6                77.4
                  84.2                         22.3                    61.9                      Denmark                   63.4                18.2                   81.6
                85.3                        22.1                     63.2                     United Kingdom               63.7                  19.1                   82.8
              86.2                        22.0                     64.2                           Sweden                        66.1                17.4                  83.5
              86.2                        21.9                    64.3                            Norway                     64.8                  18.3                  83.1
              86.0                        21.0                   65.1                               Israel                       66.9                 17.4                 84.3
                    83.4                       20.8                   62.6                        Estonia                  63.6             14.5              78.1
               85.5                       20.5                   65.0                          United States                  65.0                 17.9                 82.8
             86.4                       20.1                   66.3                            New Zealand                       66.7                17.3                  84.0
                    83.4                      19.8                  63.6                           Turkey                62.8               16.4                 79.3
               85.7                      19.3                 66.4                                Portugal                          68.4              14.7               83.0
             86.5                      19.3                  67.2                                  Iceland                          68.2                16.3                84.5
              86.1                     19.1                  67.0                                    Chile                          68.4              15.1                83.5
            87.2                    17.3                69.8                                        Korea                                71.1             13.0             84.1
               85.5                   16.8                68.7                                    Mexico                                   72.3             12.9             85.1

                  84.2                       20.1                       64.0                       Brazil                                 70.7               13.4              84.1
                           79.9                        20.0                     60.0        Russian Federation             63.3            12.4              75.7
                          80.9                      18.8                    62.0                   China                           66.8             13.4            80.2
                                   77.3                15.2                 62.1                South Africa                      66.3            11.7          78.0
           90        85           80        75         70        65            60      55                        55      60         65       70         75          80        85        90




Source: OECD 2014.




                                                                                                                 PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA                                              21
Although Russia has a history of low pension benefits that had pushed pensioners to continue
working in order to survive, since 2008 the benefits have gone up substantially. Old-age
contributory labor pensions have insurance and funded components, and the size of the pension
benefit depends on both average lifetime earnings and the length of the contribution period (see
Appendix Table A.3). The government sets the flat defined benefit part of the insured component,
with premiums for disability, advanced age, and dependents, and annually adjusts it for inflation. The
individual component is defined as the annuity of the ‚Äúcalculated pension capital‚Äù (based on
contributions to the Pension Fund since 2002 and conversion of pension rights for the defined benefit
system before 2002), divided by the expected length of pension payment, which has been raised
gradually from 12 years (for pensions claimed in 2002‚Äì09) to 19 (for pensions claimed in 2013).
Finally, the funded part of the pension (voluntary for those born before 1967 and mandatory for
those younger) is calculated as the ratio of accumulated pension contribution to the special accounts
(special part of individual pension account) to the specified expected length of pension payments
(currently variable, from 12 to 19 years, depending on the year of claiming pensions). Before 2010,
pension benefits were relatively low: 22 percent of average wage for contributory old-age labor
pensions and at 16 percent of average wage for noncontributory social pensions; however, pre-2002
pension rights were revalued in 2010, increasing pensions by a third from 2008 (OECD 2011b). This
change made Russia‚Äôs pension system replacement rates similar, in theory, to the OECD average: the
net replacement rate for an average earning male with a 40-year contribution history would be 67
percent (see Table 1, column 1). For comparison to the OECD average, this calculation applied the
standard OECD assumptions of a full career, real annual earnings growth of 2 percent, and expected
period of pension payment based on life expectancy beyond retirement (14.3 years for Russian men);
column 2 shows the replacement rate for the Pension Fund assumption of 19 years of pension
payments, which lowers the estimate (OECD 2011b). Other columns show the negative impact on
replacement rates of a shorter contribution history, absence of the funded component, a lower rate
of return on capital, and a lower contribution rate. In reality, most pensioners attain replacement
rates close to that of column (3).

 Table 1. Pension Replacement Rates in Russia (Males, Average Wage): Sensitivity Analysis

                       Expected                   Expected Pension Payment Period = 19 years
                   Pension Payment
                     Period (Life
                   Expectancy at 60
                     (14.3 years)
                      40 Years of       40 Years of      30 Years of   Insurance    1%            20%
                   Experience, 26%     Experience,       Experience    Part Only   Rate of      Pension
                     Contribution          26%               (3)          (4)      Return        Fund
                      Rate, 3.5%       Contribution                                  on        Contribu-
                      Return on         Rate, 3.5%                                 Funded      tion Rate
                    Funded Capital      Return on                                  Capital         (6)
                          (1)         Funded Capital                                 (5)
                                            (2)
 Gross pension           58.4              52.3              38.2        35.0       45.4         41.8
 replacement rate
 Net pension             67.1                 60.1           43.9        40.2       52.2         48.0
 replacement rate
Source: OECD 2011b: p. 183, Table 4.7, based on OECD pension models.



                                                           PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA         22
The current pension system gives older Russians virtually no incentive to defer receiving a
pension, which jeopardizes the fiscal sustainability of the system. Although there is no income
test for working pensioners in either noncontributory or contributory pension schemes, there is also
very little incentive to defer pension payment. The sole incentive in the current scheme is reduction
of the denominator of the expected payment period, normally set at 19 years, but even this incentive
is capped at 5 years, as the minimum expected payment period is 14 years. Virtually all individuals
who qualify for a pension begin to claim their benefits immediately, while many continue working,
often in the same job.
The 2013 pension reform did not raise retirement ages but improved the incentives to extend
working life and defer receiving a pension. One major change introduced by the law adopted on
December 28, 2013, which took effect in January 2015, has to do with pension eligibility. Although it
preserves current pension eligibility ages of 60 for men and 55 for women, the reform extended the
mandatory contribution period from 5 years to 15 (to gradually rise through 2025) and added the
requirement of accumulating at least 30 individual pension points (see Appendix Table A.3b). Since
accumulated pension points depend on annual contributions to the Pension Fund, which are based
on earnings (with upper limits defined separately for individuals with and without the funded
pension component), high-earning individuals become eligible for pensions faster. Thus, 30 pension
points would require 30 years of contribution at the minimum wage but only 15 years at double the
minimum wage. Another reform was introduction of premium coefficients (actuarial adjustments)
for individuals who defer pension receipt beyond the pensionable age; this was done both to
stimulate extension of working lives and to improve the fiscal sustainability of the pension system.
The premium coefficients (see Table 2) depend on the length of time that passes after the person
becomes eligible for either a regular or early pension. For instance, for workers who retire 5 years
after their pensionable age, the base pension will rise by 36 percent and the insurance part by 45
percent. If late retirement results in 10 years of additional working life, the base pension increases
2.11 times and the insurance part 2.32 times. These adjustments are among the highest in the world
for this type of pension scheme (for instance, Iceland allows for a 30 percent increase in pensions for
a five-year deferral). Finally, the pension reform introduced additional payroll tax rates (from 2 to 8
percent) for employers of workers in onerous working conditions. This shifted some of the burden
for paying early retirement pensions for such workers from the government to the employer, which
forces employers to internalize some of the costs of hazardous work and hopefully gives them
incentives to improve working conditions.




                                                          PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA        23
                  Table 2. Premium Coefficients for Deferring Pension Receipt

  Number of Full         Augmenting Coefficients for Pension     Augmenting Coefficients for Pension
  Months beyond                   Insurance Part                            Base Part
 Mandatory Pension
                        Regular Pension    Early Retirement     Regular Pension     Early Retirement
       Age
                         Arrangements          Pension           Arrangements           Pension
                                            Arrangements                             Arrangements
 Less than 12                1.00                 1.00
          12                 1.07                1.046               1.056               1.036
          24                 1.15                 1.10                1.12                1.07
          36                 1.24                 1.16                1.19                1.12
          48                 1.34                 1.22                1.27                1.16
          60                 1.45                 1.29                1.36                1.21
          72                 1.59                 1.37                1.46                1.26
          84                 1.74                 1.45                1.58                1.32
          96                 1.90                 1.52                1.73                1.38
         108                 2.09                 1.60                1.90                1.45
         120                 2.32                 1.68                2.11                1.53
Source: Federal Law #400 on Insurance Pensions, December 28, 2013.



Although the 2013 reform was intended to give Russians incentives to work longer,
uncertainty about how points translate into pension benefits and previous experience of
changes in pension calculations may undermine its effectiveness. The intent of the reform was
to incentivize a longer working life, decrease the prevalence of widespread under-reporting of wages,
and make the pension system more sustainable, given the demographic challenge posed by
population aging and shrinking. The new system of pension points can in theory help achieve the
aims of the reform. The Ministry of Labor expects the annual share of retirees who will defer pensions
to be about 15 percent of those reaching pensionable age. However, since this is the first transition
from a notional defined contribution scheme to a point-based pension system, the details of
transition from the old to the new scheme are not clear, making it difficult for pre-retirement
individuals to plan work and retirement decisions. In this uncertain environment, many people may
still find it attractive to claim pension benefits at the earliest possible point. The numerous changes
in the pension rules over the last 20 years add to the predisposition for myopic behavior.

Low unemployment benefits do not act as a disincentive to work, but the employment service
has little capacity to facilitate job search and improve employability, which makes it harder
to prolong the working lives of unemployed older Russians. Decisions about work and
retirement do not depend solely on how the pension system is designed; other social protection
benefits, such as unemployment insurance and disability pensions, can be used to transition from
employment into retirement. Benefits related to unemployment do not offer an exit strategy in Russia
because they are not generous. Most of those unemployed in Russia do not even bother to register



                                                           PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA       24
with the Public Employment Service (PES): the ratio of registered to ILO-defined unemployment has
fluctuated at about 20‚Äì30 percent. One major reason for not registering is that the maximum monthly
benefit amount in 2014 was 4,900 RUB, about US$145, which is very low compared to average wages
in all regions. Besides providing minimal support for job search and activation, the PES is promoting
early retirement for some older job seekers. Specifically, the PES can offer early retirement pensions
to unemployed men aged 58 and over with 25 years of social security contributions and women aged
53 and over with 20 years of contributions till the age they would be eligible for a labor pension.
Unemployed workers are eligible for early retirement pensions if they were separated due to
liquidation of the organization or individual business or there was a mass reduction of personnel.
This scheme can shave off many years of productive work‚Äî6 years for men and 7 for women at the
current effective ages of retirement. As the companion study of adult education in Russia found, some
regions have extensive experience in active labor market programs for the unemployed. However,
limited cooperation between training providers and employers decreases the effectiveness of
training services for adults (World Bank 2013).

Russia‚Äôs Labor Code bans discrimination based on age, and recent law has banned age-related
criteria in vacancy postings. The Labor Code regulates the employment of pensioners. After
becoming eligible for a pension, the person can retire from the labor force or continue with
employment, and there is nothing in the Labor Code to end the labor contract after a worker becomes
a pensioner. The exception is public servants, who need approval from the relevant state
representative to continue employment and who may not continue to be employed as a public
servant after they reach 65‚Äîalthough they can keep working in the public sector on a fixed-term
contract. Other pensioners can keep working at their pre-pension job, and the employer cannot
switch them from an open-ended to a fixed-term contract or break the contract on the grounds that
the employee has reached pensionable age. If pensioners change jobs or rejoin the labor force, the
new contract can be fixed-term. There is anecdotal evidence of cases where pensioners have been
offered renewal of fixed-term contracts every year for several years; in such cases employers can be
sued and the contract recognized as open-ended. Russia‚Äôs Labor Code prohibits employment-related
discrimination on any grounds, including age and gender, that are not related to the employee‚Äôs
productivity. In July 2013, Federal Law #162 was passed; it stipulates additional measures to enforce
the ban on age and gender discrimination in hiring. In particular, the Law on Employment and the
Labor Code were amended to prohibit discrimination not only in hiring (as had previously been the
case) but also in publishing job postings. Administrative penalties were introduced for legal entities,
including employment agencies, mass media, and Internet sites, which publish discriminatory job
postings. According to an opinion poll conducted shortly before this change, 10 percent of individuals
aged 31‚Äì45 and 25 percent of those aged 46‚Äì60 had encountered a situation in the previous two to
three years where employers thought they were too old for the job for which they were applying.4

There are few opportunities for part-time and flexible work arrangements. Because older
Russians attach significant importance to flexibility in post-retirement employment, the labor force
participation of older adults may be repressed by the lack of part-time opportunities. Although part-
time employment is ensconced in the Labor Code and part-time and full-time workers have the same


4   http://fom.ru/Rabota-i-dom/10868.


                                                          PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA        25
labor rights, Rosstat estimates that only about 5 percent of workers in 2012 worked less than 30
hours a week (4 percent of men and 6 percent of women). The propensity of pensioners to work part-
time is higher (12 percent for men and 21 percent for women aged 60‚Äì72), but it is far below the
averages for EU pensioners of 52 percent for men and 67 percent for women aged 65 and above
(Eurostat). Earlier studies suggest that in Russia part-time employment is taken up only by people
who cannot find full-time work (Tchetvernina et al. 2001 as cited in Cazes and Nesporova 2003).
Whether this is still the case, and whether there is a difference in the value attributed to part-time
employment by workers of different ages, is an important subject for future research.

Although disability can be a pathway into early retirement, the government is making a
concerted effort to bring more disabled workers into the labor market. Federal medical and
social experts‚Äô institutions operate disability certification and definition of three disability groups,5
which is regulated by the federal Law ‚ÄúOn social protection of those disabled in the Russian
Federation.‚Äù Workers certified as disabled are eligible for a labor pension no matter what the cause
of disability (with a few exceptions), the length of insurance contribution, working status, and timing
of the disability‚Äîwhile employed or pre- or post-employment. Disabled individuals who have made
no contribution to the insurance system are eligible for social disability pensions. A disability labor
pension depends on the disability class and is currently calculated as the sum of the base disability
pension (defined by the government, adjustable for dependents) and the individual component. The
individual component is defined as the ratio of the ‚Äúcalculated pension capital‚Äù as of the date of
application for a disability pension to the product of the expected length of old-age pension payment
(maximum is 19 years) and the ratio of the normative length of insurance contributions in months as
of the date of pension application (minimum of 12 months and maximum of 180). As of 2015, the
individual component of the disability insurance pension is the product of the individual pension
coefficient (points) and the value of one pension coefficient as of the date of application for a
disability pension. The only difference from the old-age labor pension calculation would be division
by the ratio of the normative length of the insurance contribution period in months as of the date of
application for a disability pension. Also, the base part of the disability pension is reformed in that its
value is set to be the same for the 1st and 2nd disability groups, with the 3rd group getting 50 percent
of that value.

A disability pension is paid until the reason for disability is no longer valid or until the person
becomes eligible for either a labor or a social pension, depending on whether the contribution
history (and, from 2015, the number of accumulated pension points) qualifies the disabled person
for the old-age labor pension. There is no explicit employment disincentive in the design of the
disability pension‚Äîit is paid in full irrespective of employment‚Äîand contributions to the Pension
Fund during employment are taken into account when reconsidering the size of a disability pension.
Although the Labor Code restricts the work time of those in the 1st and 2nd disability groups to 35
hours per week, it stipulates full payment for the reduced hours of work, which may introduce an
implicit hiring disincentive. On the other hand, the Law on Employment stipulates additional
measures to raise the employability of the disabled, including priority access to retraining and special

5 Disability Group I implies 100% loss of working capacity and requires constant attendance; disability group
II implies 100% loss of working capacity but does not require constant attendance; and disability group III
implies at least a 50% loss of working capacity and does not require constant attendance.


                                                              PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA           26
job creation programs. Moreover, the 1995 Federal Law 181 ‚ÄúOn Social Protection of the Disabled‚Äù
stipulate employment quotas for the disabled that must be met by all firms with more than 100
employees. The quotas are defined in regional legislation and should constitute 2‚Äì4 percent of the
firm‚Äôs employees. The law also stipulates that regions define the minimum number of special jobs for
the disabled at each large firm and mandates workplace adjustments as needed. Organizations that
employ the disabled are also eligible for subsidies on the profit tax, payroll tax, and accidental
insurance premiums. However, claiming these subsidies is apparently very complicated and time-
consuming. Still, the share of disability pensioners in employment has been rising steadily in recent
years, having gone up about 10 percentage points to more than 30 percent between 2006 and 2011.



                          Table 3. Share of Working Pensioners, Percent

                                       2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011
                 All pensions           24.5     26.5     28.4     30      31.2     32.4
                 Labor pension          28.2     30.5     32.7    34.3     34.9     36.4
                 Disability pension     22.5      23      23.5    24.3     30.7     31.6
                 Survivor pension        0.8      0.6      0.6     0.7      0.7      0.7

Source: Based on Rosstat 2012, Table 6.16.
Note: Rosstat changed its methodology for counting pensioners in 2010; reportedly figures, for 2006‚Äì09 are
being recalculated.

In sum, Russian social insurance benefits and labor institutions contain few disincentives to
prolonging working life, but they also do little to support an active aging agenda; the 2013
pension reform could begin to change that. Since old-age and disability pension benefits can be
combined with full-time employment without penalty, older Russians have no explicit incentive to
retire. However, many able-bodied Russians still retire once they become eligible for pensions
because the pensionable age is a powerful anchor for work/retirement decisions. Although up to
2015 the pension system did not offer any incentives to defer pensions, the latest reform makes the
first move to incentivize later pension receipt and thus promote explicit extension of working life. A
more proactive PES is needed to facilitate job search for the unemployed in Russia, especially
unemployed older adults, some of whom are currently allowed to retire even before they reach
pensionable age.




    V. POLICIES TO ENHANCE ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA

Higher productivity and longer working lives can help Russia take advantage of longer life
expectancy and attain a more active and prosperous life at older ages. Population aging does
not have to doom a country to gradual decline. Indeed, increased longevity brings with it greater
potential to enjoy everything that life has to offer; it should be celebrated as a great human


                                                            PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA         27
achievement. However, like any other systemic transformation, population aging requires
adjustment of social and economic institutions and a shift in established paradigms. Although Russia,
like other European countries, is entering a period of substantial population aging, the process is
complicated by international recognition that the working-age population is shrinking rapidly, and
only some of the shrinkage (especially for younger workers) can be offset by a more proactive
immigration policy. To surmount this demographic challenge, Russia can work to engage its able-
bodied population in productive work for longer periods and help them to become more productive.
The options offered here for policymakers to consider fall into two categories: the first focuses on
enhancing the employability of older individuals and the second on aligning social insurance
incentives to promote longer working lives for Russians.




PRESERVING THE HUMAN CAPITAL OF OLDER ADULTS

Promotion of healthier habits and lifestyles and more attention to preventive medicine and
early diagnosis can help Russian workers to remain in work longer. As already noted, in focus
group discussions health was the most mentioned driver of employment separation, and it was a
significant correlate of exit as soon as workers became eligible for retirement. Many chronic and
acute health conditions, such as cardiovascular diseases, which are more prevalent in nonworking
older Russians, stem from unhealthy lifestyles and risky habits. Using SAGE data on respondents aged
50 and over, Maximova (2014) examined the prevalence of three health risk factors: smoking,
insufficient physical exercise, and inadequate consumption of fruits and vegetables. She found that
only 6.4 percent of men and 15 percent of men aged 50‚Äì79 had none of these risks; on the other hand,
56 percent of men and 22 percent of women have two or all three of these unhealthy habits (see
Figure 14). Relative to other countries for which SAGE data are available (China, Ghana, India, Mexico,
and South Africa), Russian older adults compare favorably on smoking, diet, and exercise, but Russia
stands out for the prevalence of alcohol abuse, at 7.8 percent of adults aged 50 and over (Maximova
2014).While some age-related biological processes cannot be prevented by lifestyle changes,
preventive interventions and an active lifestyle can affect the functional capacity of the heart and
lungs, improve physical strength and reaction speed, and lower blood pressure‚Äîall of which are
essential for extending healthy years of life, which in turn enables an extended working life. Health
habits are difficult to change, but a concerted effort can yield significant results, as was demonstrated
in Finland‚Äôs North Karelia Project (Box 4). Besides promoting healthy habits in order to prevent
chronic diseases, more attention to early diagnosis is needed. Maximova (2014) identified several
conditions, such as angina, asthma, and depression, for which self-reports of older Russians in the
SAGE survey are significantly lower than symptom-based prevalence estimates. This suggests that
many respondents may not be aware that they may be susceptible to these conditions.




                                                           PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA         28
                              Figure 14. Number of Health Risk Factors, Russians aged 50‚Äì79

                                         70                     63.1
                                         60
                Percent of respondents   50
                                                           37.2           39.1
                                         40
                                         30                                                           Men
                                                                              20.7
                                         20         15                                   17.3         Women

                                         10   6.4
                                                                                                1.2
                                          0
                                              None             1              2             3
                                                         Number of health risk factors


Source: Maximova 2014, based on WHO SAGE data, 2007‚Äì10.



Encouraging firms to institute age management policies for older workers has the potential
to prolong their participation in the labor force and maintain their productivity. As noted,
employers in Russia tend to treat older workers like everyone else in terms of demands on their
productivity, which may push older workers out of the labor market when they still have potential to
contribute value. In other European countries with a fast aging workforce, many employers have
found it in their best interests to invest in age-management policies that can help to keep older
workers productive and their business competitive. Experience in other countries has shown that
older workers can be as productive as younger workers if there are workplace adjustments that
compensate for reduced physical capacity (see Box 5). Remarkably, some age-management
strategies, such as deployment of mixed-age teams, have been demonstrated to not only enhance the
productivity of older workers but also to have spillover effects on younger colleagues (Bussolo et al.
2015). Since Russia‚Äôs older adults are highly educated (half of adults aged 50 or more have higher
education and another 30 percent vocational education and training [RLMS 2012]), and since most
older workers are employed in the services sector (Figure 15), such workplace adjustments can
indeed enhance their employability and preserve their productivity. Policymakers in Russia are
already encouraging workplace adjustments for disabled individuals; those initiatives can be
combined with information on and promotion of cost-effective adaptations to an aging workforce,
especially in sectors where the shares of older employees are rising, Some large companies, such as
INTER RAO UES and Rusonyx, are already working to hold on to pension-age specialists by offering
them incentives or trying to recruit older workers with flexible schedules.6



6 The head of Rusonyx suggested that training an older worker might be preferable to training a student
(their other recruitment target), as the student will leave to make a career while the older worker will stay
until retiring (Forbes Magazine (in Russian), Oct. 17, 2012: http://www.forbes.ru/svoi-biznes-
column/idei/165541-za-sotrudnikov-sluzhby-podderzhki-kotorye-sposobny-vklyuchat-mozgi-id).


                                                                                  PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA   29
Box 4. Changing Health Habits: The North Karelia Project in Finland

In the late 1960s, Finnish men had the world‚Äôs highest rates of mortality from coronary heart disease.
From 1972 to 2007, risk factor surveys were carried out to monitor trends in risk factors and assess
their contribution to declining mortality in Finland. Between 1972 and 2007, cardiovascular disease
(CVD) mortality rates dropped by 80 percent. Evidence from public health studies suggests that
decreases in risk factors were responsible for three-quarters of this reduction (60 percent of the 80
percent) (Vartiainen et al. 2010). How could Finland able achieve such an impressive reduction in risk
factors, and mortality, in just 35 years?

The North Karelia Project

In the 1960s, health outcomes in North Karelia, a region in the east of Finland, were worse than in the
rest of the country. In 1972, Finnish authorities with the help of the World Health Organization,
launched the 5-year North Karelia Project. What spurred the project was scientific evidence that LDL
cholesterol, high blood pressure, and tobacco use were causal factors for CVD. The project‚Äôs main
strategy was an integrated, community-based approach that targeted common behavioral risk factors
in the whole population of North Karelia, not just those at high risk or already suffering from chronic
diseases. To transform the social and physical environment of North Karelia, the project engaged
primary health providers, voluntary associations, the food industry, educational institutions, and the
media. Interventions included TV shows with contestants competing to lose weight, inter-city
cholesterol reduction challenges, classes for housewives on how to cook vegetables and other healthy
food, reduction of dairy subsidies and promotion of the domestic vegetable oil industry, clearer
labeling for tobacco products and food in supermarkets, and training of primary health care staff.
Monitoring and evaluation were rigorous. By 1977 the impacts were already significant: for middle-
aged men (30‚Äì59), smoking prevalence dropped from 52 to 44 percent, serum cholesterol fell from 6.9
to 6.5, and average blood pressure decreased from149/92 to 143/89. Similar impacts on cholesterol
and blood pressure were observed for women, although their smoking prevalence remained the same
(10 percent). Importantly, in the first 5‚Äì10 years of the project, most risk factors declined faster in
North Karelia than in the reference area of Northern Savo that did not receive the intervention.

Scale-up

After the success demonstrated in North Karelia, the project was extended from 1977 onward and its
findings disseminated widely to promote prevention throughout Finland. With the national roll-out,
the prevalence of risk factors and mortality from CVD began a rapid decline throughout Finland;
moreover, the incidence of strokes and tobacco-related cancers in men has plunged, resulting in a more
than 50 percent reduction in the mortality of working-age individuals and a significant increase in life
expectancy. Together with achievements in objective measures, there is evidence of improvements in
subjective health and well-being that can be attributed to the health interventions.

Source: Vartiainen et al. 2010; Puska 2008; Puska et al. 2009.




                                                                 PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA      30
                 Figure 15. Sectoral Employment of Older Russians, 2012, Percent

                          100
                           90
                           80
                           70
                                 58      60         61       70         69          Other
                           60
                Percent

                           50                                                       Services
                           40
                                                                                    Construction
                           30
                           20                                                       Industry
                                 21      19         19                  12
                           10                                20                     Agriculture
                            0
                                50-54   55-59      60-64   65-69      70-74
                                                    Age

Source: RLMS 2012 data.



   Box 5. Adjusting Workplaces to the Needs of an Aging Workforce: The Case of BMW

   In 2007, the management of a BMW plant in Dingolfing, Lower Bavaria, was confronting a potentially
   steady decline in productivity, given its aging workforce. It was estimated that in the following 10
   years, the average age of employees would go up from 39 to 47. The traditional method of handling
   this challenge‚Äîfiring or forcing older workers into early retirement‚Äîwas not an option; BMW, the
   largest employer in Lower Bavaria, makes a firm commitment to its employees and the communities
   surrounding its plants. Moreover, moving older workers to less physically demanding jobs at the plant
   was also not feasible as there were not enough younger workers available to replace them. To solve
   the problem, BMW chose to combat the decline of productivity rather than the rising age of the
   workforce.

   Design of the intervention

   The research team hired to address this challenge first assembled a pilot production line composed of
   workers whose age profile resembled the plant‚Äôs projected demographics in 2017. Workers on this
   line were asked to report any health issues that might be attributed to their working conditions and to
   generate ideas on what changes might alleviate the problems. The ground-up approach ensured buy-
   in by workers, who identified about 70 relatively small ergonomic changes that were implemented for
   this line, such as softer wooden flooring, chairs for breaks, orthopedic footwear, and adjustable
   worktables.

   Results

   Although the cost of the interventions was only ‚Ç¨40,000, the results were dramatic. In just one year,
   productivity on the pilot production line went up by 7 percent. Compared to lines with younger
   workers, the more experienced pilot line worked faster and had a much lower error rate. Moreover,
   health-related absenteeism dropped from 7 to 2 percent‚Äîbelow the plant average. Since this pilot
   demonstration, BMW has rolled out similar interventions in other plants in Germany, Austria, and the
   United States. Although workplace adjustments in each plant depend on each plant‚Äôs unique conditions
   and the problems identified by workers there, the impacts were similar to the original.

   Source: Loch et al. 2010; Hodin and Hoffmann 2011.




                                                              PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA           31
Investment in lifelong learning can also bring about significant gains in labor force
participation of older Russians. The companion study on adult education in Russia suggests that
continuous professional education and retraining opportunities throughout working life can increase
productivity and enable workers to prolong their working life. Indeed, as suggested by evidence from
SAGE data, older Russians preserve their capacity for learning new things well into the retirement
years: in the 30 days before the survey about 72 percent of post-retirement Russians did not
experience any significant problems with concentration or memorization, and about 70 percent did
not experience any significant problems with learning new things (Maximova 2014). There are also
encouraging findings on the effectiveness of workforce training if training strategies are adapted to
the particularities of mature brains (Bussolo et al. 2015). What seems to work best is establishing
clear linkages to employers before training, and providing competence-based training in short
modules after full integration of prior learning. The combination of preserved capacity for learning,
emergence of promising approaches to adult training, the observed returns to education and skills in
terms of post-retirement employability, and the qualitative evidence of a skills mismatch in the
market for older workers in Russia all suggest that promoting accessible and high-quality lifelong
learning can extend working lives. In particular, providing co-financing for employers who invest in
on-the-job training of older workers can counteract employer hesitancy to do this because the
expected private return on this investment is lower, given the higher risk that older workers will
decide to retire.



INCENTIVES TO ENCOURAGE MORE ACTIVE AGING

Equalization of pensionable ages for men and women can extend the working lives of both
genders and improve the equity of the Russian pension system. The 2013 pension reform did
not raise the statutory ages of pension eligibility because of political economy considerations;
instead, it focused on stimulating later retirement by lengthening the contribution period required
to claim old-age pension benefits. Although a longer contribution history may be a second-best
alternative in terms of promoting labor force participation at older ages, different ages for pension
eligibility for men and women preserve a degree of gender inequity in the payoff expected from the
pension system. Lower life expectancy of men combined with a later pensionable age results in a 10-
year gender gap in life expectancy at retirement: in 2010, it was 14 years for men and 24 for women
at current pensionable ages, based on estimates of the Pension Fund of the Russian Federation (OECD
2011b). Since nothing in the current or reformed insurance pension formula adjusts benefits by the
expected payment duration,7 pension payouts for men are likely to be lower than for women. While
arguments against raising the current pensionable age of men due to its proximity to their life
expectancy at birth have some validity (although it is life expectancy at retirement age that really
matters), there is no corresponding argument that can be applied to women: the current gap between
life expectancy at birth and pensionable age for men is about 2 years, but it is 19 for women. Besides


7The reform of the funded pension component does introduce a correction for life expectancy, which will be
applied starting in 2016 (Federal Law 424 ‚ÄúOn funded pensions‚Äù).


                                                            PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA         32
the equity argument, raising the female statutory pensionable age to that of men has potential to
extend the working lives of both genders. As demonstrated in Section III, Russian couples greatly
prefer to retire together; having a spouse in work increases the probability of employment for
pensioners and decreases the probability of exit into retirement.

Discouraging early retirement of able-bodied Russians by revising pension eligibility criteria,
adjusting pension benefits, and shifting the fiscal burden from the state to employers can
promote longer working lives and better working conditions. Section II demonstrated the gap
in labor force participation rates between Russia and Iceland. Much of Iceland‚Äôs success in terms of
active aging comes from its limitation on pathways out of employment before the statutory age of 67
(Box 6). The 2013 reform in Russia preserved the right of workers in hazardous and difficult working
conditions to claim old-age pensions before statutory age if they attain a specified number of pension
points. Article 30 of the 2013 law lists 21 categories of workers who are entitled to early pension
payouts, including all teachers of children of all ages after 25 years of service and all health care
workers after 30 years (25 in rural areas). Clearly many older workers become eligible for early
pensions before they reach the already-low old-age pension eligibility ages. According to the OECD
(2011b), about 35 percent of Russians start drawing pensions before the standard pensionable age;
30 percent of women and 20 percent of men are already claiming pensions by the time they are 50,
and half of those left employment for retirement. Although the new pension formula implies higher
benefits for people who do not exercise the early retirement option, given current uncertainty about
future pension rules, many are expected to claim benefits as soon as they can. Moreover, eligibility
for early retirement provides an anchor for individuals in eligible occupations; it might lead them to
exit employment at or around their pensionable age even if they do not experience a drop in
productivity or health. A few steps could help align the incentives for both employees and employers
in a better way. The lists of eligible occupations can be revised by studying current working
conditions and the average age and health at retirement onset in each occupation listed (many
continue to work in the same job with onerous conditions while receiving early retirement benefits).
Moreover, internalization of the costs of early pension payouts could be reinforced: the 2013 pension
reform already shifted some costs onto employers in eligible occupations by introducing additional
payroll tax rates (from 2 to 8 percent). Perhaps the magnitude of the tax can be tied to the past uptake
of early retirement pensions in a way that holds employers more accountable for the working
conditions at their firms.




                                                           PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA        33
   Box 6. Active Aging in Iceland

   Of all European countries Iceland has the highest employment rates for older people. In 2010 84
   percent of workers aged 55‚Äì59, 75 percent of those aged 60‚Äì64, and 48 percent of those aged 65‚Äì69
   were employed; the EU averages in the same categories were 61, 31, and 10 percent. How has Iceland
   managed to engage so many older adults in productive work? Although part of the answer lies in the
   specifically Icelandic tradition of a long working life, countries like Russia can draw lessons from the
   design of its social security system, its active labor market policies, and its promotion of lifelong
   learning, all of which guide people to a later retirement.

   Social insurance system

   The design of the Icelandic pension system provides several incentives for prolonging working life: (1)
   The statutory retirement age is relatively high at 67 for both men and women. (2) There are very few
   exit channels from the labor force before 67. There is no early retirement pension scheme and only
   people over 60 can get disability pension. Thus pension receipt is considerably less prevalent (about
   half of males and 60 percent of females aged 65), than in other Nordic countries. (3) There are strong
   incentives to defer pension receipt for up to five years even after reaching 67 years. (4) Finally, exit
   from the labor force via disability pension is reduced through the Icelandic Rehabilitation Fund (VIRK),
   which aims to reduce job loss due to incapacity by providing consultations with vocational
   rehabilitation specialists for employees who are absent from work for an extended period due to
   illness or injury.

   Active labor market policies

   Unemployment in Iceland is very low even for older individuals: in 2012, according to Eurostat, only
   4.6 percent of active men and 3.1 percent of active women aged 50 ‚Äì74 in Iceland were unemployed,
   almost half the EU-wide average. Although active labor market policies are not specifically targeted at
   older workers, there is evidence that they actively take up the opportunities these measures offer. For
   instance, the implicit subsidy of hiring an unemployed person for a trial period was taken up by 9
   percent of unemployed aged 65‚Äì69, though the average uptake rate was just 6 percent.

   Lifelong learning

   Relative to other European countries, older workers in Iceland have very high rates of participation in
   informal education, for example, 40 percent of workers aged 55‚Äì64. Although generally, adults with
   higher education are more likely to continue learning at older ages, in Iceland older workers without
   any higher education still participate in educational activities at high rates, which may contribute to
   their employability.

   Source: Agnarsson 2012.



Making the system of social insurance benefits more transparent is crucial for ensuring that
the incentives built into the system will be effective. As with any complex reform, issues of
credibility and implementation quality can be as important as design features in determining final
outcomes. Although the 2013 pension reform introduced several innovations, such as accumulation
of pension points for establishing eligibility and augmented coefficients for deferred pensions to
stimulate longer working lives, the impact of the reform will hinge on whether the incentives provoke
changes in behavior. Opinion polls conducted several months before the reform suggest that up to a
third of Russians would be ready to defer receiving a pension by five years in return for a 50 percent
increase in pension benefits (although some polls reveal much lower readiness to take up incentives;



                                                               PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA           34
see Figure 16). Uncertainty about the value of a pension point in determining the magnitude of the
pension benefit can dampen motivation to respond to the incentives and result in a preference for
smaller but certain payoffs over larger but uncertain ones. Thus, it is important for the government
to adopt a clear and, even more important, predictable strategy for pension point valuation, one that
can enter the decision-making equation of every individual years in advance of eligibility for a
pension. An equally vital part of the reform is a broad-based information and communication
campaign to elucidate the objectives and design features of the new pension system. Ideally, this
could be followed by collaboration with social workers, regional branches of the Pension Fund, and
organizations helping pensioners and pre-pension-age individuals to make work and retirement
decisions.

  Figure 16. Willingness to Defer Pensions in Pre-reform Opinion Polls, July 2013, Percent

                        40
                        35
                        30
                        25
              Percent




                        20
                        15
                        10
                         5
                         0
                                  VTsIOM          Levada Center    OOO "Innovation"       Pension Fund
                                                                                          unified phone
                                                                                             service
                             Willing to defer pension receipt by 5 years in return for 50% increase in
                             pension benefit
                             Willing to defer pension receipt by 10 years in return for 100% increase
                             in pension benefit



Source: Ministry of Labor and Social Protection of the Russian Federation 2013.



Evidence that labor regulations or wage subsidies can increase the employment of older
workers is limited and mixed. Antidiscrimination policies may be able to protect older adults and
people with disabilities who seek jobs or older workers during systemic shocks (Murrugarra 2011).
Although strict employment protection legislation (EPL) can make it more difficult for unemployed
older adults to find new jobs, regulations such as those requiring severance pay may help older
workers stay in work, especially where there is age discrimination in the labor market (Bussolo et al.
2015). There has been minimal research on the relationship between EPL and employment of older
adults, and its results have been mixed even for OECD countries: Deelen and Bourmpoula (2009)
found that stricter protection of older workers is associated with a lower LFPR and employment and
longer stretches of unemployment for adults aged 55 and over, but Langot and Moreno-Galbis (2013)
found that stronger EPL is related to higher employment for older adults. Evidence on the
effectiveness of wage subsidies to extend working lives is also at best mixed. Huttunen et al. (2010)



                                                                       PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA   35
examined the Finnish payroll tax subsidy scheme, which aimed to stimulate the employment of full-
time low-wage workers aged 54 and over they found no impact on employment but an increased
probability of part-time workers obtaining full-time jobs. Evidence from other types of wage
subsidies suggests that subsidies might be most effective when combined with training and job
assistance support (Katz 1996).




                                                       PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA     36
REFERENCES

Agnarsson, Sveinn. 2012. ‚ÄúEmployment policies to promote active ageing, 2012: Iceland.‚Äù European
       Employment Observatory Review, European Employment Observatory.

Balaev, Alexei, Maria Ivanova, Ilya Prilepskiy, and Sergei Ulatov. 2015. ‚ÄúDemographic Transition
        and Policy Impact on Long-Term Growth.‚Äù Paper prepared for the Russia Aging & Prosperity
        task, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Bonsang, Eric, and Tobias J. Klein. 2012. ‚ÄúRetirement and Subjective Well-Being.‚Äù Journal of
      Economic Behavior and Organization 83 (3): 311‚Äì29.

Breev, B. 2005. ‚ÄúOn the Quality of Employment of Russia‚Äôs Population.‚Äù Society and Economy 7‚Äì8:
        305‚Äì25. http://demoscope.ru/weekly/2007/0277/analit06.php#_FNR_2.

Bussolo, Maurizio, Johannes Koettl, and Emily Sinnott. 2015. Golden Aging: Prospects for Healthy,
       Active, and Prosperous Aging in Europe and Central Asia. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Cazes, Sandrine, and Alena Nesporova. 2003. Labour Markets in Transition: Balancing Flexibility and
        Security in Central and Eastern Europe. Geneva: ILO.

Deelen, Anja P., and Evangelia Bourmpoula. 2009. ‚ÄòEmployment protection legislation: a cross-
       country analysis focusing on the elderly.‚Äù In European Association of Labour Economists
       (EALE) Annual Conference, Tallinn, Estonia, February, vol. 27.

Eich, Frank, Mauricio Soto, and Charleen Gust. 2012. ‚ÄúReforming the Public Pension System in the
        Russian Federation.‚Äù IMF Working Paper No. 12/201. Washington, DC: International
        Monetary Fund.

Elizarov, Valeriy, and Victoria Levin. 2015. ‚ÄúFamily Policies in Russia: Could Efforts to Raise Fertility
        Rates Slow Population Aging?‚Äù Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Gerber, Theodore, and Jonas Radl. 2014. ‚ÄúPushed, Pulled, or Blocked? The Elderly and the Labor
       Market in Post-Soviet Russia.‚Äù Social Science Research 45: 152‚Äì69.

Giles, John, Dewen Wang, and Wei Cai. 2012. ‚ÄúThe Labor Supply and Retirement Behavior of China‚Äôs
         Older Workers and Elderly in Comparative Perspective.‚Äù In Aging in Asia: Findings from New
         and Emerging Data Initiatives, edited by J.P. Smith and M. Majmundar. Washington, DC: The
         National Academies Press.

Gruber, Jonathan, and David A. Wise. 2010. Social Security Programs and Retirement around the
       World: The Relationship to Youth Employment. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.




                                                           PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA         37
Hodin, Michael, and Mark Hoffmann. 2011. ‚ÄúSnowbirds and Water Coolers: How Aging Populations
       Can Drive Economic Growth.‚Äù SAIS Review 31 (2): 5‚Äì14.

Huttunen, Kristiina, Jukka Pirtila, and Roope Uusitalo. 2010. ‚ÄúThe Employment Effects of Low-Wage
      Subsidies.‚Äù IZA Discussion Paper 4931, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

IHME (Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation). 2010. Global Burden of Disease Study (GBD
       2010). http://ghdx.healthdata.org/global-burden-disease-study-2010-gbd-2010-data-
       downloads.

IIASA (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis). 2010. ‚ÄúEducation, Reconstruction, and
        Projections.‚Äù
        http://www.iiasa.ac.at/web/home/research/researchPrograms/WorldPopulation/Researc
        h/ForecastsProjections/DemographyGlobalHumanCapital/EducationReconstructionProject
        ions/education_reconstruction_and_projections.html.

Katz, Lawrence. 1996. ‚ÄúWage Subsidies for the Disadvantaged.‚Äù NBER Working Paper 5679,
        National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Koettl, Johannes. 2008. ‚ÄúProspects for Management of Migration between Europe and the Middle
         East and North Africa: Demographic Trends, Labor Force Projections, and Implications for
         Policies of Immigration, Labor Markets, and Social Protection.‚Äù Background Paper, World
         Bank, Washington, DC.

Kolev, Alexandre, and Anne Pascal. 2002. ‚ÄúWhat Keeps Pensioners at Work in Russia: Evidence from
        Household Panel Data.‚Äù Economics of Transition 10 (1): 29‚Äì53.

Langot, Fran√ßois, and Eva Moreno-Galbis. 2008. ‚ÄúDoes the growth process discriminate against
        older workers?‚Äù IZA Discussion Paper 3841, Institute for the Study of Labor, Bonn.

Loch, Christoph, Fabian Sting, Nikolaus Bauer, and Helmut Mauermann. 2010. ‚ÄúHow BMW Is
       Defusing the Demographic Time Bomb.‚Äù Harvard Business Review (March 1): 102.

Matytsin, Mikhail, Lalita Moorty, and Kaspar Richter. 2015. ‚ÄúFrom Demographic Dividend to
       Demographic Burden?‚Äù Paper prepared for the Russia Aging & Prosperity task, World Bank.

Maximova, Tamara. 2014. ‚ÄúHealth Outcomes, Employment and Healthcare Service Provision for the
      Pensioner Population‚Äù (in Russian). Background paper commissioned by the World Bank.

MB ARMI-Marketing Company. 2012. ‚ÄúOlder Worker Labor Force Participation and Employment:
     Russia, Qualitative Research.‚Äù Background report for Schwarz et al. (2014), The Inverting
     Pyramid: Pension Systems Facing Demographic Challenges in Europe and Central Asia. Europe
     and Central Asia Reports, World Bank, Washington, DC.




                                                        PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA        38
Ministry of Labor and Social Protection of the Russian Federation. 2013. ‚ÄúWhat Do Russians Think
       of Pension Reform? Results of Public Opinion Polls.‚Äù
       http://www.rosmintrud.ru/pensions/razvitie/199/Oprosy_svodnaya.pptx.

Murrugarra, Edmundo. 2011. ‚ÄúEmployability and Productivity among Older Workers: A Policy
      Framework and Evidence from Latin America.‚Äù World Bank SP Discussion Paper Series
      1113, Washington, DC.

Nellemann, Soren, Oleg Podolskiy, and Victoria Levin. 2015. ‚ÄúState of Adult Education in Russia:
      Ensuring that Older Workers Can Acquire the Skills for of the Future.‚Äù Washington, DC: The
      World Bank.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2006. Live Longer, Work Longer.
      Ageing and Employment Policies. Paris: OECD.

‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî. 2011a. Pensions at a Glance 2011: Retirement-income Systems in OECD and G20 Countries.
    Paris: OECD.

‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî. 2011b. OECD Reviews of Labour Market and Social Policies: Russian Federation. Paris: OECD.

‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî. 2014. Society at a Glance. Paris: OECD.

Puska, Pekka (2008). ‚ÄúThe North Karelia Project: 30 years Successfully Preventing Chronic Diseases.‚Äù
        Diabetes Voice 53: 26‚Äì29.

Puska, Pekka, Erkki Vartiainen, Tiina Laatikainen, Pekka Jousilahti, and Meri Paavola. 2009. The
       North Karelia Project: From North Karelia to National Action. Helsinki: Helsinki University
       Printing House.

Rosstat (Russian Statistical Service). 2012. Socialnoe polozhenie i uroven zhizni naseleniya Rossii
       2012 (Social Conditions and Living Standards in Russia 2012). Moscow: Rosstat

‚Äî‚Äî‚Äî. 2013. Trud i Zanyatost (Labor and Employment). Moscow: Rosstat.

Schwarz, Anita, Omar Arias, Asta Zviniene, Heinz P.Rudolph, Sebastian Eckardt, Johannes Koettl,
      Herwig Immervoll, and Miglena Abels. 2014. The Inverting Pyramid: Pension Systems Facing
      Demographic Challenges in Europe and Central Asia. Europe and Central Asia Reports.
      Washington, DC: World Bank.

Tchetvernina, T., A. Moscovskaya, I. Soboleva, and N. Stepantchikova. 2001. ‚ÄúLabor Market Flexibility
       and Employment Security. Russian Federation.‚Äù ILO Employment Paper 2001/31,
       International Labour Organization, Geneva.

United Nations Secretariat, Population Division of the Department of Economic and Social Affairs.
       2012. World Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision,
       http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/index.htm.


                                                           PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA           39
Vartiainen, Erkki, Tiina Laatikainen, Markku Peltonen, Anne Juolevi, Satu Ma¬®nnisto¬®, Jouko Sundvall,
        Pekka Jousilahti, Veikko Salomaa, Liisa Valsta, and Pekka Puska. 2010. ‚ÄúThirty-five-year
        Trends in Cardiovascular Risk Factors in Finland.‚Äù International Journal of Epidemiology 39:
        504‚Äì518.

World Bank. 2013. ‚ÄúDeveloping Skills for Innovative Growth in the Russian Federation.‚Äù Report No.
       ACS1549, World Bank, Washington, DC




                                                         PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA       40
APPENDIX
                   Table A.1: Regression Analysis of Correlates of Being a Working Pensioner

 DV: Employed =1, otherwise = 0                                   (1)                       (2)
                                                                                     Women aged 55+
                                                         Men aged 60+ years
                                                                                          years
 Age                                                              -0.014                  -0.009
                                                                 (0.015)                 (0.013)
 Age squared                                                       0.000                   0.000
                                                                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
 Education: Secondary                                            0.153*                    0.006
                                                                 (0.081)                 (0.020)
 Education: Professional / vocational                           0.122***                   0.005
                                                                 (0.030)                 (0.017)
 Education: University or more                                  0.134***                 0.044**
                                                                 (0.026)                 (0.018)
 Marital status: Married / living together                      0.036***                   0.011
                                                                 (0.010)                 (0.012)
 Health self-assessment: poor / very poor                       -0.023**                -0.021**
                                                                 (0.011)                 (0.010)
 Had health problem in last 30 days                               -0.013                   0.000
                                                                 (0.009)                 (0.009)
 Has disability status                                          -0.025**               -0.033***
                                                                 (0.010)                 (0.008)
 Has chronic heart disease                                         0.003                  -0.005
                                                                 (0.008)                 (0.008)
 Has chronic lung disease                                          0.017                   0.009
                                                                 (0.022)                 (0.018)
 Has chronic liver disease                                         0.010                  -0.004
                                                                 (0.017)                 (0.009)
 Has chronic other disease                                         0.003                  -0.009
                                                                 (0.008)                 (0.014)
 Is overweight (BMI>25)                                           -0.001                   0.007
                                                                 (0.008)                 (0.009)
 Ever had a heart attack                                          -0.004                   0.010
                                                                 (0.011)                 (0.025)
 Ever had diabetes                                                 0.018                   0.014
                                                                 (0.019)                 (0.012)
 Had depression in the last 12 months                              0.018                   0.003
                                                                 (0.019)                 (0.014)
 Rather or fully satisfied with life                               0.011                0.037***
                                                                 (0.007)                 (0.012)
 Partner is employed                                            0.130***                0.094***
                                                                 (0.035)                 (0.021)
 Partner is in poor health                                         0.003                   0.001
                                                                 (0.013)                 (0.014)
 Partner is disabled                                               0.031                0.024***
                                                                 (0.020)                 (0.009)
 Presence of children under 18 in HH                           -0.020***                -0.016**
                                                                 (0.007)                 (0.007)
 Log HH income per capita net of R's labor income              -0.071***               -0.096***
                                                                 (0.021)                 (0.013)
 Settlement: Small urban                                           0.029                  -0.010
                                                                 (0.026)                 (0.017)
 Settlement: Rural                                                 0.006                  -0.006
                                                                 (0.017)                 (0.014)
 Observations                                                       969                    2,634
 Region controls                                                    Yes                     Yes
 Pseudo-R2                                                         0.575                   0.476

Note: Marginal effects reported from a probit model with st. errors clustered by PSU; robust st. errors in parentheses.
* p<0.1; ** p<0.05; *** p<0.01.




                                                                               PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA           41
                     Table A.2: Regression Analysis of Exit from Employment into Retirement
 DV: Exited from employment into retirement by next survey wave (=1);                          (1)              (2)
 otherwise=0                                                                            Men aged 50-72   Women aged 45-72
 Age                                                                                        0.061**           0.015
                                                                                            (0.025)          (0.014)
 Age squared                                                                               -0.000**           -0.000
                                                                                            (0.000)          (0.000)
 Will be eligible for old-age pension by next wave                                         0.056***          0.074***
                                                                                            (0.020)          (0.017)
 Education: Secondary                                                                        -0.031           -0.037
                                                                                            (0.047)          (0.036)
 Education: Professional / vocational                                                        -0.013           -0.043
                                                                                            (0.044)          (0.034)
 Education: University or more                                                               -0.034          -0.057*
                                                                                            (0.044)          (0.034)
 Marital status: Married / living together                                                   -0.030          0.036**
                                                                                            (0.025)          (0.015)
 Health self-assessment: poor / very poor                                                    0.008            0.023*
                                                                                            (0.020)          (0.012)
 Had health problem in last 30 days                                                          0.019            -0.004
                                                                                            (0.012)          (0.009)
 Has disability status                                                                       0.034            0.001
                                                                                            (0.021)          (0.018)
 Has chronic heart disease                                                                  0.033**           0.001
                                                                                            (0.014)          (0.010)
 Has chronic lung disease                                                                    0.023            0.022
                                                                                            (0.022)          (0.015)
 Has chronic liver disease                                                                  -0.050*           -0.002
                                                                                            (0.029)          (0.012)
 Is overweight (BMI>25)                                                                      0.002           0.022**
                                                                                            (0.012)          (0.011)
 Ever had a heart attack                                                                     0.012            0.021
                                                                                            (0.030)          (0.030)
 Ever had diabetes                                                                           -0.008           0.004
                                                                                            (0.026)          (0.013)
 Works in public sector                                                                      0.004            -0.010
                                                                                            (0.011)          (0.009)
 Works part-time (< 35 hours a week)                                                         0.026           0.020**
                                                                                            (0.022)          (0.010)
 Works from home                                                                             -0.042         -0.060***
                                                                                            (0.028)          (0.018)
 Had salary cut in the last 12 months                                                        0.003            -0.011
                                                                                            (0.020)          (0.016)
 Not very satisfied / absolutely unsatisfied with job in general                            0.049**           0.004
                                                                                            (0.021)          (0.014)
 Not very satisfied / absolutely unsatisfied with work conditions                            -0.004           0.008
                                                                                            (0.020)          (0.014)
 Not very satisfied / absolutely unsatisfied with earnings                                   -0.012          -0.017*
                                                                                            (0.013)          (0.009)
 Not very satisfied / absolutely unsatisfied with opportunity for professional growth        -0.001          0.020**
                                                                                            (0.014)          (0.010)
 Partner retires by the next wave                                                          0.076***          0.068***
                                                                                            (0.021)          (0.022)
 Partner in poor health                                                                      -0.016           -0.023
                                                                                            (0.018)          (0.016)
 Partner is disabled                                                                         0.016            0.024*
                                                                                            (0.018)          (0.014)
 Presence of children under 18 in HH                                                         -0.001           0.011
                                                                                            (0.011)          (0.007)
 Log HH income per capita net of R's labor income                                           0.021**           0.002
                                                                                            (0.010)          (0.002)
 Settlement: Small urban                                                                     -0.019           0.012
                                                                                            (0.033)          (0.025)
 Settlement: Rural                                                                           -0.015           0.017
                                                                                            (0.029)          (0.021)
 Observations                                                                                1,814            3,753
 Region controls                                                                               Yes              Yes
 Round controls                                                                                Yes              Yes
Note: Marginal effects reported from a random-effects probit model; standard errors in parentheses; * p<0.1; ** p<0.05; ***
p<0.01.



                                                                              PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA       42
                                Table A.3: Key Parameters of Russia‚Äôs Pension System

        a) Pre-2013 reform
                       Basic Part of Labor               Insurance Part of Labor Pension                   Mandatory
                            Pension                                                                      Funded Pension

Retirement age       60 for men / 55 for women with minimum of 5 years contribution, but many options for even earlier
                                                                retirement
Benefit rate       3,170 rubles/month, but     Notional account system, based on actual        Based on individual
                   higher for those aged 80 or contributions made, with an assumed 19 years contributions and
                   above and certain other     of benefit receipt at the normal retirement age interest earned on those
                   categories                  beginning in 2013, phased in from the           contributions
                                               assumed 12 years in 2002

Interest rate on                -                    Growth rate of contribution revenue per          Interest rate provided
contributions                                                       pensioner                           by fund chosen by
                                                                                                            individual
Indexation post-   Indexed to average wages,      Indexed to average wages, but can be limited       Paid as scheduled
retirement         but can be limited by          by availability of revenue                         withdrawal
                   availability of revenue
Contribution          22 percent of wages up to 512,000 rubles (of this, 6 percent finances basic pensions and 6 percent is
rates                  diverted to the mandatory funded pension for individuals born in 1967 or later). Earnings above
                                                   512,000 rubles pay a 10 percent tax rate.

        Source: Based on Eich et al. 2012.

        b) Post-2013 reform
                       Fixed Part of Insurance Pension                   Insurance Pension               Mandatory funded
                                                                                                            pension*

Retirement age      60 for men / 55 for women with minimum of 15 years contribution (gradually increasing over 2015 ‚Äì
                   2025) and accumulation of at least 30 individual pension points (gradually increasing over 2015 ‚Äì2025),
                                                certain earlier retirement provisions remain

Benefit rate       3,935 rubles/month, but higher for those    Points system, based on annual            Based on individual
                   aged 80 or above and certain other          contribution to the Pension Fund          contributions and
                   categories                                  (with gradually-increasing upper          interest earned on
                   Higher benefits for those who defer         limits on annual accumulations of         those contributions
                   pension receipt beyond pensionable age      points, and lower upper limits for
                   (based on premium coefficients)             those with a funded component).
                                                               Higher benefits for those who defer
                                                               pension receipt beyond pensionable
                                                               age (based on premium coefficients

Interest rate                          -                                          -                      Interest rate
on                                                                                                       provided by fund
contributions                                                                                            chosen by individual

Indexation         Indexed every year (by February 1) to       Indexed based on one pension point        Paid as scheduled
post-              consumer prices growth rate of the          value defined annually                    withdrawal
retirement         previous year. Additional indexation may
                   be conducted annually (By April 1) based
                   on revenue growth rate of Pension Fund
                   by decision of the Russian Government
Contribution
rates              The default of all contributions (22 percent) is going to the insurance pension, but contributors can elect
                                to contribute 16% to the insurance pension and channel 6% to funded pension

        Note: * Currently, the mandatory funded pension is frozen, with all contributions (22 percent) going to the insurance
        pension, pending the decision of the government on unfreezing the funded pension or converting it to a voluntary
        funded component.




                                                                          PROMOTING ACTIVE AGING IN RUSSIA                 43
