99517-TR
Table of Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms ......................................................................................................... 3
Acknowledgements ......................................................................................................................... 4
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................ 5
I.          Introduction ........................................................................................................................ 10
II.         Overview of the Forestry Sector in Turkey ........................................................................ 11
III.        Forest Valuation and Accounting ....................................................................................... 15
IV.         Overview of Valuation Methods for the Forest Sector ...................................................... 18
V.          The Pilot Study in Bolu ...................................................................................................... 23
      5.1 Basic Information on the Study Area .................................................................................. 23
      5.2 Types of Forestry Products and Eco-services Identified ..................................................... 24
      5.3 Data Available ..................................................................................................................... 25
      5.4 Valuation: Methods Used and Results ................................................................................ 26
      5.5 Summary of the Pilot Study Results ................................................................................... 31
VI.         Policy Implications and Recommendations ....................................................................... 34
VII.        Concluding Remarks .......................................................................................................... 37
References ..................................................................................................................................... 38
Annex 1. Selected Policy Applications of Forest Accounts ......................................................... 42
Annex 2. Overview of Existing Valuation Methods ..................................................................... 46
Annex Tables ................................................................................................................................ 51




                                                                                                                                                  2
                 Abbreviations and Acronyms

AFOLU          Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use
Bolu RD        Bolu Regional Directorate of Forestry
CB             Cost Based
CE             Choice Experiment
CM             Choice Modeling
CPS            Country Partnership Strategy
CV             Centingent Valuations
DG             Directorate General of Forestry
Forestry/DGF
EFI            European Forest Institute
GDP            Gross Domestic Product
HP             Hedonic Pricing
IPCC           Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
MoD            Ministry of Development
MoFWA          Ministry of Forestry and Water Affairs
MP             Market Price
MWTP           Marginal Willingness to Pay
NCA            Natural Capital Accounting
NGO            Non-Governmental Organization
NTFP           Non-Timber Forest Products
NWFP           Non-Wood Forest Products
OECD           The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development
RP             Revealed Preference
SCC            Social Cost of Carbon
SEEA-CF        UN System of Environmental-Economic Accounting Central
               Framework
SNA            System of National Accounts
ST             Stated Preference
TA             Technical Assistance
TEMA           Turkish Foundation for Combating Soil Erosion, for
               Reforestation and the Protection of Natural Habitats
TC             Travel Cost
TEV            Totol Economic Value
TL             Turkish Lira
TurkStat       Turkish Statistical Institute
UN             United Nations
WAVES          Wealth Accounting and Valuation of Ecosystem Services
WFP            Wood Forest Products
WTP            Willingness to Pay




                                                                           3
                                  Acknowledgements

This report is an output of the World Bank’s Turkey Environment and Natural Resources
Technical Assistance (TA) Program. The report was prepared by Bahar Ç. Erbaş (Consultant)
and Jian Xie, with input from Esra Arıkan (forest sector overview) and Vladislava I. Nemova
(overview of valuation methods) of the World Bank. Turgut Çelikkol, a retired forest engineer
of DG Forestry and FAO, shared his knowledge and experience in the pilot study area. Elsa
Varela of the European Forest Institute (EFI) assisted in the literature research and provided
information on economic valuation of biodiversity.

A number of people in Turkey provided their assistance in the pilot study. Among them, Alper
Tolga Arslan, Ramazan Balı, and Banu Karabıyık of the DG Forestry reviewed and provided
suggestions on some valuation components of the report. Alper Tolga Arslan, Özgür Balcı,
İlknur Palaşoğlu of the DG Forestry, Gülsevil Bahçeli of TurkStat, Abdullah Demirel of
Kozyaka Village in Bolu, and İsmail Kurt of beekeepers association in Yalova assisted in data
collection for the Bolu pilot study. The study also benefited from the support and discussions of
various Turkish government agencies and individuals, particularly Yuksel Erdogan, Alper Tolga
Arslan, Basar Bakir, Cengiz Yılmaz, Galip Çağtay Tufanoğlu, Fuat Sanal, Osman Karaelmas,
Ramazan Bali, Banu Karabıyık, Özgür Balkız, İlknur Palaşoğlu, Sema Oymak, Güven Kaya,
Şahin Karaçorlu, Ahmet Atalan, and Nihal Argun of DG Forestry; Sema Bayazıt, Taylan
Kiymaz, Mustafa Bulut, Pinar Topcu, and Feyza Eldemir of the Ministry of Development
(MoD); Sebahattin Sarı, Hüseyin Şentürk, Gülsevil Bahçeli, and Levent Alpar of the Turkish
Statistical Institute (TurkStat); Bahar Sel and Burak Ekinci of DG Water Management.

The Turkey TA Program was managed by Jian Xie and Esra Arıkan, under the guidance and
support of Martin Raiser, Kulsum Ahmed, and Stephen Karam. Glenn-Marie Lange, David
Treguer, Stephen Karam, and Agi Kiss of the World Bank, Alper Tolga Arslan of the DG
Forestry, Gülsevil Bahçeli of TurkStat, and Pinar Topçu of MoD helped review the draft version
of the report and provide useful comments. The forest valuation study also benefits from
discussions with Juan-Pablo Castaneda and Stig Gustaf Johansson of the World Bank’s Wealth
Accounting and Valuation of Ecosystem Services (WAVES) Global Partnership program and
many participants in the WAVES Regional Workshop held in March 2015 in Istanbul. Ülker
Karamullaoğlu and Sydnella E. Kpundeh provided administrative assistance to the program.




                                                                                               4
                                   Executive Summary
Forests have played a major role in human history, making a broad range of economic,
social and environmental contributions. Well-managed forests and woodlands provide a
variety of environmental goods and services, including carbon sequestration, support and
enhancement of biodiversity, better visual quality of landscapes, recreation, sustainable water
supply, and the prevention of soil erosion, in addition to direct timber and non-timber forest
products. In many countries, including Turkey, forests make an important contribution to poverty
alleviation, socio-economic development, and food security and they also help to secure a
healthy environment, regardless of their types and their management framework.

The array of benefits and multi-functionality that forests provide needs to be explicitly
recognized and incorporated into any development planning and policy making related to
the forest sector. The policy must also be informed by the economic value of forest resources,
forest goods, and services. Proper assessment of the socio-economic values of goods and
services provided by forests and forest ecosystems will strengthen actions to support the
sustainable management of forests and forest ecosystems, it enables countries to have balanced
trade-off decisions when managing forest management plans, for example, the choice between
eco-tourism and commercial logging.

Many forest products and services, especially the ecosystem services provided by forests,
are unaccounted for in forest and economic accounts due to a lack of price and market,
which undermines the optimal decisions on forest development and management. It is
known that timber is the most common of wood forest products (WFPs), but non-timber or non-
wood forest products (NTFPs or NWFPs) and services are also very important. Least recognized,
but most important, are public goods and the positive externalities they provide biodiversity and
watershed protection and carbon sequestration. Only a few of many benefits that forests provide
enter formal markets (WFPs and some NWFPs), where their price provides an estimation of their
value and scarcity. However, other goods and services do not enter markets at all, and with no
formal price established, they cannot serve as an indicator of the scarcity or a predictor of the
demand. This leads, as the non-market component of the provided benefits is omitted, to sub-
optimal forest management decisions.

Forest valuation and accounting are useful tools in informed policy making. In the forestry
sector, it is especially important to have tools to estimate the economic value of non-market
forest goods and services. Considerable progress has been made in valuing forest products and
services including non-market ones, and reflecting the real value in forest accounts and national
accounts. Economic valuations of forests and forest accounts are useful tools to address the
above policy questions, and to help the government create well-informed policies. Forestry
valuation quantifies the economic values of forests, which are basic to the monetary accounts of
forests. Forest Accounts, as part of natural capital accounts (NCA), further provide a framework
to capture the detailed statistics and values of the economic contributions of forests in their many
forms, and how these are linked to the economy. These accounts are important in facilitating
better management of forests and the economy.


                                                                                                  5
Forests are important to Turkey’s economy and environment. Turkey has 21.7 million
hectares, or 27.6 percent of its total surface area, covered with forests. The normal forests cover
11.6 Mha comprising 53 percent of total forest area, and degraded forests are 10.1 Mha, or 47
percent of the total forests. As of 2011, the size of the tree assets in national forest areas is 1.5
billion m3. While the total increase in the national asset was 42.2 million m3 in 2011, the annual
wood production was reported only 19 million m3, less than half of the annual increase, which
means Turkish forests was generally managed in a sustainable way in the year (DG Forestry,
2012).

The Turkish government is putting significant efforts and resources towards forest
protection and management. Ninety-nine percent of the forests across the country are owned
by the State. Almost all of the state forests, except for protected areas and national parks, are
managed by the General Directorate of Forestry (DG Forestry or DGF). In the country,
regardless of the ownership of forest land, the management, planning, protection and exploitation
of forest resources are subject to State control and supervision according to Article 169 of the
Constitution and Article 6 of the Forest Code. DG Forestry’s responsibility is to protect and
expand the forests and their operation in such a way as to provide multi-dimensional benefits to
society. In 2013, the DG Forestry spent TL 4.1 billion on forestry activities and projects and on
general administrative activities of the sector, including reforestation, sustainable forest
management, and social-economic support to forest villages.

The contribution of the forest sector, however, is underestimated in traditional national
accounts. In the national statistics prepared by the Turkish Statistics Institute (TurkStat), the
production value of primary (timber) and secondary forestry products (non-timber) and services
was estimated to be between 0.2-0.3 percent of the GDP. The low GDP percentage results from
the economic values of many products and services not being valued and accounted for in
national accounts, or implicitly reflected in non-forest sectors such as water supply and animal
husbandry.

The Government put in a strong request for forest valuation and accounting in order to
better understand the value of forests. Government agencies, e.g., the Directorate General of
Forestry (DG Forestry) under the Turkish Ministry of Forestry and Water Affairs (MoFWA), are
keen on conducting a valuation which would contribute to policy debate and decision-making in
forest protection and the utilization and design of payments for environmental and eco-system
services. Besides the valuation of forest products and services, there exist a wide range of policy
questions related to forest management, from the economic contribution natural resources make
to national growth, to tradeoffs among competing users in managing and utilizing forest
resources, to planning and prioritizing investments around managing forest capital and
compensating or offsetting the loss of forests due to depletion.

In response to the government’s request for technical assistance in valuing natural
resources, a pilot study was carried out with the World Bank's assistance in the Bolu forest
area to identify and quantify the forest products and services used by humans. The purpose of
this report is to summarize the study’s findings, discuss its policy implications and applications,
and provide recommendations for next steps. Given the time limitation, a case study was
conducted in the Bolu Region, an area of 1.037 million ha located in the northwest part of the

                                                                                                   6
country between Istanbul and Ankara. The study area includes two provinces, Bolu and Düzce,
which have 22 municipalities and a total population of 640,000. About 56 percent of the study
area is mountains, and about 64 percent of Bolu and 50 percent of Düzce are covered by forests.
The region's total forest area is 628,734.9 hectares (ha). The climate in the northern part of the
study area is Black Sea and the rest of the area is Black Sea – Central Anatolia Transition. Water
surface area is 997 ha. There is one national park, Yedigöller, five nature parks, and six wildlife
development centers in the area.

The pilot study helped to significantly value the total economic value of forests in Bolu
region. The direct use, option, indirect use, and non-use values of forest products and services
were estimated with the use of various valuation methods. The estimated total net economic
value (TEV) was $666.3 million in 2013. The largest portion of the TEV are the indirect use
values coming from ecosystem services, including watershed protection, carbon sequestration
and soil erosion control, which amounts to $341.4 million or 50.0 percent of the total economic
value. In traditional national accounting, these values are largely unaccounted for or partially
included in the value-added of other sectors, such as cost reduction of water supply. The second
largest component of the total economic value is the direct-use value composed of timber,
firewood, NWFP-plants, honey, recreation, fodder for grazing, and hunting. The sum of these
direct-use values is $316.6 million, comprising 46.3 percent of the total economic value. Among
them, $86.4 million of the direct-use value from timber, firewood, NWFP-plants and hunting) is
normally accounted for under the forestry sector. The value of recreation services is accounted
for under the tourism sector, honey, and fodder for grazing are counted under agriculture and
husbandry. The values from NWFP-Plants and hunting can be accounted either under the
forestry sector or agriculture. In addition to the total direct and indirect use values, the nonuse
value of biodiversity and the option value of pharmaceuticals is estimated. Their values are
$19.3 million and $6.1 million, respectively. These forestry benefits are normally not estimated
and are unaccounted for in economic accounts.

The valuation results of the case study help to adjust and better understand the scale of
economic values that various forest products and services have in the local economy. The
study illustrates that the economic value of various forest products and services, which is
normally unaccounted for or accounted implicitly in non-forest sectors, is seven times of the
value currently accounted as the forest sector's contribution. In terms of GDP, the known and
accounted value ($86.4 million) of forest products was about 0.50 percent of the regional GDP in
2013. The case study further shows that the total economic value of forest product and services
is $666.3 million equivalent to 3.9 percent of GDP. The TEV reflects the true value and
contribution to the regional economy, and will help guide development programs and policies
towards forest protection and a more sustainable use of forest resources; for instance, the
justification for and prioritization of public expenditure in the forest sector in order to provide
public goods and externalities to national and regional economy. The study demonstrates that
improving forest valuation and accounting will be an important first step in getting the
information right in order to ensure well informed decision-making on forest sector protection
and development and the prioritization of forestry sector activities.

The report further concludes that Turkey will need to continue to improve its standards and
systems of forestry data collection and surveys, develop its own valuation methods and national

                                                                                                 7
guidelines on economic valuation and accounting of the forest sector, scale up its valuation
efforts nationwide, and systematically integrate valuation results into national development
planning and policy making. Specific recommendations are as follows:

Improve data availability and associated institutional arrangement. The study found out
that data, especially related to forest services, is scarce and has not been systematically collected
and processed at local and national levels. Some data and coefficients needed to quantify
ecosystem services does not exist, and have to be collected through field surveys; for example
physical data regarding water and soil protection and monetary data of recreation and tourism.
There are different agencies and institutions which collect and possess some data useful to
economic valuation such as DG Forestry, DG Water Management, the Ministry of Food,
Agriculture and Livestock, Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat) and the regional offices of
these agencies. It is necessary to develop a unified information system at the national level to
collect, manage and use the data. Therefore, to move forward with an institutional arrangement
for data gathering and management for economic valuation and accounting, we recommended
developing a more unified information system for forest data that can be easily used to locate and
categorize available data sets in different agencies for the purpose of economic valuation and
policy making.

Standardize data gathering methods. We recommend standardizing the terminology and
methods for data collection efforts across institutions and regions. As part of the effort to
improve data coordination and consistency, it is necessary to develop standards for use in the
field to both gather data and apply to appropriate methodologies. The concepts, terminology,
and data collection methods used in forestry data generation and application need to be
standardized. Such standards will help to eliminate inconsistencies and misunderstandings in
data collection and use.

Improve the accuracy of valuation through site specific surveys and field studies. Given the
time and funding constraints, the pilot study has relied on the benefit transfer approach which
adopts and converts the unit value or parameters estimated by others elsewhere in valuing a
number of indirect ecosystem services provided by forests in the pilot study area in order to
demonstrate the orders of magnitude of forest values. But due to the complex and unique nature
of forest ecosystem services, more site specific surveys and studies are necessary to improve the
quality and accuracy of economic valuation and calibrate the methodology for valuing forest
ecosystem services. We recommend developing a systematic and scientific approach to sample
different types of regions by forest type to study and value ecosystem services in these regions.
For example, the water supply service of Turkey's forests is crucial due to the high stress on
water sources under the impact of global climate change in both the country and the surrounding
region. There is therefore a need for studies on the quantity and costs of water supply production
in different regions covered by different forest types in Turkey.

Develop national guidelines on the economic valuation of forest products and service. For
DGF to guide forest valuation efforts, we recommend developing and adopting national
guidelines on forest valuation methods. The guidelines will outline data requirements, data
quality assurance, valuation methods and application examples to guide regional and local
offices in carrying out their forest valuation programs.

                                                                                                   8
Pilot integrated physical and monetary forest accounts. To guide decision making, the
results of forest valuation need to be integrated into existing economic and forest accounts. We
recommend piloting forest accounts that integrate physical and monetary results. This can start in
one region.

Scale up forest valuation accounting efforts at the national level. With more experience
obtained and the national guidelines in place, forest valuation efforts can be scaled up in more
regions and eventually nationwide. The results will be aggregated at the national level, and lead
to the development and enhancement of forest and economic accounts, which will be used to
guide national development planning and policy making.




                                                                                                9
                                     I.      Introduction

Forests are one of Turkey’s significant natural endowments. The country’s forest areas occupy
21.7 million ha (approximately 27.6 percent of its total surface area), and are inhabited by close
to 10 percent of its total population. The forest sector generates a variety of timber and non-
timber products and eco-services. It is strongly linked to the economic growth and well-being of
people living both within and outside of forested areas.

Development decisions that discount (or ignore) the value of natural resources often lead to their
mismanagement and to issues of scarcity, situations which often require more extreme measures
to correct in the future., It is therefore in Turkey’s national interest to ensure that natural
resources are used sustainably and in the long-term. The Turkish government has put great effort
into reforestation and forest management, increasing the total area of forests. However,
according to national statistics, to date the forest sector is responsible for only 0.2-0.3 percent of
Turkey’s GDP. This is because forest statistics are currently largely underused due to insufficient
valuation efforts. Since forests are a major factor in biodiversity, protection from soil erosion,
water conservation, carbon sequestration and other types of non-timber forest products or
ecosystem services, the government is eager to conduct a full economic valuation of forest
products and services. In their Tenth National Development Plan (2014-2018), the Turkish
Government has decided to take a series of actions, including quantifying the value of natural
resources and their ecosystem services and taking them into account in making and
implementing policy decisions.

In response to the government’s request for technical assistance in valuing natural resources, the
World Bank assisted the Directorate General of Forestry (DGF) under the Turkish Ministry of
Forestry and Water Affairs (MoFWA) in conducting a pilot study in the Bolu forest area to
identify and quantify the forest products and services used by humans and assess the possibility
to expand and scale up forest valuation.

The purpose of this report is to summarize the study’s findings and discuss its policy
implications and next steps. The report contains six chapters, starting with this introductory one.
Chapter 2 provides an overview of the forest sector in Turkey, from physical conditions to
institutional aspects. Chapter 3 presents the justification and application of forest valuation and
accounting, while the valuation methods for forest products and services are introduced in
Chapter 4. Chapter 5 then discusses the findings and results of the Bolu pilot study. The Policy
implications, areas for improvement, and recommendations for scaling up are discussed in
Chapter 6.




                                                                                                   10
               II.     Overview of the Forestry Sector in Turkey

Turkey’s surface area of 78.5 million hectares (Mha) has forests covering 21.7 Mha, or 27.6
percent of the country. The forests suitable for timber production total 11.6 Mha, and comprise
53 percent of total forest area, while degraded forests are 10.1 Mha, or 47 percent of total forests.
The total area of high forests is 17.3 Mha, while the total coppice forests cover 4.4 Mha.
Conifers, broadleaved and mixed high forests are 68.2, 17.9 and 13.9 percent, respectively, of the
total high forests (DG Forestry, 2013). The distribution of growing stock (measured in m3) by
2012 was 95 percent high forests and 5 percent coppice forests (Ministry of Forests and Water
Affairs, 2014). With its many plant species and fauna, the country is on the list of temperate zone
countries rich in biological diversity.

Ninety-nine percent of the forests across the country are owned by the State. Almost all state
forests, except for protected areas and national parks, are managed by the General Directorate of
Forestry (DG Forestry or DGF) of the Ministry of Forests and Water Affairs (DG Forestry,
2012). DG Forestry is a special, budgeted institution with public legal entity, and was
established by Law 3204 in 1937. The legal basis of Turkey’s modern forestry management was
first laid out by Forest Law 3116 (in 1937), and later improved by Forest Law 6831 (1956). In
Turkey, regardless of the ownership of forest land, the management, planning, protection and
exploitation of forest resources are subject to the State control and supervision according to
Article 169 of the Constitution and Article 6 of the Forest Code.

The responsibility of the DG Forestry is to protect and expand the forests and their operation in
such a way as to provide multi-dimensional benefits to society. Its headquarters has 18
departments. At the regional level, the DG Forestry has two types of main units: 27 Regional
Directorates of Forestry and 12 Research Institute Directorates. There are a total of 40,658 staff
in DG Forestry at the national level and 17,524 working in DG Forestry’s regional directorates
and local offices in 2013 (DG Forestry, 2014) The Forestry District (Management) Directorates
under the Regional Directorates are important for forest management as they carry out any field
applications in connection with the protection, development and management of the forests. The
Research Institute Directorates perform analyses and research, provide technical support, training
and consulting services over issues identified by the DG Forestry and other public entities. They
also develop and implement research projects via pilot testing and trials (DG Forestry, 2014).
According to the DG Forestry, in 2013 it received a budget of about 4.4 billion Turkish Lira (TL)
and actually spent 93 percent. 50 percent of budget allocation was for general administration
activities and the rest was for financing various activities such as: investments in wood
production and quality (17.4 percent), forest fires control (5.5 percent), afforestation, soil
conservation and range management (3.6 percent), and financial support to forest villagers (3.2
percent).

In accordance with recent functional forest management plans, 50 percent of total forest area was
categorized with an ecological function, while 47 percent had an economic function, and 3
percent a social function in 2009 (DG Forestry, 2009). Further sub-functional breakdown shows
that 47 percent of the total forest area serves forest production, 19 percent nature production, 16

                                                                                                  11
percent hydraulic production, 11 percent erosion protection, 2 percent aesthetic, and the
remaining 5 percent is shared equally among eco-tourism and recreation, climate change
activities, public health, national defense and scientific. By 2012, the percentage of forest areas
fulfilling economic and social functions had increased to 63 and 5 percent, respectively, while
the percentage of forest areas having ecological functions went down to 32 percent, a decrease of
18 percent (The DG Forestry, 2012). The changes are primarily due to official reclassification of
forest areas for filling economic and social functions of land use.

As of 2011, the size of tree assets in national forest areas is 1.5 billion m3. While the annual
total increase was 42.2 million m3, a little less than half this amount, 19 million m3, is the annual
wood production (DG Forestry, 2012). According to national statistics, prepared by TurkStat on
annual production and statistics of industrial products, the sales value of wood (sawn or chipped
lengthwise, sliced or peeled, of a thickness > 6 mm; railway or tramway sleepers of wood not
impregnated) was around $340.5 million in 2013 and the sales value of wood (continuously
shaped along any of its edges or faces (including strips and friezes for parquet flooring, not
assembled, and beadings and mouldings) was $283.5 million. The production value of primary
(timber) and secondary forestry products (non-timber) and services was estimated to be between
0.2-0.3 percent of the GDP. Many sectors of economies also rely on forests and their ecosystems
for various inputs just as the forest sector relies on many other sectors. The forestry sector in
Turkey also serves the development of the country by providing high levels of employment per
unit of output; it ranks 17th among 64 sectors with respect to the employment multiplier.

DG Forestry has established and maintained a great number of recreation areas to fulfill the
public’s need to utilize the social, cultural, scientific, sportive and aesthetic services provided by
forests. Recreation areas number 1450, and there are 122 urban forests operated by the DG
Forestry. Existing as protected areas, there are 40 national parks on 848,447 ha, 31 natural
conservation areas on 64,225 ha, 183 natural parks on 81,189 ha and 106 natural monuments on
5,549 ha (DG Forestry, 2013). The DG Forestry also follows national and international
processes to improve the protection and development of biodiversity in the forests. The country
has two of the eight major gene centers in the world. There are about 3,400 endemic plants
among the country’s more than 9000 species. Moreover, Turkey provides habitats for 192 inland
freshwater fish species, 18 amphibian species, 83 reptile species, a minimum of 426 bird species,
and 120 species of mammals (DG Forestry, 2012).

Turkish forests generate a wide range of ecological services for the protection and maintenance
of soil, water and health. Furthermore, the forests also provide biospheric services such as
climate regulation and biodiversity conservation. The forests regulate hydrological flows and
water quality; supply water, by surface drainage and infiltration, to ground water; intercept and
store rainfall and moisture; regulate river flow; and reduce soil loss and sedimentation. In a
fragile environment as the Mediterranean country, the role of forests in protecting water supplies,
regulating water flows, and conserving soil is particularly important. Compared to conventional
agricultural land, forest catchments supply downstream populations with higher quality water
(Croitoru and Liagre, 2013). Soil erosion is being acknowledged a serious problem for Turkey
where some 80 percent of the total land area has mountainous and rugged topography and
sensitive soil— water helps create balance. Soil erosion was measured as 500 million tons every
year. Some 70 percent of this volume is carried by rivers and streams into the dams producing

                                                                                                   12
irrigation services, energy, and water provisions (DG Forestry, 2012). Soil loss per ha is 2, 6,
and 22 times more than in Asia, North America, and Africa, respectively ( Çepel, 1997; Özden et
al., 2007; Karahalil et al., 2009). The economic cost of sediments to dams and other water
infrastructure downstream is significant. In recognition of the role forests play in soil and water
protection, “protective forests” have been designated worldwide to prevent soil erosion and
preserve water resources. The country’s forests also provide benefits for human health and
services such as reduction of floods, drought, and landslides, and the assimilation of
contaminants and filtration of airborne particles. They are therefore an essential component of
mental health and well-being.

Biospheric services include the forests’ contribution to the protection, preservation and creation
of biodiversity at the gene, species, community, and ecosystem levels, as well as climate and gas
regulation, including the sequestration of CO2. The forest area dedicated to the conservation of
biodiversity in Turkey is a little less than 1 million ha, which is significantly below, by about 3.3
million ha, that in Italy, and 2.3 million ha below the Mediterranean region (Plan Bleu FEEM,
2014). Regarding carbon sequestration, it is estimated that national forests retained an annual net
volume of 6,045,000 metric tons of carbon,, which is equivalent to a carbon dioxide volume of
58,833,000 metric tons in 2010 (DG Forestry, 2012).

Forests are an area where a significant portion of Turkish population lives, and poverty is a
major concern. Due to rural poverty and poor accessibility to modern facilities in forest villages,
and the hope that cities and urban life can provide better education and health services, there is a
migration from forest villages to cities. In the 1970s, the forest village population was about 12
million, or about 22 percent of the country’s population. In 2004 the share of forest village
population went down to 10 percent of the country’s population. As of 2014, 7.16 million
people live in 21,723 forest villages, which comprise approximately 9.2 percent of the national
population and 40 percent of the rural population. The rate of unemployment in the forest
villages is estimated at 60 percent.

With national attention on poverty reduction, forest villages are a key area for consideration. The
state forestry service has created some supporting measures for the development of forest
villages. These mainly provide employment to forest villagers through forestry activities in their
regions, both direct and indirect resource allocation. State programs aim to minimize the
pressures on forests and direct forest villagers to alternative income sources by making
contributions to the social and economic development of village people living inside, and
adjacent to, the forests. In 2013, the total amount allocated directly to the development of forest
villages was 142.2 million TL. Forestry management units employ forest villagers in all sorts
forest work such as the harvesting of timber and non-timber forest products, afforestation and
rehabilitation works, etc. According to DG Forestry, there are about 300,000 forest villagers
employed at least seasonally each year for above works.

Despite the various benefits provided by Turkey’s forests, few studies are available on the
economic valuation of forestry contributions to ecosystems and the economy. The Turkish
government affirms that calculations of the economic value of the protective and environmental
services of forests is vitally important to making well informed public policies on forest
management and development and in increasing public social welfare and wellbeing. The DG

                                                                                                  13
Forestry is keen on conducting the valuation of forestry products and services which in turn will
contribute to the policy debate and decision making around forest protection and utilization, and
also the design of payments for environmental and ecosystem services. Policy questions which
could be important for the country include:

   •   What role do forestry resources play in economic growth, and what could their potential
       contribution to GDP be?
   •   How can economic contributions of forests guide sector and macro-economic investment
       and budget plans?
   •   How can the quality of feasibility studies on investments and development programs be
       improved, taking into account the full economic value of forests and eco-system services
       protection?
   •   What would the appropriate pricing policy be for scarce forestry resources?
   •   How should entrance fees in national parks and other eco-tourism pricing be determined?




                                                                                              14
                     III.   Forest Valuation and Accounting

Need for forestry Valuation and Introduction to the NCA approach

Although Turkey’s forests make a major contribution to its biodiversity, soil erosion protection,
water conservation, carbon sequestration and other types of non-timber forest products or
ecosystem services, their economic and environmental contributions are largely underestimated
or unaccounted for in statistics due to insufficient valuation efforts. TurkStat reports that the
annual contribution of forest products to GDP is only 0.2-0.3 percent of GDP and that most non-
market values are unaccountable. The drawbacks of national accounts have been well discussed
in literature. If these unaccounted values are not taken into account, the economic contribution
of forests is much less appreciated. This will undermine the government’s ability to make
informed decisions on forestry policy and investment.

Government agencies (e.g., DG Forestry) are keen to conduct a valuation which would
contribute to policy debate and decision-making in forest protection and the utilization and
design of payments for environmental and eco-system services. Besides the valuation of forest
products and services, a wide range of policy questions exist related to forest management, from
the economic contribution of natural resources to national growth, to tradeoffs among competing
users in managing and utilizing forest resources, to planning and prioritizing investments around
managing forest capital and compensating or offsetting the loss of forests due to depletion.

The economic valuation of forests and forest accounts are useful tools to address the above
policy questions and help the government make well-informed policies. Forestry valuation
quantifies the economic values of forests, which are basic to the monetary accounts of forests.
Forest Accounts, as part of natural capital accounts (NCA), further provide a framework to
capture the detailed statistics and values of the economic contributions of forests in their many
forms, and how they are linked to the economy. They are important to facilitate better
management of forests and the economy.

NCA is particularly useful in measuring the value of natural resources that currently do not have
any price or estimated value (e.g. ecosystem service value of forests). The valuation methods
inherent in NCA can help value the economic benefits and costs of the service values and
environmental externalities from forests. Many of these values are non-market in nature, and at
present it is normal that non-market values are not properly reflected in cost-benefit analyses.
The application of NCA enables the government to better integrate the full economic value of
natural resources into their development planning and prioritization, understand any potential
tradeoffs of development, and helps them make more informed policy decisions.

NCA efforts have been seen for years on particular issues in specific countries using disparate
methodologies. In recent years, momentum for the development and application of NCA has
been growing around the concept of looking beyond traditional national income accounts to
evaluate economic growth. Today there exist a methodology for calculating the value of goods
and services provided by forests and an internationally approved statistics framework to do

                                                                                              15
systematic forest accounting. In 2012 the UN System of Environmental-Economic Accounting
Central Framework (SEEA-CF) was adopted as an internationally agreed upon standard. The
SEEA provides methodology for building forest asset accounts as well as flow accounts for
timber and non-timber forest products as an extension of the System of National Accounts
(SNA). Forest ecosystem services can be captured in both physical and monetary terms. The
SEEA expands the asset boundary of the SNA to include both cultivated and natural forests. In
addition, SEEA flow accounts for forest goods and services are integrated into national income
accounts.

Policy Applications of Forest Accounts

Forest accounts provide a comprehensive framework for representing all forest goods and
services provided to all other sectors, with extensive policy applications. Examples of the policy
uses of forest accounts and the actions that could be taken on the basis of the policy analysis are
shown in Annex 1. Prominent among the policies are the institution of fees for environmental
services, which may be used to fund forest management—which is often woefully underfunded
in many countries—and to compensate other users, often local communities who may have to
sacrifice some forest uses in order to maintain the flow of forest protection services. Several of
these policy issues are being considered for Turkey’s planned update of its Forest Sector Review.

Forest accounts help to identify potential conflicts, both at the level of Ministry development
objectives and between local users of forest resources. By quantifying the relative values, trade-
offs among users can be assessed as well as an optimal forest strategy designed to take all
stakeholders into account. Forest accounts also assist in the building of multidisciplinary
alliances across ministries and among different stakeholders in the private sector, each realizes
the extent of their dependence on forests.

International Experience

As a tool for analyses and decision-making around sustainable development and green growth
policies, NCA has been used to help governments better define national targets of sustainable
natural resource management, address policy questions around natural resource management,
and improve the government’s policies and investment prioritization processes. NCA can also
help identify and guide the interactions between economic activities and actions in the natural
resources sector through the valuation and pricing of natural resources.

Developed countries have a long history of working with natural capital accounts. For instance,
the EU Statistical Office (Eurostat) has been instrumental in piloting programs and providing
insight for the development of SEEA. In recent years, the European Union has passed a variety
of regulations and directives related to natural capital accounting, and several countries have
already established natural capital accounting programs. Most of Europe’s western and northern
countries (namely Germany, France, the Netherlands, the UK, Sweden, and Norway) have
established forest accounts and applied them to their development policy making. Other OECD
countries such as Australia, Canada, and New Zealand have also advanced natural capital
accounts. Emerging economies like South Africa and Mexico have created their own water and
forest accounts. China is actively valuing forest resources and the economic costs of

                                                                                                16
environmental pollution in an attempt to pilot green GDP. In Turkey, some agencies have started
exploring the valuation of eco-system services for some natural conservation areas. The
following introduces the recent application of forest accounting in Spain and Guatemala.

In Spain, a recent study (Caparros et al., 2014) examined forest ecosystems in Andalusia to
establish a system of ecosystem accounts for the Andalusian forests, conduct income estimates
for almost all of Andalusia’s forest ecosystems, and provide the total economic contribution of
these ecosystems. The study’s information enables the Andalusian government to prioritize
planning and budgetary considerations for managing these ecosystems (see Box 1 below).
                             Box 1. Forest Accounts of Andalusia, Spain
 Policy question: How to manage the global biodiversity hotspot region of Andalucia?

 Context: Traditionally, Andalucia’s ecosystems were managed for timber, cork, hunting, and grazing livestock.
 As pressures on the forest grew, policy makers realized the ecosystems were worth much more. The region
 provides ecosystem services—public and private recreation, forest produce, carbon storage, and biodiversity—
 whose values are not readily observable in markets.

 The challenge was how to develop the area while making sure that it continued to provide the other ecosystem
 services in the long run, including drawing millions of tourists annually. Four years ago, the government
 decided to spend $9 million on building a detailed set of land accounts related to its forests and the complex
 system they support. While most of the research follows the SEEA methodology, they are pushing to develop
 their own ecosystem accounts.

 Applications of the accounts:
 Evaluating trade-offs for development: When building roads or bridges, these accounts show which parts of the
 forests store more carbon and are worth preserving or how much compensation should be paid to local residents
 for commercial revenue lost as a result of the road.
 Public buy-in for millions spent on fire protection in the region: The accounts map fire expenditures and help in
 determining whether money is being spent on the forests with the greatest value. This helps in communicating
 and justifying the public expenditure on protection against forest fires.
 Setting entry prices for tourists: One part of the land accounts involves using the Simulated Exchange Value
 tool, which determines the amount of money tourists would be willing to pay to visit a particular area of
 Andalucia.



Efforts to establish forest accounts have also been seen in some developing countries. In
Guatemala, the forest accounts showed that the country’s deforestation rate was the highest in
Central and South America. That information has fueled strategies to control the use of firewood
and unauthorized logging, a review of the forestry law, and an update of regulations. Greater
budget resources for these initiatives were made available.




                                                                                                                  17
                   IV. Overview of Valuation Methods for the Forest Sector

       This chapter provides an overview of the concept and application of total economic value (TEV)
       and valuation methods and techniques commonly used in the forestry sector. Economists
       developed the TEV concept to capture the full value that eco-systems such as forests provide to
       human society. The notion of TEV provides an all-encompassing measure of the economic value
       of any environmental asset (Pearce, et al., 2006). In recent years, the TEV has been widely used
       to quantify the full value of different components of ecosystems, including those provided by
       forests (Mavsar, et al., 2014; Merlo and Croitoru, 2005). The wide range of benefits that forests
       provide requires a coherent analytical framework, and assigning monetary economic values helps
       to create a common metric for comparison. The main advantage of using TEV is that all forestry
       benefits are considered systematically and comprehensively without any double counting
       (Mavsar, et al., 2014).

       The classifications and terminology vary, but TEV generally categorizes values into use and non-
       use (or passive use) (Pearce, D., et al., 2006). See Figure 1 below. Use values relate to actual use
       of the good in question (e.g. a visit to a national park), planned use (a visit planned in the future)
       or possible use. Actual and planned uses are fairly obvious concepts, but possible use could also
       be important since people may be willing to pay to maintain a good in existence in order to
       preserve the option of using it in the future. Option value thus becomes a form of use value
       (Pearce, et al., 2006). It is the value obtained from maintaining the option of the future use of
       goods or services. In other words, it is potential use values, which might be realized in the
       future.

                                                        Figure 1. Total Economic Value

                                                                    Total Economic Value

                                        Use values                                                            Non-use values

    Direct use values                 Indirect use values                Option values     Existence values              Altruistic and bequest values
(usually measures outputs)   (usually measures benefits/services)


       Use value can be further divided into direct use value and indirect use value. According to Dixon
       and Pagiola (1998) Direct use value derives from goods which can be extracted, consumed or
       directly enjoyed; for example, extractive use value would be derived from timber, from harvest
       minor forest products, hunting and fishing. In addition to these directly consumed goods, direct
       use value can also be non-consumptive. For example, people who enjoy hiking or camping in the
       same forest receive a direct use value, but not actually "consume" any of the forest resource.
       Indirect use value, also known as non-extractive use value or functional value, derives from the
       services the environment provides. These services do not require any good to be harvested,
       although they may require someone's physical presence.



                                                                                                                                        18
Non-use value refers to the willingness to pay to maintain some good in existence despite having
no actual, planned or possible use. The types of non-use value vary, but the following are
convenient classifications: existence value, altruistic value, and bequest value. Existence value
refers to the willingness to pay (WTP) to keep a good in existence in a context where an
individual expressing the value has no actual or planned use for his/herself or for anyone else.
Motivations here vary, and might include having a feeling of concern for the asset itself (e.g. a
threatened species) or a “stewardship” motive whereby the “valuer” feels some responsibility for
the asset. For example, many people will never have the opportunity to see the Amazon
rainforest, yet are willing to pay for its preservation. Altruistic value might arise when an
individual is concerned that the good in question should be available to others. A bequest value
is similar, but concerned that the next and future generations have the option to make use of the
good.

As for the forest sector, the definitions of direct use, indirect use, and option values or benefits
can be further elaborated as follows (Lange, 2004): direct use values include economic benefits
obtained from direct use of the forest, which can be extractive (e.g. timber, fuelwood, edible
plants, game and medicinal plants) or non-extractive (e.g. recreation and tourism). Indirect use
benefits refer to environmental services provided by forests that are of indirect value, such as
carbon sequestration, the provision of a habitat to protect biodiversity, or various ecosystem
protection services such as the ability to reduce soil erosion and siltation in rivers. Option value
refers to the value people may place on maintaining forests to enjoy their direct or indirect use
values at some time in the future, including preservation of a natural gene bank.

Direct use values include market or near-market goods whose physical volume and monetary
value can be measured. Many of forest products either have market prices (e.g. commercial
timber) or prices that can be readily estimated by closely related market goods and services (e.g.
own-account fuelwood, edible plants and game). In principle, these products or goods should be
included in SNA although in practice the estimation of non-market goods and services may be
quite limited in some countries. Indirect use of forest services, such as for biodiversity protection
and hydrologic function, are often represented in physical terms only because of difficulties with
valuation (Lange, 2004).

Wherever possible, all of these values should be represented in both physical (forestland in
hectares, timber harvested in cubic meters) and monetary units in the accounting framework.
Owing to measurement problems, forest accounts have been limited to some direct use values,
such as timber, non-wood forest products (NWFP), recreation and tourism, and fodder for
grazing.

Indirect use of forest services for carbon storage is relatively easy to measure in physical terms,
and there is some international consensus on valuation. But use of other indirect services, such as
biodiversity protection, is represented qualitatively through physical indicators. In the forestry
economic literature, quite a bit of work has been done to estimate option value and non-use
values. However, these values are rather experimental at the present time; neither SEEA nor any
official forestry accounts have attempted to include these values.




                                                                                                  19
In some forestry analyses (Table 1), TEV is broken down into 6 types of values, with the adding
up of the types of benefits and outputs provided by forests and associated social costs should
damage to forests occur. Many forest outputs, e.g. timber, recreation and soil conservation, have
positive value and can be easily located within TEV categories. Other results, such as damages
of forest fires, soil erosion, and floods, are social costs with negative value, and mostly affect the
indirect use values of forests (Croitoru, 2007).

         Table 1: TEV Categories with Several Examples of Forest Benefits and Social Costs
                                                TEV
                 Use Value                                              Non-Use Values
 Direct use           Indirect use       Option value         Altruistic      Bequest value       Existence
 value                value                                   value                               value
 Direct               Ecosystem          Direct or indirect   Value for the   Value for          Value derived
 consumption          functions          future us values     enjoyment of    future             from the
 products                                                     other people    generations        existence of the
                                                                                                 resource
 Timber,              Watershed          Personal future      Recreational    Habitats,          Endangered
 firewood, cork,      protection, soil   recreation,          opportunities   avoided            species,
 resin, sparto        conservation,      potential source     enhanced for    irreversible       conservation of
 grass, decorative    avalanche and      of energy and        other people    changes,           biodiversity,
 plants,              floods             raw materials,                       landscape,         habitats, species
 mushrooms,           prevention,        potential                            recreation,        for the right or
 truffles, berries,   landscape          unknown source                       energy and raw     welfare of non-
 grazing,             quality, carbon    of biodiversity                      material           human beings
 recreation,          sequestration      and plants,                          availability,
 hunting                                 preserved habitat                    potential
                                                                              unknown
                                                                              source of
                                                                              biodiversity
                                                                              affecting future
                                                                              generations
                                              Social Costs:
  Damage by forest fires
  Erosion, floods, avalanches due to poor or no forest management
  Pollen or other allergic factors
  Loss of recreation opportunities due to intensive plantation forestry and poor management
  Loss of landscape values due to excessive expansion of forest land use
  Loss of biodiversity and landscape values due to plantation forestry
                              Source: developed based on Croitoru (2006).

A variety of environmental valuation methods has been developed to estimate the value of
ecosystem goods and services. They are presented in Table 2 below. The main categories of
these methods are the revealed preference (RP) and stated preference (SP) methods (Mavsar,
et al 2014). These could be applied to the forestry sector.




                                                                                                                 20
                          Table 2. List of Economic Valuation Methods

                                          Direct                         Indirect


             Revealed          Competitive Market Price  Travel Cost
            Preferences        Simulated Markets         Hedonic Property Values
            (Observed                                    Avoidance Expenditures
             Behavior)                                   Referendum Voting
                           Contingent Valuation          Contingent Ranking
       Stated Preferences
         (Hypothetical)    Bidding Games                 Contingent Activity
                                                         Contingent Referendum
                                               Unit Value Transfer
        Benefit Transfer
                                                Function Transfer
    Source: Adopted with modifications from Freeman, 1994 and EFIMED and CTFC, 2014


The revealed preference (RP) methods are based on actual observed behaviors of people.
These methods are suitable when a relationship exists between the environmental goods or
services at stake and a functional and well established market (Mavsar, et al. 2014; Morrison,
1996). For example, part of the real estate value is often associated with the environmental
quality (e.g., pollution level). It is very likely that RP methods underestimate the value of public
goods, as they are not able to capture all the possible ways in which people benefit from them
(i.e. non-use values). The main advantage of RP methods is that they are based on actual market
behavior of users of non-market goods and services (e.g. paying a higher price for a house
because of a nice forest view); however, their applicability is limited to only a few non-market
forest goods and services (recreation, tourism and landscape aesthetics) (Mavsar, et al., 2014).

The stated preference methods are based on people’s responses to questions describing
hypothetical markets or situations (Mavsar, et al., 2014). These techniques are suited to eliciting
each of these kinds of value; although, in practice, it is usually not possible to disaggregate
individual types of non-use value, and also not usually relevant to a decision to secure that
breakdown. But differentiating between use and non-use values is important because the latter
can be large relative to the former, especially when the good in question has few substitutes and
is widely valued. In addition, non-use value remains controversial in some decision-making
contexts, so it is important to separate it out for presentational and strategic reasons (Pearce, D.,
et al., 2006). The main disadvantages to this methodology is that they are based on hypothetical
situations (no real market transaction is performed and the received answer might not reflect the
real situation) and their application is complex (specialists are needed for the development of a
questionnaire and for data analysis) and time consuming. Another weak point for this group of
methods is a high risk of biases that may lead to inaccurate WTP estimations.

A specific method is the benefit transfer approach, which is not a valuation method, but which
uses (transfers) economic estimates from previous studies with similar changes in environmental

                                                                                                  21
goods and services to estimate the value of environmental changes at the valued site (Mavsar, et
al., 2014). The method is still relatively new, and no widely accepted standards for its application
have yet been adopted. The benefit transfer is a process of “borrowing” values that have already
been estimated in some other study or context, and would save considerable time and effort in
conducting “primary” valuation studies. Certainly, the more primary valuation research there is
the more we can learn about the benefit transfer (Pearce, et al., 2006). It could be used for
screening to determine if a more detailed, original valuation study should be conducted. Benefit
transfer may not be accurate, except for making gross estimates of recreational values, unless
sites share all of the site, location, and user-specific characteristics. Unit value estimates become
outdated quickly. A detailed introduction to each valuation methods can be found in Annex 2.




                                                                                                  22
                            V.     The Pilot Study in Bolu

Bolu region, which is the jurisdiction of the Bolu Regional Directorate of Forestry, was chosen
as the pilot study area. The DGF suggested Bolu because of the region’s relatively rich forest
products and services, adequate institutional support, and the availability of data.

5.1 Basic Information on the Study Area

The Bolu study area (Figure 2) is located in the northwest part of the country between Istanbul
and Ankara, and its total area of 1.037 million ha includes the municipalities of Bolu and Düzce.
The total population of the study area is 640,338 with a density of 34 persons per km2 in Bolu
and 139 persons per km2 in Düzce. About 56 percent of Bolu is mountains. The climate in the
northern part of the study area is Black Sea, and the rest is Black Sea – Central Anatolia
Transition. Water surface is 997 ha composed of 478 ha of natural lakes, 131 ha of dam
reservoirs, 127 ha of manmade small lakes and 260 ha of rivers. There is one national park,
Yedigöller, five nature parks, and six wildlife development centers in the area.

                    Figure 2. The Boundary of Bolu Regional Directorate




               Source: Strategy Development Department, DG Forestry, Turkey

About 64 percent of Bolu and 50 percent of Düzce are forest areas. The region’s total forest area
is 628,734.9 ha. High forests, i.e. a stand of trees generally of seedling origin, that normally
develop into a high, closed canopy, are 628,517 ha, and coppice forests are 217.5 ha (Table 3).

                                                                                              23
About 80 percent of the high forests are normal, and 20 percent are degraded. All coppice forests
are degraded. The vegetation has a great range of flora consisting of 89 families and 363 species.
Majority of flora family, about 82, are endemic plants. There is rich wild life in forest areas of
high altitude, including bears, wildcat, roe-deer, deer, and wolf. The region’s main tree species
are Pinus Brutia (Calabrian Pine), Pinus Nigra (Crimean Pine), Pinus Silvestris (Scotch Pine),
Abies Nordmandiana (Fir), Juniperus sp (Junier), Fagus Orientalis (Beech), Horn Beech,
Quercus sp (Oaks), Carpinus sp (Hornbeam), Alnus sp (Alder), Castanea Sativa Mill (Anayolian
Chestnut), Fraxinus (Ash), Populus-Moula (Poplar), Acer sp (Maple), Tilia sp (Lime). In terms
of vegetation, the forest is 90,611.8 ha broadleaved and 537,905.6 coniferous.

                   Table 3. Forest Resources in the Bolu Regional Directorate

                             High Forest       Coppice Forests            Total Forest Area
                                (ha)                 (ha)                        (ha)
             Normal           500,393.3               0                      500,339.3
             Degraded         128,178.1             217.5                    128,395.6
             Total            628,517.4             217.5                    628,734.9
                                           Source: DG Forestry


The forests are mostly state-owned and under the management of the Bolu Forestry Regional
Directorate (Bolu RD), which has 12 Management Departments with 80 Forest Management
Chieftainships and 6 other Units (for seedling production, education, production storage,
information technology and communication, wireless and machines). There is a Research
Institute Directorate of DGF covering the Western Black Sea located in Bolu. Stakeholders are
forest owners (both the State and Private), villagers living in or near forests, foundations,
associations, NGOs, and investors, and the general public.

The service sector has the largest share in the region’s economy at 40.7 percent followed b y
agriculture with 37.7 percent and industry with 21.6 percent. 754,870 m3 industrial wood and
199,945 ster 1 firewood were produced in 2014. The sale of these forest products provided
revenue of 133 million TL and a profit of 48 million TL. There are about 118 plants operating in
the forestry sector (Bolu City Government, 2014). Major industrial sectors are manufacturing,
mining, utilities, and construction. In terms of socio-economic development measures as defined
by the Ministry of Development, Bolu ranks 11th and Düzce ranks 35th among 81 cities in the
country. In Bolu City alone, 402 villages out of 487 are located inside or near forests.

5.2 Types of Forestry Products and Eco-services Identified

Forests in Bolu provide a variety of products, both timer and non-timber, and ecosystem
services, which are presented in Table 4.



1
 Ster is a measure used by the DG Forestry to measure a volume of wood stack with 1 meter length and width and
1.1 meter height. 1 ster is 0.75 m3 when the spaces within the stack of wood are taken into account.

                                                                                                           24
                  Table 4. Forest Goods and Services Considered in the Pilot Study
               Value Types                         Forest Products or Services
                                        Timber
                                        Firewood
                                        NWFP-Plants
          DIRECT USE VALUE              Honey
                                        Recreation
                                        Fodder for Grazing
                                        Hunting
            OPTION VALUE                Pharmaceutical

                                        Watershed Protection (Water Supply)
        INDIRECT USE VALUE
                                        Carbon Sequestration
                                        Soil Erosion Control
            NONUSE VALUE                Biodiversity
                                       Source: The authors.


Timber, firewood, non-wood forest products-plants (NWFPs-plants), honey, recreation, fodder
for grazing, and hunting—are products and eco-system services considered in the study under the
category of direct use value since they have direct use or interaction with local people or visitors
to the site. The benefits from education activities and over-night eco-tourism activities were
identified but not quantified in the valuation exercise below due to data limitations. For the
future use of goods and services, option value only includes pharmaceutical value.

The indirect use of forests include watershed protection, water supply, carbon sequestration, and
soil erosion control, which largely benefits people downstream or outside of the study area.
Reduction of air pollution is not included in this category. Biodiversity, existence value, and
bequest value are the non-use values, and they are estimates to some extent. To avoid double
counting, conservatively, only the value associate with biodiversity is taken into account in the
calculation of the total economic value. Furthermore, altruistic value exists, but was unable to be
estimated in the analysis given the unavailability of related data and usable studies.

5.3 Data Available

The pilot study relied on the use of readily available data of the Bolu study area. The specific
data immediately available from DGF and its regional directorate as well as local experts and
communities are gathered, organized, and analyzed to perform valuation analysis. The data
obtained for the Bolu forest area includes forest land area, timber and wood production, the
amount of NWFP produced and revenue from sales of NWFP, tourist and hunter data as well as

                                                                                                 25
their prices and fees. In general, the availability of relevant economic data diminishes as one
moves from the top categories of direct use values to the bottom categories of non-use values.
More specifically, for the goods and services providing direct use value, the physical extraction
and production amounts are available, but their monetary values are largely unavailable in
statistics or government records. The gate prices for NWFPs-plants and honey are not available
from published sources and they were obtained from interview of local experts or village heads.

Due to time and resource limitations for conducting field studies, the lack of field-specific
information such as the physical amounts of soil erosion, water supply and biodiversity per
hectare of forests by type is a serious problem in terms of valuing indirect ecosystem services.
The presence of the studies in the literature for other countries such as Nunez et al. (2006)
indicates that it is possible to conduct similar studies that obtain physical measurements
regarding ecosystem services in certain regions in Turkey. However it is beyond the scope of this
pilot study, which aims to quickly demonstrate forest valuation and its policy application. The
benefit transfer approach was employed in quantifying most indirect use values. The base year
of the study is 2013. All the unit prices and values were adjusted to the base year.

5.4 Valuation: Methods Used and Results

The aim and limitation of the pilot study and the data availability determined the choice of
valuation methodologies. The economic valuation undertaken in the pilot study mainly relies on
the following methods: market price, cost based method, standard value use, adjusted and
unadjusted benefit transfers. As introduced in the early chapters, environmental and nature
resource economics provide various forms of valuation methods depending upon whether
individuals’ preferences are revealed through their choices in the market or not. When the
preferences are not observed, the methods rely on stated preferences. There is also literature,
mostly from international experience but also relevant to Turkey, to support the valuation of
ecosystem services or non-use values of forests through the adoption of the benefit transfer
approach (Nunez et al., 2006; Kaya et al., 2009; Croitoru, 2007; Bann and Clemens, 1998;
Vilademir, 2014; and Walsh et al. 1999). There have been similar studies found in the literature
that use a similar methodology with readily available data such as Croitoru (2007), Türker et al.
(1999; 2001) and Pak, et al. (2010). Therefore, a number of valuation methods were applied
based on available field data and relevant coefficients from the literature, and presented below by
category of forest products and services.

5.4.1 Direct Use Value

Market price is used to value timber, firewood, NWFP-Plants, honey and fodder for grazing.
Recreation is valued by benefit transfer while hunting value is computed based on license fees,
i.e., the minimum costs to hunters. The services provided for research-education activities, eco-
tourism, and over-night stays under recreation, as well as spiritual or cultural services of forests
were not quantified in the valuation exercise due to no data immediately available. For the
future use of goods and services, option value only includes pharmaceutical value, and excludes
medicinal research. The economic value for the region from direct use of forest goods and
services in 2013 was estimated to be $316.6 million, and makes up 46.3 percent of the forests’
total economic value. The values should be treated as low end results due to the omission of

                                                                                                 26
some benefits mentioned above. The calculation of each product or service category is presented
in below.

Timber and Firewood. The timber or wood production includes telephone pole, mining pole,
other industrial wood, pulp wood, fire-chip wood, and thin pole and it is measured in m3.
Firewood production measured is measured in ster. The timber production in Bolu Forest Area
has been managed by the Bolu Regional Directorate (BRD) in a sustainable way to ensure no
excessive harvesting over years. According to BRD, the annual production of standing tree is
1,234,543 m3 in 2013, of which 868,687 m3 is from coniferous forests and 365,856 m3 is from
broadleaved forests. The timber was harvested and sold to timber or industrial wood producers.
The stumpage value is 85 TL/m3 for standing coniferous timbers and 67 TL/m3 for broadleaved.
The economic value of wood products in 2013 is calculated to be $75.1 million or 11 percent of
the total economic value (see table A.1). The annual firewood value is calculated separately from
the value of the wood production. The amount of firewood production is 295,529 ster (127,047
ster from coniferous and 132,482 ster from broadleaved) in 2013. The average regional price for
firewood is 58 TL/m3. The economic value of firewood is $10.4 million, or 1.5 percent of the
total economics value. The unit cost of production for each type (TL/m3) was also estimated by
BRD. BRD further assumed that the unit cost of firewood is 40 percent of the unit cost of
general wood production.

NWFP-Plants. Non-Wood Forest Products (NWFP-Plants) include non-animal products such as
laurus nobilis, tilia, castanea sativa, ruscus aculeatus and boletus. Table A.2 has the complete list
of NWFP-plants that were harvested in the study area in 2013. Bolu RD staff conducted field
surveys to obtain their quantities sold and the revenue obtained by the region’s villagers in 2013.
The unit prices of harvested products are the quarterly averages obtained by dividing quarterly
sales by quarterly revenue. The data set does not include maintenance costs and self-
consumption quantities. Therefore, on one hand the economic value calculated for the pilot study
is over estimated due to lack of cost data. On the other hand it is under estimated due to lack of
self-consumption value. The economic value of NWFPs-Pants is calculated to be only $0.5
million, the one of the smallest components of direct use values, or 0.1 percent of TEV.

Honey. Due to data availability, honey is the only animal based forest product that was able to
be quantified in the study. The data necessary to calculate the economic value of honey
produced from forests are available from various different sources. Two types of honey,
chestnut and flower, are produced in the region: Düzce produces honey from chestnut trees and
Bolu produces honey from other plants, considered to be flower honey. The honey production
(metric ton/year) from Bolu and Düzce in 2013 is available from the Turkish Statistical Institute
(TurkStat). According to DG Forestry, the honey produced from the forests is 80 percent of the
total honey production in the region, which results in 440.3 metric tons in Bolu and 221 metric
tons in Düzce in 2013 (Table A.3). There are different prices for each type of honey obtained by
DG Forestry staff from the Bolu and Düzce Regional Honey Producers Association. However,
the Associations do not have the unit cost data (TL/hive/year). The average cost data were
obtained from the Honey Producers Association of Yalova, a nearby region. The cost is
calculated by summing up the average costs of labor, materials, hive, honey bee food and
medications, and comb. The economic value of honey produced in the region is calculated at $
5.3 million, which makes up 0.8 percent of TEV.

                                                                                                  27
Recreation. The calculated recreation value includes daily trips only to park areas and other
types of recreational locations. The recreational area in the pilot study is the sum of the areas of
a national park and five natural parks, and also the areas of two waterfalls. Their total area is
3,852.4 ha. The number of visitors and size of the parks were obtained from the Bolu RD (Bolu
9th Regional Directorate Web Site, 2015). In 2012 the total number of daily visitors to the parks
was 788,252. Recreational use value has been the most widely studied in Turkish valuation
literature. Among them is a study by Kaya et al. (1999) conducted in Soğuksu National Park, a
park adjacent to Bolu with similar features to Bolu’s recreational areas. By using the benefit
transfer method and discounting the consumer surplus value per visitor, each daily trip was
calculated to be 17.2 TL in 2013. Both the study area, Soğuksu national park, and also parks in
the pilot area attract visitors from big cities, especially from Ankara. There is no income
elasticity data, the income adjustments are not done for the unit value, and income elasticity is
assumed to be one comparable to that in the literature. Due to a lack of visitor numbers for 2013,
the 2012 numbers of were used. The total maintenance costs of the parks in the pilot area are
assumed to be the same as the total expenses of picnic areas, a figure provided by the DG
Forestry (Table A.4). The economic value estimate for recreational use is $12 million in 2013, or
about 1.8 percent of TEV. This value is a very conservative one since (i) it does not include the
values of other types of recreational use such as overnight stays and eco-tourism, and (ii) the
pilot study area may have a higher demand for recreational use since it is closer to another big
city, Istanbul.

Fodder for Grazing. To determine the economic value of fodder for grazing, fodder (grass,
seeds, leaves, shoots) production per ha in a specific area was calculated by using coefficients
obtained from interview with experts and villagers for each of specific forest areas. The specific
areas considered in the study include forest soil (pasture), degraded coppice, normal coppice,
broadleaved coppice, coniferous degraded coppice and coniferous coppice. After calculating the
fodder production, the actual use of fodder for grazing was assumed to be the half of the
production amount, relying on expert judgment. This represents a conservative assumption. The
price (TL/kg) is obtained by interviews with local people in the study area (Table A.5). The
economic value of fodder for grazing is $ 212.9 million which corresponds to 31.1 percent of the
TEV.

Hunting. The economic value of hunting is estimated by the cost based method. Literature
searches did not result in studies that would provide a willingness to pay value per hunter. The
only data available was the number of hunters registered in the region’s Bolu and Düzce
Hunters’ Associations. Hunters have to obtain a hunting permit (certificate) from the regional
Association. The permit costs 169.4 TL for nonmembers and 155 TL for members. In addition
to the permits, hunters must pay a fee of 140 TL to hunt during hunting season. In the valuation
exercise, it is assumed that the difference between the permit values for members and
nonmembers is the membership fee for the Associations. Therefore, each hunter incurs the cost
of 169.4 TL for the permit. There are only few hunters from outside of the region (they number
11) and for them the hunting fee is 220 TL2. Given the number of registered hunters in Bolu,
Düzce and outside the region, and assuming that they went hunting one time in the study year,

2
 These values are obtained from the web site of the region
(http://bolge9.ormansu.gov.tr/9bolge/AnaSayfa/avcilikbelgesi.aspx?sflang=tr).

                                                                                                 28
the total costs they incurred was calculated to be $0.5 million or 0.1 percent of the TEV. It is
important to note that this figure does not include other expenses to hunters such as materials
needed for hunting, travel costs, and others. Therefore, the value of hunting in the region is
underestimated.

5.4.2 Indirect Use Value

The indirect use values estimated in the study contain the values driven from forest ecosystem
services including watershed protection, soil erosion control, and carbon sequestration. The
valuation of each service is discussed in the following sections. The economic value of forest
ecosystem services under the indirect use category is estimated to be $341.4 million or 50.0
percent of the TEV in Bolu in 2013. Indirect use value of forests also includes assimilation of
contaminants, filtering of air pollutants, and climate regulation as biospheric services (EFIMED
and CTFC, 2014). These services are not valued in the pilot study due to lack of data and
resources.

Watershed Protection. Watershed protection functions of forests include regulation of rainfall
and water flow, water quality, sustainable water supply, reduction of overflow, and flooding.
Watershed protection and water supply services were calculated separately in the pilot study
following the studies of Croitoru (2007) and Nunez et al. (2006). However, to avoid double
counting, only the value associated with water supply under watershed protection is included in
the study. Nunez et al. (2006) stated that water supply is one of the crucial ecosystem services of
temperate forests in Chile, and they valued the economic benefit of Chilean temperate forests in
sustaining the supply of drinkable water for human consumption. Nunez, et al. (2006) employed
a change in productivity method by including stream flow from a forested watershed into a
production function of drinkable water for Valdivia, a city in Southern Chile. The study area is
similar to the pilot study area in at least two ways: (i) vegetation in the pilot study area is also
temperate forests as in the study area in Chile, and (ii) as in the case of the study of Nunez et al
(2006), big cities surrounding the pilot study area, especially Istanbul with a 2013 population of
14,160,467, consumed water from the Melen River in the pilot study area. Nunez et al. (2006)
estimates the economic value of the benefits from the water supply as $162.4 per ha for the
summer period and $61.2 per ha for the rest of the year. Therefore, in order for the unit value to
be transferred, the weighted average of the two values is calculated by using the lengths of the
summer and non-summer periods as weights. The unit value is adjusted for income and price
level differentials between Chile and Turkey and carried forward to 2013 by the consumer price
index (The World Bank, 2015; OECD Statistics, 2015; TurkStat, 2015). The economic value of
the water supply is estimated to be $125.5 million (Table A.8), or 18.4 percent of the TEV.

Soil Erosion Control. The economic value of soil erosion control services of the forests in Bolu
RD was estimated by the unit value transfer method (Table A.10). Bann and Clemens (1998)
computed $46 per ha as the soil erosion control services for forests in Turkey. The value was
calculated by replacement cost of nutrients and flood damages. It does not include actual
sediment removal costs of specific reservoirs and river channels in the pilot study area due to
lack of data and thus may underestimates the value of the forests’ soil protection. The unit value
was adjusted to the base year 2013 and applied to forest areas that control soil erosion including
reforested and rehabilitated forests, areas covered by soil conservation efforts, however the areas

                                                                                                 29
of degraded forest were excluded. The economic value is estimated to be $103.8 million or 15.2
percent in the TEV.

Carbon Sequestration. Estimation of the carbon sequestration value of Bolu’s forests required a
standard price and the estimated amount of carbon sequestered in the form of CO2. The amount
of carbon sequestered was calculated from the 2013 forest increments (m3) by following the
methodology presented in Karabıyık (2014). The data of annual timber and firewood production,
including the illicit firewood available from DG Forestry, were used to approximately represent
the annual increment of wood for carbon storage (Tables A.9.4 and A.9.5). Above ground
biomass of broadleaved and coniferous forests in m3 and metric ton are computed from the wood
for carbon storage by using biomass expansion factors (BEF) and volume weights (metric
ton/m3, respectively) that were calculated by Prof. Ünal Asan (Table A.9.1) and presented in
Karabıyık (2014). Underground biomass was calculated by using the coefficients of root-to-
shoot ratios for temperate forests with the two types of vegetation (Karabıyık, 2014). These
ratios are from the Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use, Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (AFOLU, IPCC 2006). After obtaining both aboveground and underground
biomass, the total incremental biomass was estimated for both types of forests. In order to
compute the carbon captured in the biomass, the oven dried total biomass needed to be
calculated. Oven dried total biomass (metric ton) is computed by using the dried weight figures
for other broadleaved and coniferous (Table A.9.3). The dried weight figures were obtained
from Karabıyık (2014) and Tolunay (2013b). The carbon captured by total biomass in
broadleaved and coniferous forests is computed by multiplying the total biomass with the
corresponding carbon contents of coniferous and broadleaved as determined in agriculture,
forestry and other land use (AFOLU) (Karabıyık, 2014). To convert carbon to CO2, the
conversion factor is used, and thus the total CO2 captured in 2013 was estimated to be about 1.8
million metric ton.

As the social cost of carbon (SCC) is the most common approach to carbon valuation (EFI,
2014), it was used in this pilot study to value carbon sequestration services. The European Forest
Institute (EFI, 2014) reviewed 237 studies and the average SCC for CO2 was € 49 per metric
ton. Since carbon sequestration service is a global public good and benefits the citizen of the
entire world, the unit value does not need further adjustments. Bolu’s economic value of carbon
sequestration was estimated to be $112.2 million in 2013, or 16.4 percent of the TEV.

5.4.3 Option Value

The only study found on option values in Turkey was on the option value of pharmaceuticals.
This value is derived from forest genetic materials and is estimated to be €5 per ha (Croitoru,
2007). This is the future use value of pharmaceutical materials, and is separated from non-use
value related to biodiversity. The unit value in TL in 2013 was converted by using 2004
comparative price levels in Euro areas and Turkey (OECD Statistics, 2015) and Turkey’s
consumer price index (TurkStat, 2015). The forest area of 718,446.30 ha was used to calculate
the economic value for pharmaceuticals. The option value of pharmaceuticals was estimated to
be $6.1 million or 0.9 percent of the TEV.

5.4.4 Non-Use Value

                                                                                               30
Computation of non-use values is challenging compared to use values. In the pilot study, two
types of non-use values were estimated: biodiversity and existence and bequest value combined.
Both values are estimated by using unit value transferred from other studies. To avoid the
possibility of double counting, as well as to provide a conservative estimate for a non-use value,
only the biodiversity value was taken into account in the study3.

Vilademir (2014) estimated non-use value of forests designated for conservation or protected
areas for countries of the Mediterranean region including Turkey. Vilademir (2014) conducted
meta-analysis, an econometric approach that estimates the marginal willingness to pay (WTP),
based on the data gathered from several studies that use stated preference techniques
implemented in countries of the region. The study specifically states that non-use value includes
altruistic, bequest and existence values. The pilot study employs non-use values specifically
calculated for Turkey in Vilademir’s study. Therefore, the value in this category is not
connected to values like recreation and direct use values. Specifically, Vilademir’s study shows
that marginal WTP values for temperate and subtropical forests in Turkey in 2005 are $20.17 per
ha and $19.0 per ha, respectively. The total forest areas designated for conservation in Bolu area
is 98,535 ha, as provided by DGF. The marginal WTP for non-use benefits are adjusted to 2013
based on the country’s consumer price index. The economic value of biodiversity is estimated to
be $19.3 million, or 2.8 percent of the TEV.

5.4.5 Costs and Negative Externalities

The net total economic value is calculated by deducting operation and maintenance expenditures
to keep forests sustainable and negative externalities from TEV (Turker 2001 and 2006, Pak,
2001, 2006 and 2010, and Croitoru, 2007). The total forestry expenditure of Bolu RD includes
expenses related to soil conservation, afforestation, range management, and rehabilitation of
degraded coppice forests, and it amounted to $3.1 million in 2013. Furthermore, the value of
negative externalities needs to be deducted from the TEV. The soil erosion from degraded
forests, the value of negative externalities, was estimated in the study. Degraded forest areas
cause more soil erosion than normal forest cover, yet compared to uncovered land they eliminate
some soil erosion. Therefore, the unit value of soil erosion was adjusted for the ability of
degraded forests’ to partially stop soil erosion by a factor of two thirds of unit value of soil
erosion, taken from Bann and Clemens (1998). The value of soil erosion for degraded forests is
$14 million. Therefore, costs and negative externalities add up to $17.1 million.

5.5 Summary of the Pilot Study Results

Table 5 summarizes the final results of the valuation exercise. The total estimated value of the
various types of goods and services of forest resources net of costs and negative externalities of


3
 The existence and bequest values were also estimated for the pilot study area. These estimates rely on very
specific value calculated for the existence and bequest value of the wildlife in Colorado, US, as the average WTP in
US dollars in 1999 in the study of Walsh et al. (1999). These two values together are estimated to be $13 million
for the pilot study but were not included in TEV to avoid double counting. Thus the details of this estimation are
not included in the report.

                                                                                                                 31
the pilot area is $666.3 million in 2013. The net unit value per ha is $9304. The total economic
value is made up of direct use, option, indirect use, and non-use values. The largest component
was the indirect use values coming from ecosystem services including watershed protection,
carbon sequestration, and soil erosion control, which amounts to $341.4 million or 50 percent of
the total economic value. In traditional national accounting, these values are largely
unaccounted or are partially included in the value added of other sectors, such as cost reduction
of the water supply.

            Table 5. Total Economic Value of Forest Goods and Services in Bolu in 2013
                                                                                                                               Percentage
    Value Type              Products or Services                   TEV - 2013 ($)              Valuation Method               Shares in TEV
                                                                                                                               (%) (2013)*

                     Timber                                      75,049,925                Market Price                             11.0
                     Firewood                                    10,366,677                Market Price                              1.5
                     NWFP-Plants                                 534,252                   Market Price                              0.1
    DIRECT USE       Honey                                       5,337,387                 Market Price                              0.8
      VALUE          Recreation                                  12,020,272                Unit Value Transfer                       1.8
                     Fodder for Grazing                          212,845,872               Market Price                             31.1
                     Hunting                                     469,631                   Cost Based Valuation                      0.1
                     Total Direct Use Value                      316,624,017                                                        46.3
      OPTION         Pharmaceutical                              6,081,991                 Unit Value Transfer                       0.9
      VALUE          Total Option Value                          6,081,991                                                           0.9
                     Watershed Protection (Water                                           Adjusted Unit Value
                                                                                                                                    18.4
                     Supply)                                     125,449,004               Transfer
     INDIRECT                                                                              Standard Value Transfer
                                                                                                                                    16.4
    USE VALUE        Carbon Sequestration                        112,204,911               (SCC)
                     Soil Erosion Control                        103,744,814               Unit Value Transfer                      15.2
                     Total Indirect Use Value                    341,398,728                                                        50.0
     NONUSE          Biodiversity                                19,247,591                Unit Value Transfer                      2.8
      VALUE          Total Nonuse Value                          19,247,591                                                         2.8
                     Total Economic Value                        683,352,327                                                       100.0
                     Expenditure related to Soil
                     Conservation, Aforestation,
                     Range Management,                                                                                              18.2
      General        Rehabilitation of Degraded
     Costs and       Forests                                     3,103,081                 Actual Expenses
      Negative
    Externalities    Soil Erosion for Degraded                                                                                      81.8
                     Forests                                     13,992,820                Value Transfer
                     Total Costs                                 17,095,901                                                        100.0
* For the presentation purpose, the percentage shares are rounded to one decimal and therefore their sum may not exactly be 100 percent.




4
    Purchasing Power Parity Exchange Conversion from OECD is used to convert Turkish TL to US Dollar.

                                                                                                                                           32
The second largest component of the total economic value is the direct used value composed of
timber, firewood, NWFP-plants, honey recreation, fodder for grazing and hunting. The sum of
these direct use values is $316.6 million, comprising 50 percent of the total economic value.
Among these $86.4 million of the direct use value from timber, firewood, NWFP-plants and
hunting) is normally accounted for under the forestry sector. The value of recreation services are
accounted for under the tourism sector, and fodder for grazing and honey are accounted for under
agriculture. The values from NWFP-Plants and hunting can be accounted for either under the
forestry sector or agriculture.

In addition to the total direct and indirect use values, the nonuse value of biodiversity and the
option value of pharmaceuticals were estimated. Their values are $19.3 million and $6.1 million,
respectively. These forestry benefits are normally not estimated and unaccounted.

The monetary results of the pilot study help better understand the scale of economic values of
various forest products and services (see Figure 3). The study illustrates that the economic value
of various forest products and services which are normally unaccounted or accounted implicitly
in non-forest sectors is seven times of the value currently accounted as the forest sector’s
contribution. The Bolu region produced about $17.3 billion in GDP in 2013. The known and
accounted for $86.4 million in forest products comprised about 0.50 percent of regional GDP.
The case study further shows that the total economic value of forest product and services of
$666.3 million is equivalent to 3.9 percent of GDP.

                 Figure 3. TEV components of the Pilot Study and Forestry Accounts




                                Source: Authors’ own calculation

Although the valuation tried to capture major categories of values in the total economic value,
there are some categories of economic valuations which were not done due to the limitations of
data, time, and resources. Also, most of the valuation was done under conservative assumptions.
Therefore, the estimated total value may represent an underestimated result. The following
chapter will elaborate the limitations, areas for improvement, and recommendations.




                                                                                               33
               VI. Policy Implications and Recommendations

Current national accounts significantly underestimate the economic value of the forest
sector and may mislead policy making related to the sector development. The value of the
forest sector reflected in traditional economic accounts has significantly underestimated the
sector’s real contribution to the economy and natural environment. In Turkey, including the
Bolu region, the percentage of forestry value in GDP is very low compared to the total economic
value estimated in the study. The low percentage even fails to help justify the forestry spending
made annually by the government, and may result in misallocation and inefficient use of national
resources and also mislead policy making regarding forest development and management in the
long-run.

The total economic value of the forest sector may be over seven times higher than the value
of forest products currently accounted for in statistics; an accurate accounting can and
help restore the importance of the sector. The case study results show that a large portion of
economic benefits from forest products and services have been underestimated or unaccounted in
the forest sector in national accounts. The majority of unaccounted values are from ecosystem
services that forests provide to human society. Their economic value, as estimated in the study,
is in the scale of over seven times the value of forest products reported in the current form of
national statistics. Given its scale, the government cannot overlook the missing value,
particularly in forest-rich regions. The TEV of forests helps justify and prioritize the public
expenditure in the forest sector in order to provide public goods and externalities to national and
regional economy.

Valuation of ecosystem services also helps other related sectors such as tourism, water
supply, agriculture, fisheries, and animal husbandry to better understand and appreciate
the important contribution of forests. This is illustrated in the case of the values of NWFP-
Plants, honey and fodder for grazing shared with agricultural sectors, and value of recreation
services captured by tourism sector. Values of watershed protection, soil erosion control and
carbon sequestration are also obtained by several different sectors of the economy. Further
understanding of which sectors benefit from these forestry services and by how much will enable
policy makers to instrument appropriate tools to finance these services and maximize the overall
outcome. This will strengthen cross-sectoral coordination, and support and promote sustainable
development at the multi-sectoral level.

To improve forest valuation and develop more policy applications, we make the following
recommendations.

Improve data availability and associated institutional arrangement. The study found out
that data, especially related to forest services, is scarce and has not been systematically collected
and processed at local and national levels. Some data and coefficients needed to quantify
ecosystem services does not exist, and have to be collected through field surveys; for example
physical data regarding water and soil protection and monetary data of recreation and tourism.

                                                                                                  34
There are different agencies and institutions which collect and possess some data useful to
economic valuation such as DG Forestry, DG Water Management, the Ministry of Food,
Agriculture and Livestock, Turkish Statistical Institute (TurkStat) and the regional offices of
these agencies. It is necessary to develop a unified information system at the national level to
collect, manage and use the data. Therefore, to move forward with an institutional arrangement
for data gathering and management for economic valuation and accounting, we recommended
developing a more unified information system for forest data that can be easily used to locate and
categorize available data sets in different agencies for the purpose of economic valuation and
policy making.

Standardize data gathering methods. We recommend standardizing the terminology and
methods for data collection efforts across institutions and regions. As part of the effort to
improve data coordination and consistency, it is necessary to develop standards for use in the
field to both gather data and apply to appropriate methodologies. The concepts, terminology,
and data collection methods used in forestry data generation and application need to be
standardized. Such standards will help to eliminate inconsistencies and misunderstandings in
data collection and use.

Improve the accuracy of valuation through site specific surveys and field studies. Given the
time and funding constraints, the pilot study has relied on the benefit transfer approach which
adopts and converts the unit value or parameters estimated by others elsewhere in valuing a
number of indirect ecosystem services provided by forests in the pilot study area in order to
demonstrate the orders of magnitude of forest values. But due to the complex and unique nature
of forest ecosystem services, more site specific surveys and studies are necessary to improve the
quality and accuracy of economic valuation and calibrate the methodology for valuing forest
ecosystem services. We recommend developing a systematic and scientific approach to sample
different types of regions by forest type to study and value ecosystem services in these regions.
For example, the water supply service of Turkey's forests is crucial due to the high stress on
water sources under the impact of global climate change in both the country and the surrounding
region. There is therefore a need for studies on the quantity and costs of water supply production
in different regions covered by different forest types in Turkey.

Develop national guidelines on the economic valuation of forest products and service. For
DGF to guide forest valuation efforts, we recommend developing and adopting national
guidelines on forest valuation methods. The guidelines will present the data requirements, data
quality assurance, valuation methods, and application examples to guide regional and local
offices to carry out their forest valuation programs.

Pilot integrated forest physical and monetary accounts. To guide decision making, the result
of forest valuation needs to be integrated into existing economic and forest accounts. It is
recommended to pilot in a region to improve forest accounts with the integration of physical and
monetary results.

Scale up forest valuation and accounting efforts at the national level. With more experience
obtained and the national guidelines in place, forest valuation efforts can be scaled up in more
regions and eventually nationwide. The results will be aggregated at the national level, and lead

                                                                                               35
to the development and enhancement of forest and economic accounts which will be used to
guide national development planning and policy making. With forest valuation and accounting in
place at the national level, policy makers will be able to make well-informed decision on
program prioritization, budget allocation, and pricing policy related to the forest sector. With
valuation methods available, the feasibility study of investment activities involving forests can
be much improved to ensure better economic efficiency of public investments.




                                                                                              36
                              VII. Concluding Remarks

The Government of Turkey has made significant investments in reforestation, forest
management, and poverty alleviation through its national programs in its forest areas. Despite
the efforts, the forest sector appears less important in national statistics. According to TurkStat,
the sector contributes to only 0.2-0.3 percent of GDP. It is well known that forests provide a
variety of products and ecosystem services to human society such as water conservation, soil
protection, recreation, and carbon sequestration. The low GDP percentage is because the
economic values of many products and services have not yet been valued and accounted for in
national accounts, or implicitly reflected in non-forest sectors such as water supply and animal
husbandry.

The results of the Bolu case study show that forests provide a variety of non-timber products and
services and that the total value of those unaccounted or less accounted, forest products and
services can be over ten times higher than the value of forest products already accounted for in
the traditional GDP. Therefore, improving forest valuation and accounting will be an important
first step to get the information right and ensure a well informed decision making around forest
sector protection, development, and prioritization of forestry sector activities.

Turkey will need to further improve its systems of forest data collection and surveys as a starter.
It will also need to develop its own valuation methods and national guidelines on economic
valuation and accounting of the forest sector, scale up its valuation efforts nationwide, and
systematically integrate valuation results into national development planning and policy making.




                                                                                                 37
References

Ateşoğlu, I. (2008). “Determination of the Recreation Value of Bartın Balamba Forest
Recreation Site” M. Sc. Thesis, Forest Engineering Department, Zonguldak Karaelmas
Üniversitesi, Zonguldak, Turkey.

Bann, C. and Clemens, M. (1998) Turkey: Forest Sector Review - Global Environmental
Overlays Program. Final Report. The World Bank, Washington DC.

Başak, E. (2010). “Valuating Nature” Ekoyapı. http://www.ekoyapidergisi.org/103-dogaya-
deger-bicmek.html Research on Ecosystem Values. Kaçkar Mountains Sustainable Forest Use
and Conservation Project. Funded by European Union and TEMA Foundation.

Bishop, J. T. (1999). Valuing Forests: A Review of Methods and Applications in Developing
Countries. International Institute for Environmental and Development: London.

Biro, Y. E. K. (1998).        Valuation of the Environmental Impacts of Kayraktepe
Dam/Hydroelectric Project, Turkey: An Exercise in Contingent Valuation, Ambio, 27(3), 224-
229.

Bolu 9th Regional Directorate Web Site, Nature Parks and National Parks
http://bolge9.ormansu.gov.tr/9bolge/AnaSayfa/ilsube/bolusube/bolutabiatparklari/bolukaragoltb.
aspx?sflang=tr, Accessed 25 1 2015.

Croitoru, L. (2007). “How Much are Mediterranean Forest Worth?” Forest Policy and
Economics, Vol. 9, pp. 536-545.

Çepel N (1997). Soil pollution and Damages to Environment. TEMA Foundation Publications,
No:14, _Istanbul pp. 111.

Daly-Hassen, H., Croitoru, I, Tounsi, K., Aloui, A. and Jebari, S. (2012) “Evaluation
Economique des Bienset Services des Forets Tunisiennes, Prepare Pour le Ministere de
l’agriculture and de l’Environment and la FAO.

Deniz, T. (2012). Valuation Analysis in Erosion Control Activities. Ph.D. Thesis, Forest
Engineering Department, Natural Science Institute, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey.

Dixon, J. and Pagiola, S. (1998). Economics Analysis and Environmental Assessment, The EA
Sourcebook, The World Bank.

DG Forestry (2014). 2013 Activity Report, OGM, Ankara, Turkey.

DG Forestry (2013). Forest Atlas. CTA LTD. Ankara, Turkey.


                                                                                           38
DG Forestry (2012). Strategic Plan: 2013-2017. Ankara, Turkey.

DG Forestry (2009). State of Turkey’s Forests. ESTA LTD. Ankara, Turkey.

EFI (2014). The Provision of Forest Ecosystem Services, Vol. 1: Quantifying and Valuing Non-
Marketed Ecosystem Services. Edited by Tjorsen, J. B., Mavsar, R., Tyrvainen, L., Prokofieva,
I., and Stenger, A. European Forest Institute.

EFIMED and CTFC (2014). Technical Report. Optimizing the Production of Goods and Services
by Mediterranean Forests in a Context of Global Changes. Methods and tools for socio-
economic assessment of goods and services provided by Mediterranean forest ecosystems. April
2014.

Freeman, A. M. (1994). The Measurement of Environmental and Resource Values: Theory and
Methods. Resources for the Future, Washington D.C., USA.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) (2014). The State of the World’s Forests, FAO,
Rome. Chapter 3, page 18.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) (2012). The State of the World’s Forests, FAO,
Rome. Chapter 3, page 28.

Gurluk, S. and Rehber, E. (2008). “A travel cost study to estimate recreational value for a bird
refuge at Lake Manyas, Turkey.” Journal of Environmental Management, Vo. 88 (4), pp. 1350 -
1360.

Gurluk, S. (2006). The Estimation of Ecosystem Services’ Value in the Region of Misi Rural
Development Project: Results from Contingent Valuation Survey, Forest Policy and Economics,
9(3), 209-218.

Karabıyık, B. S.(2014). Biomass Carbon Stock of Turkish Forests: Comparison of Different
Calculation Methods. M.Sc. Thesis, Dept. of Forest Engineering, Istanbul University.

Karahalil, U., Keleş, S., Başkent, Z. E. and Köse, Selahattin (2009). “Integrating Soil
Conservation, Water Production and Timber Production Values in Forest Management Planning
Using Linear Programming” African Journal of Agricultural Research, Vol. 4 (11), pp. 1241-
1250

Kaya, G., Aytekin, A., Yıldız, Yasef, and Şaltu, Z. (2009). Determining the Economic Value of
Protection of Wildlife Resources and Hunting Services. TUBITAK Project no. 107O072. Bartın,
Turkey.

Lange, G. M. (2004). Manual for Environmental and Economic Accounts for Forestry: A Tool
for Cross-Sectoral Policy Analysis. FAO Forestry Department, Rome, Italy.




                                                                                             39
Merlo, M. and Croituru, L. (eds.) (2005) Valuing Mediterranean Forests: Towards Total
Economic Value. Wallingford, UK, CAB International.

Ministry of Development (2014). The Tenth Development Plan (2014-2018). Ankara
http://www.mod.gov.tr/Lists/DevelopmentPlans/Attachments/5/The%20Tenth%20Development
%20Plan%20(2014-2018).pdf

Ministry of Development (2011). İllerin ve Bölgelerin Sosyo-Ekonomik Gelişmişlik Sıralaması
Araştırması (Survey on Socioeconomic Development Ranking of Provinces and Regions) (SEGE-
2011). Ankara. http://www.kalkinma.gov.tr/Lists/Yayınlar/Attachments/548/SEGE-2011.pdf

Ministry of Forest and Water Affairs, Republic of Turkey (2014). Forestry Statistics 2012.
Publication of Official Statistic Program. Publication No. 03. TUIK, Printing Division, Ankara,
Turkey.

Miran, B. and Başar, H. (2009). “Determination of the Use Value of the National Park of Büyük
Menderes Delta, Dilek Peninsula” Bartın Forestry Faculty Journal, Special Issue, ISSN: 1302-
0943, Vol. I, pp. 179-185.

Nunez, D., Nahuelhual, L. And Oyarzun, C. (2006). "Forests and Water: The value of native
temperate forests in supplying water for human consumption" Ecological Economics, v.58 (3),
pp. 606-616.

OECD Statistics (2015). Comparative Price Levels, Purchasing Power Parities and Related
Indicators (http://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=PPPGDP). Data extracted on 07 Feb
2015 12:04 UTC (GMT) from OECD.Stat)

Ortaçeşme, V. Özkan, B. and Karagüzel, O. (2002). “An Estimation of the Recreational Use
Value of Kursunlu Waterfall Nature Park by the Individual Travel Cost Method” Turkish Journal
of Agriculture and Forestry, Vol. 26, pp. 57-72.

Ozdemir, E. (2006). Internalizing the Externalities in the Context of Economic Features of
Environmental Problems (Internalizing the External Benefits of Forest Resources). M.Sc. Thesis,
Social Science Institute, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey.

Özden M, Dursun H, Sevinç AN (2007). The Land Resources of Turkey and Activities of
General Directorate of Rural Services. http://www.toprak.org.tr/isd/isd_03.htm

Pak, M. and Türker, M. F. (2006). “Estimation of Recreational Use Value of Forest Resources by
Using Individual Travel Cost and Contingent Valuation Methods (Kayabaşı Forest Recreation
Site Sample)” Journal of Applied Sciences, Vol 6(1), pp. 1-5.

Pak, M. and Türker, M. F. (2001). “Determination of Forest Recreational Use Value of Forest
Resources in Turkey: Sazalan Forest Recreation Site Sample”
http://www.fao.org/docrep/ARTICLE/WFC/XII/0411-A1.HTM



                                                                                            40
Pak. M, Türker, M. F. and Öztürk, A. (2010). “Total economic value of forest resources in
Turkey” African Journal of Agricultural Research, Vol. 5(15), pp. 1908-1916.

Pearce D. W. and Pearce C. G. T. (2001) "The Value of Forest Ecosystems" A Report to The
Secretariat, Convention on Biological Diversity.

Pearce D., Atkinson G., and Mourato S. (2006). Cost-Benefit Analysis and the Environment
Recent Developments. OECD, Chapter 6, pp. 85-89.

The        World      Bank       (2015).   GDP     per     Capita         (Current      US$)
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.PCAP.CD?page=2,

Tolunay, D. (2013). “The Coefficients that Can Be Used in Calculating Biomass and Carbon
from Forest Assets in Turkey.” International Symposium on the 50th Anniversary of Sectoral
Planning in Forestry, November 26-28, Antalya, Turkey.

TurkStat, 2015. Price Indicies. http://www.tuik.gov.tr/UstMenu.do?metod=temelist

Türker, M.F., and Pak, M., Öztürk, A. (2001). “Total Economic Value Approach and Valuation
of Goods and Services Provided by Forests” National Conference on Forestry, Forest
Association Publication, Ankara.

Türker, M. F. Öztürk, A. and Pak, M. (2006). “Total Economic Value of Forest Resources
inTurkey” http://www.fao.org/docrep/ARTICLE/WFC/XII/0410-A2.HTM

Vincent J. R. (1999) “A Framework for Forest Accounting. Forest Science, 45: 552-561.

Vladimir, O. (2014). The Passive Use Value of Mediterranean Forests, CMCC, FEEM and Nova
School of Business and Economics, FEEM, Report 86.2014.

Walsh, R., Loomis, J and Gillman, R. (1984). “Valuing Option, Existence and Bequest Demand
for Wilderness” Land Economics, 60(1), 14-29.




                                                                                          41
        Annex 1. Selected Policy Applications of Forest Accounts

Indicator/measure          Use for policy analysis      Examples of policies and actions
                                                        taken from policy analysis

1. What is the total economic contribution of forests and what are the benefits from
  sustainable management?

Total value of forests     More comprehensive,          Showing a higher value for forest
including non-market       accurate value of forests’   contribution to GDP may increase the
forest goods and           contribution to GDP.         forestry sector’s ability to request a
services.                                               larger share of national budget for forest
                                                        management and investment.

Value of forest services   Measure of the economic      Design economic instruments to
to non-forestry sectors.   importance of forest         promote sustainable forest use, for
                           services to agriculture,     example:
                           electricity, fisheries,
                           tourism, municipal water     - institute a conservation fee on water
                           supply, etc.                   and hydroelectricity tariffs for
                                                          downstream beneficiaries that can be
                                                          used for forest management or to
                                                          compensate local communities
                                                        - institute tourism fees for biodiversity
                                                          conservation for forest
                                                          management/compensation of local
                                                          communities
                                                        - negotiate international payments for
                                                          carbon storage services of forests
                                                        Build multi-sectoral stakeholder
                                                        alliances on the basis of mutual
                                                        benefits.
                                                        Identify institutional weaknesses in
                                                        forest management, e.g. where one
                                                        sector benefits but does not pay, or does
                                                        not have a say in forest management.

Value of forest goods      Share of forest goods in     Useful for design and implementation
and services used by       rural livelihoods provides   of poverty reduction strategies.
local communities.         measure of local
                           communities’ dependence
                           on forests

2. What is the distribution of forest benefits among different groups in society?

                                                                                                 42
Indicator/measure          Use for policy analysis      Examples of policies and actions
                                                        taken from policy analysis

Share of forest benefits   Identify social benefits     Identify potential conflicts, e.g. benefits
accruing to commercial,    from preservation of local   to subsistence users/local communities
artisanal and              communities and              are low because commercial/
subsistence users of       increased equity.            downstream users obtain benefits.
forests, or,


                                                        Design economic instruments so that
                                                        beneficiaries pay for their benefits,
Share accruing to local,                                compensating those who may sacrifice
downstream and global                                   benefits. For example, property
beneficiaries.                                          rights—having a say over how a forest
                                                        is managed—and fees for
                                                        environmental services received.
                                                        Optimize investment in forests and
                                                        forest infrastructure that balances social
                                                        objectives for equity and regional
                                                        development as well as economic
                                                        objectives of maximizing national
                                                        income.

3. Is economic growth sustainable or is it based on the depletion of forests?

Value of forest assets     Macroeconomic indicators Reassess forest management if
and the cost of            of sustainability (such as deforestation is occurring.
deforestation and forest   adjusted net saving
degradation.               (ANS), net domestic
                           product (NDP), national
                           wealth, asset depletion).

4. What are the trade-offs among competing users of forests?




                                                                                                  43
Indicator/measure        Use for policy analysis     Examples of policies and actions
                                                     taken from policy analysis

Value of forest goods    Measure economic            Optimize forest use and investment in
and services under       linkages between forestry   forests and forest infrastructure by
alternative forest       and other sectors of the    taking into account total economic
management options.      economy, upstream and       value of forests, market and
                         downstream.                 non-market, including linkages to non-
                                                     forestry sectors and impacts on all
                         Identify the economic       stakeholders, economy-wide.
                         trade-offs among
                         competing sectors.          Identify winners and losers.
                                                     Design appropriate economic
                                                     instruments to achieve that strategy
                                                     (fees, compensating payments, property
                                                     rights, etc.).

5. What are the impacts of non-forestry policies on forest use?




                                                                                              44
Indicator/measure           Use for policy analysis        Examples of policies and actions
                                                           taken from policy analysis

Analyze economic            Measures the winners and       Identify winners and losers.
development scenarios       losers, pressures on forests
that trace the full chain   and forest users from          Identify optimal forest management
of causation from           alternative development        strategy based on addressing conflicts
macroeconomic policy        strategies.                    among ministries and within a single
and/or non-forestry                                        ministry.
sector policies to their    Identifies potential
                            conflicts between              Design appropriate economic
impact on forestry and
                            development objectives of      instruments to achieve that strategy
land use.
                            forestry and those of other    (fees, compensating payments, property
                            sectors, e.g. commercial       rights, etc.).
                            logging vs. catchment
                            protection (Ministry of
                            Forestry and Water
                            Affairs, Ministry of Food,
                            Agriculture and
                            Livestock, Ministry of
                            Energy and Natural
                            Resources, etc.).
                            Identify potential conflicts
                            among divisions of the
                            same ministry (Ministry
                            of Forestry and Water
                            Affairs), e.g. pastoralists’
                            use of forest vs.
                            downstream water needs
                            of farmers.

Source: Adopted from Lange (2004).




                                                                                                    45
             Annex 2. Overview of Existing Valuation Methods
There is a broad array of valuation techniques to estimate TEV for forest goods and services as
shown in Table 1 above. All these methods are potential tools; the choice of one or another of
them will depend on the objectives, data availability, and time and resource limitations of the
valuation study.

Knowing the benefit provided by forests in a study area, one could select the valuation method.
The market price based method is typically used for the whole range of forest resources while it
may not be applied to spiritual or cultural services of forests. For such forest benefits as
biodiversity protection, climate regulation, air quality regulation, health protection, and water
regulation, the most appropriate approach will be to rely on contingent valuation or choice
experiment methods. The value of recreation and hunting is estimated wherever possible using
the consumer surplus derived from the application of CV or the TC methods (Croitoru, L. 2006).

Some of the methods (e.g. the travel cost method, hedonic pricing) rely on the revealed behavior
of the users for these goods while others are using surveys and directly asking users about their
WTP for certain goods or services (e.g. the contingent valuation method, choice modelling). The
advantage of the first group of methods (revealed preference methods) is that they are based on
actual market behavior of users of non-market goods and services (e.g. paying a higher price for
a house because of a nice forest view); however, their applicability is limited to only a few non-
market forest goods and services (recreation, tourism and landscape aesthetics).

Nevertheless, in the last decade, the methodology and knowledge on these methods has
improved considerably, enabling sound estimation of economic values of non-market goods and
services. Each of the techniques and methods has its own strengths and weaknesses and specific
characteristics, which are detailed in this section. Table 6 gives a flavor of how each method is
applicable to this or that group of forest goods or services. The final selection of the method
depends on many factors, including: (i) type and number of objects to be valued; (ii) relevant
population (e.g. users or non-users or both); geographical scope (local, regional, national,
international); (iii) data availability (e.g., restricted data access – data on house values); (iv)
available time and financial resources; (v) team (e.g., experience).

Market price method

This method values those forest goods or services that are traded mainly in resource markets
(e.g. fuel-wood, timber, cork, non-wood forest products), thus it is always preferable to use if a
market exists for the forest product at stake. But as understood markets exist for a limited
amount of forest goods and services, so market price should be carefully considered due to
subsidies or markets that are not fully competitive. Seasonal variations and other effects on price
must be considered. Another strength of this method is that both direct and indirect value are
captured. For some WFPs and NWFPs whose prices are unknown, the opportunity cost of labor
or the cost of harvest is used. For unpriced products, the market price of similar goods is used
(Croitoru, 2007).


                                                                                                46
Application of the market price method requires data to estimate consumer surplus and producer
surplus. The Market Price (MP) method is sometimes used for carbon sequestration, water
purification, soil protection, recreation and tourism values of forest goods and services. The
method cannot be easily used to measure the value of larger changes that are significantly
affecting the supply of or demand for a good or service.

      Table 6: Overview of the valuation methods for forest goods and services.
Group         Forest Good/Service            MP       CB      HP     TC       CV                       CE
         Industrial wood                      +        ○       ─      ─        ─                       ─
         Fuelwood                             +        ○       ─      ─        ─                       ─
    Resources




         Cork                                 +        ○       ─      ─        ─                       ─
         Food products                        +        ○       ─      ─        ─                       ─
         Fodder and forage                    +        +       ─      ─        ─                       ─
         Decorative material                  +        ○       ─      ─        ─                       ─
         Hunting and game products            +        ○       ─      ─        ─                       ─
         Pharmaceuticals, cosmetics           +        ○       ─      ─        ─                       ─
         and other raw materials for
         industrial application
         Biodiversity protection              ─        ○       ─      ─         +                      +
         Climate regulation                   ─        +       ─      ─         +                      +
  Biosp
  heric




         Air quality regulation               ─        +       +      ─         +                      +
         Carbon sequestration                 ○        +       ─      ─         +                      +
         Health protection                    ─        +       ─      ─         +                      +
         Water regulation                     ─        +       ─      ─         +                      +
  logical
    Eco-




         Water purification                   ○        +       ─      ─         +                      +
         Soil protection                      ○        +       ─      ─         +                      +

                Recreation                               ○        ○         ─        +        +        +
                Tourism                                  ○        ○         ─        ○        +        +
    Social




                Spiritual and cultural services         ─         ─         ─        ─        +        +
                Historical and educational              ─         ─         ─        ─        +        +
  Ameni
    ties




                services
                Aesthetic services                      ─         ○         +        ○        +        +
                                        Source: Mavsar, et al., 2014
Note: MP-market price based method; CB-cost based methods; HP-hedonic pricing method; CV- contingent
valuation method; CE- choice experiment method.
+ typically used; ○ sometimes used; - not applicable.



Cost based (CB) methods

These methods can be used to estimate values of ecosystem goods and services based on either
the costs of avoiding damages due to lost goods and services, the cost of replacing ecosystem
goods and services, or the cost of providing substitute goods and services (King and Mazzotta,


                                                                                                           47
2000). An example of cost based method application could be valuing erosion protection services
by measuring the cost of removing eroded sediment from a downstream area.

Cost based methods rest upon: (i) notion that costs do not exceed the economic value of the good
or service; (ii) costs to substitute or restore and replace can be found with accuracy; (iii) extent
and nature of the damage is predictable.

Often they are applied when estimating the value of climate regulation; air quality regulation;
carbon sequestration; and all aspects of ecological forest benefits (health protection; water
regulation, water purification and soil protection, flood prevention, erosion mitigation, dam
sedimentation). Nowadays for this group of methods market data is available and robust.
Another good example of CB methods application is when estimating damages to WFPs due to
forest fires. The replacement cost method is suggested to be used in this case. Forest fires
actually cause losses of benefits from all TEV components. The damage to WFPs could be
measured either through application of replacements costs or the value of burnt wood. Losses of
NWFPs as a result of forest fires are valued based on their average value per hectare of forests.
In some cases, these estimates are weighted according to the estimated degree of damage
(Croitoru, L., 2006).

These methods assume that expenditures to repair damages or to replace ecosystem goods and
services are valid measures of the benefits provided. However, costs are usually not an accurate
measure of benefits, which should be measured by peoples’ WTP. These methods do not
consider social preferences for ecosystem services, or the behaviour of individuals in the absence
of those services.

Hedonic pricing (HP) method

This method is suitable for investigating the influence of forest view or forest proximity in the
price of a house. The basic premise of the HP method is that the price of a marketed good is
related to its characteristics, or the services it provides. The main strength is that it can be used to
estimate values based on actual choices. The method will only capture WTP of people for
perceived differences in environmental attributes, and their direct consequences. Thus, if people
are not aware of the linkages between the environmental attribute and benefits to them or their
property, the value will not be reflected in home prices.

Travel cost (TC) method

This is a good method for measuring recreational, scenic and cultural destinations and relatively
inexpensive to apply, relying on people’s actual behaviour. The travel cost method (TC) uses the
cost of travel, observed site characteristics, and observed trip patterns to value the characteristics,
or existence, of a site-specific environmental amenity (for example, how much people spent to
arrive at and stay at their destination (e.g., forest) for the entire length of their visit). To do this,
the TC method estimates use values for site-specific amenities, particularly use values that can
only be obtained by visiting a site. Its use requires that out-of-pocket expenses occur, and that
they vary across users.



                                                                                                      48
TC models can be used to value access to sites, i.e., the welfare effects of the elimination of a
recreational site, or to value the characteristics of a site, i.e., a change in the level of the quality
of the site. Secondly, TC models are commonly used to estimate benefit changes due to the
implementation of an environmental policy which aims, for example, at decreasing the level of
water pollution in a lake or extending the number and/or length of hiking trails in a forest. More
generally, it might be interesting to value changes in site attributes when considering a set of
recreational sites; or to determine how variations in site quality affects the probability of
choosing one site over another.

The travel cost method can be used to estimate the economic benefits or costs resulting from:
    Changes in access costs for a recreational site;
    Elimination of an existing recreational site;
    Addition of a new recreational site;
    Changes in environmental quality at a recreational site

The method is based on behaviour—what people actually do—rather than stated WTP—what
people say they would do in a hypothetical situation. The method is relatively inexpensive to
apply. But it cannot be used to assign values to on-site environmental features and functions that
site users do not find valuable. It cannot be used to appraise off-site values supported by the site.
Most importantly, it cannot be used to measure non-use values. Thus, sites that have unique
qualities valued by non-users will be undervalued.

Contingent valuation (CV) and the choice modelling (CM) methods

This family of methods is the only one allowing estimates of use and non-use values
simultaneously: biodiversity conservation and recreation for this or that forest area or pilot area.
In forest-related studies, the choice experiment (CE) is the most widely used method within the
CM family. Choosing between contingent valuation (CV) and choice experiment (CE) depends
upon several criteria, such as the study aim and the nature of the change to be valued. When the
change is multi-dimensional and affects several goods and services, CE is preferred.

In CV questionnaires, people are presented with a hypothetical change in the provision of goods
and/or services and are asked to state their WTP (or WTA). Whereas in a typical CM
questionnaire, respondents are faced with several alternatives and are (in most cases) asked to
pick their most preferred alternative (Riera and al., 2012); this variant of CM is known as choice
experiment (CE). The CV leads to a more holistic approach than CE that focuses on single
components (Kramer and al., 2004). However, the CV only provides a single WTP (WTA)
estimate for the complete change, while the CE delivers marginal WTP (WTA) for each of the
components. The CE method focuses on the value of a number of attributes relevant for policy
design or forest management (Holmes and Boyle, 2004) rather than focusing on the total
(holistic) value of forest ecosystems. This approach is best suited for management decisions that
are concerned with changing attribute levels rather than estimating the overall change in the
provision of environmental goods and services (Hanley and al., 2001b).

Benefit transfers: unit value transfer method and function transfer methods.


                                                                                                     49
Benefit transfer is not a valuation method, but a method that involves transferring economic
estimates from previous studies to value the environmental change at a policy site.
There are two primary groups of BT methods (Navrud, 2004):

     UNIT VALUE TRANSFER METHOD                      FUNCTION TRANSFER METHOD
     - Simple unit value transfer                    - Benefit function transfer
     - Unit value transfer with income               - Meta-analysis
     adjustments

The benefits set to be transferred from the study site or from several study sites to the policy site
can be estimated using either revealed preference methods like travel cost and HP, or stated
preference methods like the CV and CM. For example, for a CV the benefit function can be
written as:
                                  = 0 + 1 + 2 + 

Where, WTPij is the willingness to pay off household i for site j; Gj is the set of characteristics
of the environmental goods at site j, and Hij is the set of characteristics of household i at site j,
and 0, 1 and 2 are sets of parameters; and  is the random error. To implement this approach,
first a study in the existing literature has to be found, with estimates of the constant 0, and the
sets of parameters, 1 and 2. Then data on the two groups of independent variables, G and H, at
the policy site.

Unit value transfer method
Simple unit value transfer (i.e., from one study, or as a mean value estimate from several studies)
is the simplest method to transferring benefit estimates from a study site, or as a mean from
several study sites, to the policy site. This method assumes that the well-being experienced by an
average individual at the study site is the same as will be experienced by the average individual
at the policy site, and that the change in the environmental amenity being valued is the same at
the two sites. The main problem with simple unit value transfer is that individuals at the policy
site may not value ecosystem services the same as the average individual at the study sites.

Function transfer method
Transferring the entire benefit function is conceptually/theoretically more appealing than just
transferring unit values, because more information is effectively taken into account in the
transfer. However, transfer evidence is mixed in regard to whether function transfers perform
better than unit value transfers (Bateman and al., 2009; Ready and al., 2004). Often, it seems that
the benefit function transfer does not reduce transfer errors significantly, in comparison to a
simple unit value transfer.




                                                                                                  50
                                                               Annex Tables

Table A.1 - Wood Production, Economic Value -2013 - Bolu Regional Directorate
                                                                         Harvesting           Average
                                                                                                              Economic
                                 Coniferous Broadleaved        Total        Cost             Price 2013                        Economic Value ($)
                                                                                                              Value (TL)
                                                                          (TL/m3)             (TL/m3)
                                                                                            85 (Conf) ;67
                                    868,687       365,856        1,234,543                                  83,305,416,9      75,049,925.2
       Standing (KGH m³)                                                                    (BrdLvd)
            Log (m³)                281,639       93,337         374,976      87.2          220

      Telephone pole (m³)           1,034         0              1,034        87.2          270

        Mining pole (m³)            11,725        973            12,698       87.2          176

  Other industrial wood (m³)        192           5,532          5,724        87.2          124

         Pulpwood (m³)              233,801       58,389         292,190      87.2          129

     Fiber-chip wood (m³)           149,834       94,024         243,858      87.2          82

         Thin pole (m³)             160           67             227          87.2          98
        Fuel wood (Ster)            127,047       137,482        264,529      34.9          58              11,507,011.5     10,366,667.0
Note: 1 ster = 0.75 m3 and 1 m3=1.33 ster. Thin pole production is given in m³ whereas its price is available in ster. Thus, the production
amount is concerted to ster in calculating the economic value. 2. The data is provided by DG Forestry and Bolu Regional Directorate. 3. There
are three alternatives for the valuation of wood: the first one is the valuation with the stumpage price. It is available from the regional RD (85
TL/m3 for coniferous and 67 TL for Broadleaved). Small portion of the threes are sold as standing. Moreover, the market prices for each
industrial wood product are also available. Therefore it is possible to use market prices to arrive to a value for wood production. To be consistent
with the ongoing practice and total economic value concept, the stumpage price will be used for this study.



                                                                                                                                                 51
Table A.2. - NWFPs-Plants Harvest and Economic Value -2013 - Bolu Regional Directorate
                                                                                                         4. Quarter
                                        1. Quarter
                                                         2. Quarter (April-    3. Quarter (June-          (October-          2013
                                    (January-February-
                                                             May-June)            July-August)           November-          Yearly
                                         March)
                                                                                                         December)          Total
                                                 Unit                 Unit    Quantit                Quantit                Total
                                    Quantity             Quantity                          Unit                  Unit
          NWFP - Plants                          Price                Price    y Sold                 y Sold               Revenue
                                    Sold (kg)            Sold (kg)                       Price ($)             Price ($)
                                                  ($)                  ($)      (kg)                   (kg)                   ($)
Laurus nobilis (leaf)               0           0.000    32000       0.450    10000      4.505       32000     0.450     73873.9
Tilia L.                            0           0.000    0           0.000    0          0.000       300       36.036    10810.8
Castanea Sativa (fruit)             1995        4.505    0           0.000    10000      4.505       25000     4.505     166644.1
Ruscus Aculeatus L. (herba)         0           0.000    2000        3.604    2000       3.604       3000      3.604     25225.2
Boletus Edulis                      0           0.000    0           0.000    0          0.000       1500      1.802     2702.7
Pteridium Aquilium                  0           0.000    0           0.000    3000       0.901       10000     0.901     11711.7
Rosa Canina                         0           0.000    0           0.000    2000       1.802       4000      1.802     10810.8
Rhododendron L.                     12200       0.036    17200       0.009    25000      0.901       20000     0.901     41135.1
Bark                                0           0.000    1000        0.901    100000     0.225       35000     0.225     31306.3
All Kinds of Onions                 0           0.000    200         0.225    0          0.000       0         0.000     45.0
All Kinds of Empty Cones            200         5.405    0           0.000    7200       0.315       8000      0.315     5873.9
All Kinds of Seed Cones             0           0.000    0           0.000    25000      0.631       0         0.000     15765.8
Morchella Esculenta                 0           0.000    100         9.009    0          0.000       0         0.000     900.9
Other Mushrooms                     0           0.000    0           0.000    500        7.207       2000      7.207     18018.0
Wood of Pine Root Without Tinder    0           0.000    0           0.000    0          0.000       20000     0.360     7207.2
Stone-Sand                          0           0.000    0           0.000    0          0.000       200000 0.045        9009.0
All Kinds of Residues               0           0.000    0           0.000    100000     0.225       100000 0.225        45045.0
All Kinds of Plant Residues-Humus   1000        0.023    150000      0.054    0          0.000       115000 0.054        14346.8
Other Non-wood products             12200       0.631    0           0.000    0          0.000       20000     1.802     43729.7
Sapling                             0           0.000    50          1.802    0          0.000       0         0.000     90.1
                                                                                                         Total
                                                                                                         NWFP         534.252,25

                                                                                                                                     52
Table A.3 - Honey Production and Economic Value 2013 - Bolu Regional Directorate
                         Honey
                                                                                   All Other
              Honey     Productio Number                               Cost                                       Economic     Economic
                                                                                     Costs
            Productio      n in        of         Price     Type of     of a                        Economic     Value (TL)    Value ($)
                                                                                  (Materials
            n (metric    Forests     Active      TL/Kg      Honey      Hive                         Value (TL)    Regional      Regional
                                                                                  and Labor)
               ton)      (metric     Hives                              (TL)                                        Total        Total
                                                                                   TL/Hive
Region                    ton)
                                                           Chestnut
Düzce      518         440.3        51973      35          Honey      15       222                3,092,899.0 5,924,500.0 5,337,387.4
Bolu       260         221          16027      30          Honey      15       222                2,831,601.0
Note: 1. Honey production data is available from TUIK and number of active hives data is available from Turkish Honey Producers
Association
2. Honey produced from Forests is assumed to be 85% of honey produced in the region. This percentage is provided by Animal Products
Unit of the DG Forestry.
3. Prices of honey were obtained from Animal Products Unit of DG Forestry.


   Production Cost of Honey TL/year*         Costs (TL)/Hive/year

Hive                                           15
Honey Bee Medications                          8
Honey Bee Food                                 80
Comb                                           30
Materials                                      4
Total                                          137
Labor                                          100
Total (TL/Hive)                                237
Average Honey Production
(kg)/hive/year                                 14
Average Cost (TL/kg)                           16.93
Note: * The data from Bolu and Düzce Region was not available.
Instead, İsmail Kurt. Mr. Kurt got the data from Yalova Honey
Producers Association

                                                                                                                                           53
Table A.4 - Recreational Use Value 2013 - Bolu Regional Directorate
                                  CS/
                                             CS/person in Total Consumer           Total        Economic          Economic
                 Total         person in
                                              1999 (TL)*      Surplus (TL)    Expenditures      Value (TL)        Value ($)
                               2013 (TL)
No. of
Visitors     788,252.4       17.02          2,096,000.00     13,412,502.22 70,000.00         13,342,502.22 12,020,272.27
Area (ha) 3852.4
Total Area used in recreation includes Yedigöller National Park, Güzeldere waterfall, Samandere waterfall and natural
monument, and five natural parks namely, Abant, Gölcük Gölü, Sünnet Gölü, Sülüklü Gölü and Kıbrıscık Karagöl.
Note: 1. The number of visitors and areas of the parks and other recreational location are taken from the web page of
http://bolge9.ormansu.gov.tr/9bolge/AnaSayfa/ilsube/bolusube/bolutabiatparklari/bolukaragoltb.aspx?sflang=tr Accessed 25
1 2015 2. The benefit values are carried to 2013 by CPI.

Table A.5 – Economic Value of Fodder for Grazing 2013 - Bolu Regional Directorate

                                                                                 Usable
                                                                       Fodder
                                                                               Fodder per                  Price
                                               Düzce                  Produced                                           Economic         Economic
                                 Bolu (ha)               Total (ha)               Area    Actual Use* (kg) (TL/
                                                (ha)                  per Area                                           Value (TL)       Value ($)
                                                                                 (metric                    kg)
                                                                      (ton/ha)
                                                                                  ton)

     Forest Soil (Pasture)       83,349.8    4,729.9      88,079.7      6.00     528,478.2    264,239,100.00    0.5
      Degraded Coppice            217.5        0.0         217.5        1.80     391.5        195,750.0         0.5
       Normal Coppice              0.0         0.0          0.0           -
        Broadleaved              64,168.4    26,443.4     90,611.8      1.80     163,101.2    81,550,620.0      0.5

     Coniferous Degraded         114,418.6     2,647.7    117,066.3       0.70    81,946.4     40,973,205.0     0.5
          Coniferous             334,083.6 93,712.2 427,795.8             0.40    171,118.3 85,559,160.0        0.5
             Total                                                                945,035.7 472,517,835.0       0.5    236.258.917,5 212.845.871,6
Note: 1. Fodder production per area for each type of forest area and fodder prices were obtained from interview with forestry experts and villagers as
well as the assumption that actual fodder consumption is half of usable fodder.




                                                                                                                                                   54
Table A.6. Hunting Value

                      Registered Hunters
                                               Hunter Permit          Hunter Fee         Total Expenses for      Total Expenses for
                         (number of
                                              (Nonmembers)*        (Nonmembers)**        Permit and Fee (TL)     Permit and Fee ($)
                         individuals)

Bolu (from region) 602                       169.4               140                    186,258.8              167,800.7

Düzce (from
region)             1069                     169.4               140                    330,748.6              297,971.7

Bolu ve Düzce
(foreign)           11                       169.4               220                    4283.4                 3,858.9

Hunting Total                                                                                                  469,631.4

Note: * There is a membership fee for the hunters' associations. There is a fee for hunting. The difference between the fee for the
members and nonmember was assumed to be membership fee for the assocaition. ** Hunters are assumed to come from around the
region except for few foreign hunters. Source: http://bolge9.ormansu.gov.tr/9bolge/AnaSayfa/avcilikbelgesi.aspx?sflang=tr




                                                                                                                                      55
Table A.7. Pharmaceutical Value (PV)




                          Forest Area     Pharmaceutical    Pharmaceutical          Pharmaceutical      Economic Value
           Forest Area                                                                                                       Economic Value of
Region                   and Forest Soil Value (PV) Euro/ha   Value (PV)            Value (PV) TL/ha     of MSV TL (in
              (km2)                                                                                                           MSV $ (in 2013)
                              (ha)            (in 2004)     TL/ha (in 2004)             (in 2013)            2013)




Bolu      5,976.45       597,644.50

Düzce     1,208.02       120,801.80

Total     7,184.46       718,446.30       5.00                  4.67                      9.40            6,751,009.85          6,081,990.85

Notes:1. Forest areas include forest soil. 2. The option value of pharmaceuticals derived from forest genetic materials was estimated to be € 5 per
ha for Turkey (Croitoru, 2007). 3. Croitoru, L. (2007) "How much are Mediterranean forest worth?" Forest Policy and Economics, v9, pp. 536-545.
4. The benefit values are carried to 2013 by CPI.




                                                                                                                                               56
Table A.8 Watershed Protection (Water Supply)

                                                Water
                  Forest     Forest Area       Supply           Income          Water Supply        Water Supply        Economic         Economic
   Region          Area      and Forest      Value (WSV)     Adjusted WSV       Value (WSV)         Value (WSV)       Value of WSV      Value of WSV
                  (km2)       Soil (ha)        $/ha (in      $/ha (in 2004)    TL/ha (in 2004)     TL/ha (in 2013)     TL (in 2013)      $ (in 2013)
                                                2004)

Bolu            5,976.45     597,644.50

Düzce           1,208.02     120,801.80

Total           7,184.46     718.446.30      94.93           89.48             96.37              193.82              139,248,393.9     125,449,003.5

Note: 1. Unit value is taken from Nunez et al. (2006). 2. The study area is Chile's temperate forests which is similar to the project area (the pilot
area) forests. 3. The benefit values are carried to 2013 by CPI.




                                                                                                                                                    57
Table A.9 - Carbon Sequestration by Forest Increments in Bolu and Düzce Forest Areas and
economic value                                                                                                 Credits from the Increments
(BL: Broadleaved; CNF: Coniferous; tonne: t)

                                                                                                                                    Total Forest
                                                                                                             Total Forest           Increments
                Forest Area (Hectar)       Total Forest Asset (m3)       Forest Increments (m3) 2013    Increments (m3) 2013       (m3/ha) 2013
                   BL          CNF            BL             CNF               BL             CNF           BL         CNF          BL       CNF
Düzce         26,443.4     96,359.9      10,055,011     23,616,274       163,388          491,343
                                           1,740 (ster)                         87 (ster)
Bolu                64,168.4   441,545.7                  65,362,249                        1,737,396
                                         20,110,885                      493,581
                                         30,165,896                      656,969
Total               90,611.8   537,905.6                  88,978,523                        2,228,739   657,034.4     2,228,739     7.3        4.1
                                           1,740 (ster)                         87 (ster)
Total Area    628,517.4




                                                          Debits from the Production

                                                                      Firewood
                         Wood                                        Production
     Wood              Production      Firewood Production        (including elicit                     Roots left                         TOTAL
Production (m3)         (m3/ha)     (including elicit firewood) firewood) (m3/ha)       Roots left in   in Forests      TOTAL LOSS          LOSS
  [Table A.9.5]       [Table A.9.5]      (m3) [Table A.9.4]         [Table A.9.4]       Forests (m3)     (m3/ha)           (m3)           (m3/ha)
                                 CN                                                                            CN
  BL         CNF         BL               BL             CNF        BL       CNF        BL      CNF       BL            BL        CNF     BL   CNF
                                  F                                                                             F




                                                                                      69,481. 147,99                  435,173 926,901.
252,322   678,385        2.8     1.3   113,369.9    100,524.1      1.3          0.2                      0.8    0.3                    4.8     1.7
                                                                                         5     2.7                       .4      8


                                                                                                                                                 58
                          Net Gain

                                                                                                                              Forest
                                                                                     Forest                                Increments
    Wood for Carbon Storage          Wood for Carbon       Forest Increments     Increments                                 (Biomass
         (=Increment-              Storage (=Increment-     (Biomass Above         (Biomass   Forest Increments (Biomass Under Ground)
   (Production+Firewood+Ro        (Production+Firewood     Ground) (t) [Table   Above Ground) Under Ground) (tons) [Table   (tons/ha)
           ots) (m3)                 +Roots) (m3/ha)             A.9.3]            (tons/ha)             A.9.2]           [Table A.9.2]
      BL           CNF               BL          CNF         BL         CNF       BL      CNF     BL            CNF        BL      CNF




                                                          122,023. 561,091.
  221,861.0      1,301,837.2         2.4        2.4                              1.35     1.04      56,130.84         224,436.74    0.62   0.42
                                                             6        8



                               Forest                              Carbon
                            Increments       Carbon Captured                                               CO2          Total CO2    Economic
                                                                  Captured            CO2 (tons)
  Forest Increments            (Total             (tons)                                                (tons/ha)         (tons)    Value [SSC] $
                                                                  (tons/ha)
(Total Biomass)(tons)     Biomass)(t/ha)
    BL         CNF         BL       CNF        BL         CNF      BL   CNF      BL           CNF        BL     CNF




178,154.40   785,528.58    1.97      1.46   85,514.11 400,619.57 0.94   0.74 312,981.65 1,466,267.64 3.45 2.73 1,779,249.30 112,204,910.52




                                                                                                                                               59
Table A.9.1 (Taken from Table 2.6: Biomass
Expansion Factor (BEF) calculated by
Prof.Dr. Ünal ASAN and weight -per-          Table A.9.3 (Karabıyık, B., 2014 and Tolunay,
volume values)                               2013b)

                                 Volume
                                                                                Percentages
                                 Weight                       Dried Weight
                                              Broadleaved                        in Forest
                                 (metric                      metric ton/m3
                                                                                   Area
Tree Type      BEF1     BEF2     ton/m3)

                                             Fagus
Coniferous     1.22     1.24       0.496     Orientalis       0.53              0.75

Broadleaved    1.24     1.26       0.638     Carpinus         0.63              0.1

                                             Other
                                             Broadleaved      0.55              0.15

Table A.9.2 (Taken from Table
3.5: Root-to-Shoot Ratio for
Temperate Forest; MA Thesis of
Banu Karabıyık, pp 32-33                     Weighted
(AFOLU IPCC 2006))                           Average                            0.543

                        Root-
                                                                                Percentages
                         to-                                  Dried Weight
                                               Coniferous                        in Forest
              Above     Shoot                                 metric ton/m3
                                                                                   Area
Tree Type     Ground    Ratio

                <50      0.40                Pinus Nigra      0.47              0.1
Coniferous                                   Pinus
              50-150     0.29                Sylvestris       0.43              0.9

                                             Weighted
              75-150     0.23                Average                            0.434
Broadleaved
               >150      0.24




                                                                                             60
Table A.9.4 Firewood Production

                                                                Total
                 Firewood     Firewood          Ilicit          Firewood
                 Production   Production        Firewood        Extracted
Forest Type      (Ster)       (m3)              (m3)            (m3)

Broadleaved 137,482.0         103,369.9         10,000.0        113,369.9

Coniferous       127,047.0    95,524.1          5,000.0         100,524.1




Table A.9.5 Wood Production

              2013                Broadleaved      Coniferous

Standing (KGH m³)                 365,856       868,687

Log (m3)                          93,337        281,639

Telephone pole (m³)               0             1,034

Mining pole (m³)                  973           11,725

Other industrial wood (m³)        5,532         192

Pulpwood (m³)                     58,389        233,801

Fibre-chip wood (m³)              94,024        149,834

Thin pole (m³)                    67            160

Fuel wood (Ster)                  137,482       127,047

Wood Production                   252,322       678,385




                                                                            61
Table A.10 Soil Erosion Control Value



                                                      Forest Area
           Forest                                                                                      Soil       (SEV)
            Area                                                                                     Erosion       PPP-      SEV
                                                                                                                                     Economic       Economic
           which                                                                                      Value     Exchange    TL/ha
Region                                                                                                                              Value of SEV   Value of SEV
         eliminate                                                                                    (SEV)     Conversi      (in
                                                                                                                                    TL (in 2013)    $ (in 2013)
         s Erosion   Degraded    Normal                         Soil          Range        Forest    $/ha (in   on TL/ha    2013)
                                            Reforestation
            (ha)      Forest     Forest                     Conservation   Management       Soil      1998)     (in 1998)
                                             (1999-2013)
                       (ha)       (ha)                      (1999-2013)    (1999-2013)   (Pasture)



         479,528.                389,221.
Bolu     2           118,116.3   9          3,502.0         3,454.5        1,632.5       83,349.8

         118,023.                112,749.
Düzce    8           2,778.0     9          544.0           0.0            0             4,729.9

         597,552.                501,971.                                                                       14,430,5            115,156,743.   103,744,813.
Total    0           120,894.3   8          4,046.0         3,454.5        1,632.5       88,079.7    46.0       22          192.7        4              9

Note: 1. Degraded forest areas were not included in the forest area which eliminates erosion. Areas of reforestation, forest rehabilitation, and
soil conservation activities are added to normal forest area and subtracted from degraded forest area. The area where range management was
realized is already included in the forest soil (pasture area) 2. Unit value of soil erosion is the specific value calculated for Turkey and taken from
Bann and Clemens (1998). 3. This value was evaluated by replacement cost of nutrients and flood Damages. 4. The benefit values were adjusted
to 2013 by CPI.




                                                                                                                                                            62
Table A.12. Biodiversity Value for Bolu Regional Directorate

                                                    Forest
                      MWTPof         MWTP of        Areas        MWTP of       MWTP of     MWTP of      MWTP of     Total Value
                      Subtropical    Temporate      Designated   Subtropic     Temporat    Subtropic    Temporat    for           Total
                      Forests        Forests        to           al Forest (   e Forests   al Forests   e Forests   Designated    Amount for     Total Value    Total Value
                      (2005          (2005          Conservati   2005          (2005       (2013        (2013       Forests       Undesignat     of             of
             Forest   int.$/ha/yea   int.$/ha/yea   on Total     TL/ha/yea     TL/ha/yea   TL/ha/yea    TL/ha/yea   (TL) in       ed Forests     Biodiversity   Biodiversity
             Areas    r)             r)             (ha)         r)            r)          r)           r)          2013          (TL) in 2013   (TL) in 2013   ($) in 2013

Bulu and     716,814.                                                                                               3,083,679.    18,281,146.    21,364,826.    19,247,591.
Düzce        6        19.00          20.17          98,535.01    15.789        16.76       29.57        31.30       98            44             42             37

MWTP- Marginal Willingness to Pay; Note: 1. The unit value is specifically calculated for Turkey in Vladimir (2014) by meta-analysis. 2. Two
different unit values for temporate and subtropical forests are used. 3. The forest areas designated for conservation is taken from Table A.12.1.
The data in ATable A.12.1 is obtained from the DG Forestry. 4. Unit values are carried to 2013 by CPI.
Table A.12.1. Total Forest Area Designated to Conservation

                              BOLU                                                                       Düzce

                                                    Wild Life                              Wild Life
 Forest Area                             Nature                                 Nature                          Forest Area
                            Nature                 Protection National Nature             Protection  Nature
    having    National                 Protection                             Protection                           having
                            Parks                     and      Parks   Parks                 and     Monuments
conservation Parks (ha)                  Forest                                 Forest                         conservation
                             (ha)                 Development   (ha)    (ha)             Development    (ha)
 feature (ha)                          Area (ha)                              Area (ha)                         feature (ha)
                                                    Area (ha)                              Area (ha)

1,4409.4        1,623.027 2,982.87 992.36           6,3952.53       0          186.73 437.29         764              11.3           1,3175.5

Note: Forest Areas having conservation features are the forest areas in which all management activities are conducted although they are not
conservation forests. DG Forestry states that these forest areas need to be distinguished and assigned a special status in planning, that is why
thety are included in this table.




                                                                                                                                                   64
