                                                                                                  99543



THE IDENTIFICATION
FOR DEVELOPMENT
(ID4D) AGENDA:
Its Potential for Empowering
Women and Girls
 Background Paper


Mariana Dahan* and Lucia Hanmer**†

World Bank

Key words:
Identification, ID4D, birth registration, CRVS, gender.



 * World Bank, Senior ICT Policy Specialist, ID4D Working Group Coordinator; e-mail: mdahan@worldbank.org
 ** World Bank, Lead Economist, Gender Cross-Cutting Solutions Area; e-mail: lhanmer@worldbank.org
 † Authors’ names are presented in alphabetical order. Acknowledgments go to the members of the ID4D
 Working Group, the peer reviewers, and the research assistants who have contributed to this work.
                                         Table of contents

    Abstract.........................................................................................3
    1. Introduction..............................................................................4
    2. Rationale for Improving ID Systems in Developing
       Countries...................................................................................5
       Potential for greater development outcomes and welfare gains............................... 5

       Potential for greater inclusion and economic gains................................................... 6

       New opportunities from emerging technology.......................................................... 6

    3. The Role of IDs in Achieving Gender Equality in
       Development Outcomes ...........................................................8
       Access to financial services ........................................................................................ 8

       Access to social protection and women’s empowerment.......................................... 9

       Political participation................................................................................................ 10

    4. Right to Identity for All ...........................................................12
    5. Need for Gender-Disaggregated Identity Data ........................14
       Global birth registration data................................................................................... 14

       India’s birth registration data................................................................................... 15

    6. Making Everyone Count: a Global Agenda................................17
    7. Critical Considerations for Policy Design...................................18
    8. Conclusions ............................................................................19
    References..................................................................................20




2
Abstract


G    ender inequality and related issues remain a major global challenge, particularly for developing
     countries. Despite considerable progress on gender equality over recent decades, key gender gaps
remain in endowments (health and education), in access to jobs and economic opportunities, and in
voice and agency. Lack of data limits ability to assess gender gaps and measure progress toward elimi-
nating them. Successfully addressing the incompleteness of civil registration and vital statistics (CRVS)
systems could help fill some of these vital data gaps. In addition, having official personal identification
(ID) is an important stepping-stone for women and girls—enabling them to access services, claim their
entitlements as citizens, and increase their voice and agency through participation in voting and oth-
er politics. Global initiatives such as Identification for Development (ID4D) promote opportunities to
provide women with access to foundational documentation such as birth certificates and expansion
of other ways to establish their legal identity. In addition, better data resulting from personal identity
registration will advance gender equality policy discussions and planning. This paper examines rates
of male and female registration for national identities globally to identify key registration constraints
and gaps. We find no systematic evidence of gender-based gaps in birth registration; rather, evidence
suggests that poverty, social exclusion, and geography may constrain birth registration of both males
and females. Drawing on case studies and national-level data, we next examine outcomes in specific
policy areas: access to financial services, access to social protection schemes, and inclusion in elector-
al roles and voting. Here, the evidence suggests, adult women face gender-specific barriers in getting
ID, sometimes related to inability to obtain foundational documentation such as birth certificates.




   THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls         ▪ 3
    1. Introduction


    D   espite unprecedented progress in many important aspects of the lives of girls and women over
        recent decades, key gaps in endowments, opportunities, and agency persist between males and
    females in all countries. There is considerable variation within and between countries and regions, but
    in most countries, gender inequalities tend to be greater among the poor than the rich, especially in
    education, health, and economic opportunities (World Bank 2011).

    In addition, lack of data on women and girls has hindered efforts to increase gender equality and to
    design evidence-based policies that can lift the constraints that hold women and girls back. Without
    adequate data, policies to promote gender equality are difficult to formulate, and it is also hard to
    assess progress toward achieving such goals. Moreover, women often struggle to assert their rights
    and eligibility for lack of personal identification (ID) and other associated legal documents that would
    prove eligibility to government programs and give access to services. Without a robust way of proving
    one’s identity, exercise of basic citizen rights, claim of entitlements, access to a range of governmental
    services, including social protection and health care, and conduct of many daily activities could be
    hampered.

    While the widespread lack of official ID in developing countries is a critical stumbling block to national
    growth, it affects in particular women, and their children. Missing birth registration certificates and
    official ID documentation hampers a host of daily activities: entitlement claims; access to governmen-
    tal services such as social protection, education, and health care; access to financial institutions and
    other economic opportunities, including many types of jobs; family and property transactions requiring
    individual legal status; and basic citizenship rights, including voting and participation in politics.

    Recognizing the transformational potential of modern, 21st-century ID systems for the improved de-
    livery of basic services to the poor, the World Bank has launched the Identification for Development
    (ID4D) program that aims to bring global knowledge and expertise to bear across multiple sectors and
    countries to tackle this fundamental development challenge. It also will engage operationally in this
    area, collaborating with development partners, donors, and governments to provide unified technical
    and financial support to low- and middle-income countries participating in this effort.

    As the world moves towards the new Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) framework, setting new
    and ambitious targets for global progress investing in efforts to collect gender data and evidence
    becomes increasingly urgent. For the World Bank closing gender data gaps and increasing access to
    gender-relevant data are priorities, central to the mission of eliminating extreme poverty and boosting
    shared prosperity. The recently launched ID4D agenda aims to help achieving that vision.

    ID4D’s goals and principles align not only with the World Bank Group’s twin goals of ending extreme
    poverty and promoting shared prosperity, but also with the proposed SDG target #16.9 of universal
    legal identity, including birth registration (Dahan and Gelb 2015).




4
2. Rationale for Improving ID Systems
   in Developing Countries
POTENTIAL FOR GREATER DEVELOPMENT OUTCOMES AND WELFARE GAINS
An overwhelming majority of low- to middle-income countries lack adequate systems to register births
or identify millions of people living within their borders, predominantly the poorest and most vulnera-
ble, excluding them from participating in many important aspects of society. This is a problem—and an
increasingly urgent one—for delivering successful development outcomes. Data and evidence are also
important to make visible the lives of women and girls. But in many countries, particularly in the de-
veloping world, we lack the data needed to understand gender gaps in economic opportunities, health
and education, and women’s voice and agency.

A growing body of research highlights the importance of understanding better the causes of inequality
and strengthening development policies in these areas:

▪	   Education. Enormous progress has been made across all developing regions in reducing gaps
     between girls and boys in primary and secondary school enrollment. As of 2011, the net primary
     school enrollment rate was 92 percent for boys and 90 percent for girls, and the gross secondary
     enrollment rate was 72 percent for boys and 69 percent for girls. However, comparisons also show
     differences in achievement between countries at different levels of per capita income: just 20
     percent of low-income countries have achieved gender parity at the primary level, 10 percent at
     the lower-secondary level, and 8 percent at the upper-secondary level (UNESCO 2014; UN Women
     2014).

▪	   Health. Although the reproductive health of women and girls has improved in some respects over
     the past few decades, maternal mortality remains high. Globally, there were an estimated 287,000
     deaths from complications of pregnancy or childbirth in 2010, a decline of 47 percent since 1990
     but well below the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) target to reduce the maternal mortality
     rate by three-quarters by 2015 (UN 2000).

▪	   Economic opportunities. Gender inequality in the world of work has been stubbornly persistent
     across multiple dimensions, despite relatively large gains in women’s health and education. On vir-
     tually every global measure, women are more economically excluded than men. Women are more
     likely than men to work in low-productivity activities, be unpaid family workers, work in informal
     employment, and transition more frequently between informal employment and being out of the
     labor force. Globally, women’s labor force participation has stagnated, in fact decreasing from 57
     percent in 1990 to 55 percent in 2012. Women on average earn 10–30 percent less than working
     men; on this score, there are large variations between countries, although we don’t know exactly
     why (World Bank 2011, 2014).

Highlighting the deficit of data and evidence in this domain, the Data2X partnership’s report - “Map-
ping Gender Data Gaps” – outlines the key gender data gaps across five domains of women’s em-
powerment: health, education, economic opportunities, political participation, and human security
(Buvinic, Furst-Nichols, and Koolwal 2014). Based on need, population coverage, and policy relevance,
the Data2X report identifies 28 priority gender data gaps to close—coverage of national identification
(ID) documentation being one of them. The report also draws attention to the benefits of improved vital




     THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls    ▪ 5
    registration data, such as more accurate data on maternal mortality and its causes. It also notes that
    civil registration—of births, deaths and causes of death, and marriage and divorce—is critical for both
    health and civic initiatives.

    This is where the link between gender-disaggregated data and the civil registration and Vital statistics
    (CRVS) and ID4D comes to light. Without proof of personal ID and official registration of their children,
    women do not even make it into the count of population – they simply do not officially exist – and
    thus the lack of data and evidence on their lives make it impossible to design effective development
    policies.

    POTENTIAL FOR GREATER INCLUSION AND ECONOMIC GAINS
    A body of evidence accumulated over recent years has shown the benefits of inclusive societies and
    the costs—social, political, and economic—of discrimination. For example, Inclusion Matters finds that
    the exclusion of the ethnic minority Roma from the economy costs Romania €887 million in lost an-
    nual productivity and that ethnic exclusion of indigenous populations in Bolivia reduces agricultural
    productivity by up to 36 percent (World Bank 2013b). Moreover, Stiglitz (2012) identifies discrimina-
    tion—against women, African Americans, and Hispanics—as a major source of the growing and outsize
    inequality that slows economic growth, lowers gross domestic product (GDP), and produces instability
    in the U.S. economy.

    For economies worldwide, the bottom line is this: Any country that cannot provide free or low-cost
    identity credentials to its entire population stands therefore to lose the immense potential of full par-
    ticipation in society, whether measured as human well-being or as economic growth.

    NEW OPPORTUNITIES FROM EMERGING TECHNOLOGY
    There is no one single approach to improving ID systems; however, emerging information and commu-
    nication technologies (ICTs) provide new opportunities for developing countries1. The widespread use
    of mobile devices in the developing world, combined with the decreasing costs of biometrics technol-
    ogy, offers a transformative solution to the problem—a simple means for capturing personal ID that
    can reach far more people and can provide new, more efficient ways for government and business to
    reach and serve the population, especially the most disadvantaged groups (Dahan and Sudan 2015).
    Many developing countries have started to implement national ID schemes that aim to be inclusive.
    India launched the massive Aadhaar program to provide a foundational ID service for all residents,
    including the marginalized groups.2 The Aadhaar program is distinctive in a number of ways. It does
    not distinguish citizenship (hence cannot be considered as a “national” program) and relies on direct
    biometric authentication against the central database rather than an ID card.

    The main objective in developing the program was to help rationalize India’s bewilderingly complex
    and leaky system of subsidies. However, the benefits of using Aadhaar over the past three years have


    1	     For more information, see “Information and communication technologies for women’s socio-economic empower-
    ment” World Bank policy toolkit, 2009.
    2	    “Foundational” ID refers to an ID including the most basic information (biographic data, biometrics, and other attri-
    butes), such as registries for civil registration and national ID systems. This information can be reused or shared to support
    the development of integrated “functional” registries, which are administrative databases supporting specific programs or
    services (for example, benefits administration, financial services access, or business registries). More information on India’s
    Unique ID program can be found at http://uidai.gov.in/.




6
helped to expand its scope of application and coverage to yield several innovative solutions to en-
trenched social problems. For instance, Aadhaar was an enabling element in India’s Direct Benefit
Transfer for Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) scheme in 2013 and 2014, encompassing approximately
100 million customers and 3,770 distributors (DBTL Review Committee 2014). Instead of the former
three-tiered market (consisting of a consumer subsidized price, a consumer market price, and a com-
mercial price), under the new scheme, consumer subsidies were deposited directly into the enrolled
consumers’ bank accounts, which are linked to their Aadhaar numbers. Among its results, the scheme
decreased diversion of subsidies to the commercial market and increased the availability of LPG for
consumers.

Estonia has followed a different model: it modernized its CRVS system to successfully transition to a
national ID system. Now the country delivers services on digital platforms that can quickly authenticate
citizens’ identity credentials—whether for financial transactions or for elections (European Commission
2012). The Estonian Constitution guarantees “equality before the law” for women and men, and this
equality extends to access to the national ID cards (World Bank 2013a).

These examples show that different implementation models for improving ID systems can achieve re-
sults. Some countries, like Estonia, may choose an incremental approach, while others will leapfrog to
an Aadhaar-type system. What matters in the end is that everyone is counted in: everyone gets access
to a unique identity and to digital ID-enabled services.




   THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls      ▪ 7
    3. The Role of IDs in Achieving Gender Equality
       in Development Outcomes
    T   his paper argues that identification is a critical factor for gender equality and the empowerment of
        women across multiple policy areas. Unique identification may help in strengthening governance
    by improving the integrity of electoral processes and making service delivery more transparent and
    accountable. In some jurisdictions, it is required to exercise the legal right to information under access
    to information laws. And evidence is accumulating that, alongside the direct benefits to women and
    their families, accruing from their ability to access government benefits and services and economic
    opportunities, indirect effects on their decision-making power within the household, self-esteem, and
    broader political participation and social inclusion can occur.

    ACCESS TO FINANCIAL SERVICES
    Having a bank account, access to loans, and other financial services is fundamental to the ability to
    benefit from economic opportunities. Legal proof of identity is central to the ability to access financial
    services, including the compliance with know-your-customer (KYC) requirements (Gelb and Raghavan,
    forthcoming). The world’s financial systems exclude 2 billion adults, or 38 percent of adults worldwide,
    the vast majority of whom live in developing countries and are disproportionately poor and female
    (Demirgüç-Kunt et al. 2015). Worldwide, 42 percent of women are unbanked compared with 35 per-
    cent of men, and 18 percent of unbanked adults report lack of documentation as one of the reasons
    why they do not have a bank account (Demirgüç-Kunt et al. 2015). Table 1 lists the reported barriers to
    use of a bank account, by gender. By far the most common reason reported by both men and women
    is insufficient funds. Of the total number of adults reporting that lack of documentation is one of the
    barriers they face, 49 percent are men and 51 percent are women (Global Findex database).3

         Table 1: Self-Reported Barriers to Use of an Account at a Financial Institution by Gender, 2014
                                     Adult respondents without an account, percentage
     Barrier                                                         Men                         Women
     Financial institutions too far away                                         23                          20
     Accounts too expensive                                                      24                          23
     Lack of necessary documentation                                             19                          17
     Lack of trust                                                               14                          12
     Not enough money                                                            61                          57
     Religious reasons                                                           6                           5
     Family member already has an account                                        26                          30
     No need for an account                                                      31                          30
     Source: Demirguc-Kunt et al. 2015, based on Global Findex database.
     Note: Respondents offered more than two reasons, on average.



    3	 The Global Findex database, the world’s most comprehensive database on financial inclusion, provides in-depth data
    on how individuals save, borrow, make payments, and manage risks. Collected by the World Bank in partnership with the
    Gallup World Poll and funded by the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, the Global Findex is based on interviews with about
    150,000 adults in over 140 countries. For more about the Global Findex database, see the website: http://www.worldbank.
    org/en/programs/globalfindex.




8
Beyond the benefits of financial inclusion, procedures adopted by financial institutions that use secure
means of ID for their clients can also have specific benefits for women. For example, Opportunity In-
ternational, operating in about 30 countries globally, safeguards its clients’ bank account balances by
requiring that transactions be authenticated by fingerprint—making it impossible for male relatives to
seize control of women’s assets upon the death of their husbands, as is common in Malawi.4 Not sur-
prisingly, the vast majority of Opportunity’s clients are women (Dahan and Gelb 2015).

ACCESS TO SOCIAL PROTECTION AND WOMEN’S EMPOWERMENT
A digital ID can ensure that benefits meant for women, such as conditional cash transfers, actually reach
women (Sudan 2013). In Pakistan, for example, the use of biometric IDs is a precondition for access-
ing cash transfer programs, ensuring that payments to female beneficiaries are delivered directly to
them rather than to their husbands or brothers, as had been common under the previous system (Malik
2014). By 2012, 40 million women in Pakistan possessed a Computerized National Identity Card (CNIC),
and program managers report significant empowerment effects for women, such as having a sense of
identity not experienced before, having the right to vote, and having legal protection as registered citizens
of the country. Early results of an independent impact evaluation of the Benazir Income Support Program
(further discussed in box 1) support these views, finding evidence of impact on women’s decision-mak-
ing power within the household, improvement of their status within the family, and improvement in their
self-confidence (OPM 2014).5 Social norms about women’s mobility seem to be slowly changing, too,
with increased acceptance that women can travel to collect the transfers themselves.


     Box 1. Impact Cash Transfers to Women in Pakistan
     Giving cash directly to women increases their bargaining power within the family, and when women have greater
     power to make decisions, the household increases its investment in human development. Recent evaluations
     and beneficiary assessments of the Benazir Income Support Program (BISP) endorse this gender-differentiated
     impact in Pakistan.
     Data from the Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement survey show that when Pakistani women have
     more decision-making power, households spend significantly more on things that women value, including nutri-
     tion and child education (particularly for girls), and that women make greater use of reproductive health services.
     A recent study showed that 78 percent of the women receiving cash transfers used their cash for food, while the
     next most common expenditure was on health (15 percent). In addition, when a woman acquires a Computer-
     ized National Identity Card (CNIC), she gets other citizenship rights (voting, the option to open a bank account,
     and the like). From 2009 to 2012, CNIC enrollment of female citizens jumped by 94 percent, largely because of
     collaboration with BISP.
     After receiving BISP cash transfers, the beneficiaries felt more empowered: about 58 percent of the women said
     they could spend money as they wanted, 75 percent felt their importance in the family had increased, 62 percent
     were making more family decisions, and 72 percent reported having more confidence. Evaluation results also
     exhibit that that 64 percent of the female beneficiaries report that they retain control over how the cash transfers
     are spent, mainly toward increasing consumption and reducing poverty. The BISP transfer is also associated with
     higher engagement with formal institutions: BISP beneficiaries are more likely than non beneficiaries to report
     that they would vote.
     Sources: Pakistan National Database and Registration Authority (NADRA) (for CNIC enrollment numbers); ICF GHK 2012;
     Oxford Policy Management 2014; World Bank, forthcoming.



4	      For more about Opportunity International, see its website: http://opportunity.org.
5	      The Government of Pakistan has not yet released this report.




       THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls                       ▪ 9
     Unique identification may help in strengthening governance by improving the integrity of electoral pro-
     cesses and making service delivery more transparent and accountable. In some jurisdictions, it is
     required to exercise the legal right to information under access to information laws.

     Women face significant legal and institutional hurdles, disparities, and disadvantages that are directly,
     or indirectly, linked to lack of recognized legal identity. In many countries, single mothers and women
     in consensual unions who are not legally married cannot register their children without the father’s
     signature. Further, poor and less-educated mothers register their children at birth significantly less
     often than other mothers (UNICEF 2002, 2013).

     POLITICAL PARTICIPATION
     In their pursuit of the opportunity to participate in public events, influence decisions women encoun-
     ter multiple forms of discrimination and disadvantage, keeping them from realizing their political and
     civic ambitions (NDI 2014). While requirements for voter ID vary between countries, often women get
     completely sidelined from any electoral process if they do not possess a recognized form of ID or a
     voter card.6


       Box 2. Lack of National ID Cards as a Barrier to Voting in Guatemala
       In 2007, in addition to supporting Mirador Electoral’s (Election Watch) pre-election and election-day observation
       efforts, the National Democratic Institute (NDI) partnered with a Mirador member, the Latin American Faculty of
       Social Sciences (FLACSO), to conduct a study of barriers to political participation in Guatemala.
       FLACSO and NDI experts used surveys in four communities to research why indigenous citizens vote at a lower
       rate than their non indigenous counterparts in Guatemala. The study found that lack of a proper ID card—rather
       than a lack of interest—was the main reason that Guatemalans across all ethnic groups did not vote.
       The study has informed FLACSO’s election observation and advocacy efforts. Since 2008, the Guatemalan gov-
       ernment has made a concerted effort to register women voters, which not only increased the ID cards issued to
       women but also led women to make up the majority of the voter registry for the first time in 2011.
       Sources: Nevitte, Cruz, and Estok 2008.



     Electoral registration work has exposed gender-specific barriers faced by women in some countries.
     The National Democratic Institute (NDI) has found that the gap on birth registration for women and
     for some men is most acute when it comes to documentation requirements for voter registration or
     candidate nomination. The NDI reports that because women are often less likely to have those types of
     documents and be more negatively affected in those types of electoral environments, there is a gen-
     der gap in ability to register to vote or register as candidates because of the missing documentation.7
     A striking example is from Burkina Faso, where, to get a birth certificate, citizens must have two wit-
     nesses, such as their mother or a midwife, to vouch for their birth in the country (NDI 2012). But many
     women leave their birth villages when they marry, and returning to find witnesses can be a daunting


     6	 A Carter Center report found that most Latin American countries surveyed require national ID cards, but in Africa a
     range of means exist for identifying a potential voter (Carter Center, n.d.). Some African countries accept any one of a large
     number of IDs or witness testimony in lieu of ID. Others may accept only a limited number of IDs or, in the case of six coun-
     tries, only one document.
     7	     NDI personal communication, June 6, 2015.




10
task. Burkina Faso is one of the world’s poorest countries, and for a woman to leave her village for an
entire day to complete this task can cost more than she can afford. In the run-up to Burkina Faso’s last
election, the NDI and its partners mobilized women to obtain birth certificates and traveled with Minis-
try of Interior officials to the regions with lowest registration to bring women to a central location where
they could obtain birth certificates. More generally, for both women and men, unavailability of required
documentation, such as birth and marriage certificates, can be a challenge in some rural, conflict, or
post-conflict contexts because of factors such as displacement or lack of documentation at the time of
birth, among others. In such cases, it may be necessary to verify identity through alternative methods.

Other work on electoral registration often refers to the particular difficulties that women face relative
to men, given that women are more likely to be illiterate and social norms may restrict their mobility,
preventing them from traveling to and entering public offices to obtain documentation.8 Pakistan, for
example, instituted days for women-only registration for voter ID to respond to these limiting gender
norms. Such initiatives can help to overcome ID and registration challenges for women such as those
in rural villages distant from registration centers and those living in areas where there are security
issues.




8	   See, for example, Wang 2013.




     THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls        ▪ 11
     4. Right to Identity for All


     L  egal barriers can also prevent women obtaining an ID for themselves or their children in the same
        way as men that men can obtain them. Many countries are biased toward using the father’s nation-
     ality when determining a child’s nationality (UNICEF 2013). These gender-related disadvantages in
     women’s ability to register their children are not only unfair but are also a strong link in the intergener-
     ational transmission of poverty between mothers and children.

     The following are just a few examples of the child-registration obstacles that women face (UNICEF
     2013, 11–12):

     ▪	   Barriers to registration based on unknown father or unmarried status. In Bhutan, children with un-
          known fathers cannot be registered; Nepal requires the names and approval of both the father and
          grandfather; and Nicaraguan women living in consensual unions can only register their children
          temporarily if the father hasn’t signed the birth record.

     ▪	   Barriers to registration based on marriage certificate. In Indonesia, a marriage certificate is re-
          quired to register a child’s birth.

     ▪	   Barriers resulting from limited access. Papua New Guinea has just one birth registration center for
          7 million people living in an area spanning more than 460,000 square kilometers, including 600
          islands.

     Women, Business and the Law latest report assessed differences between women and men’s legal
     ability to interact with the government and private sector (World Bank 2013). These differences can af-
     fect a woman’s ability to engage in the economy, access services and resources, or even receive health
     care for herself or her children. Findings from the World Bank’s Women, Business and the Law data-
     base (table 2) reveal that differences exist between the actions required of women and men to obtain
     an ID card or passport or to confer citizenship on their children. Some of these differences constitute
     more of a barrier to obtaining identity than others. To obtain an ID card, for example, certain countries
     impose the following differing requirements for women and men:

     ▪	   Married women must provide marriage certificates, but married men are not required to do so.

     ▪	   Married women require an additional signature, such as a father’s or guardian’s, while married
          men do not.

     ▪	   Married women must indicate the name of their spouse, but married men are not required to do so.

     ▪	   Identity cards are optional for women but required for men.

     Moreover, important differences in accessing these legal documents exist between married women
     and unmarried women, pointing to serious legal constraints and barriers to equal rights for women.9



     9	 Analysis based on data from the World Bank’s Women, Business and the Law database, http://wbl.worldbank.org/
     data/exploretopics/accessing-institutions#rights-of-married-and-unmarried-women--1.




12
   Table 2: Economies Imposing Differing Legal ID Processes for Married Women and Married Men
Type of ID request                Economies with different processes for married women and mar-
                                  ried men
Obtain a national identity card   Benin; Cameroon; Egypt, Arab Rep.; Mauritius; Oman; Pakistan; Saudi Arabia;
                                  Senegal; Togo (9)
Confer citizenship on children    Guinea; Iran, Islamic Rep.; Jordan; Kuwait; Lebanon; Madagascar; Malaysia;
                                  Mali; Mauritania; Nepal; Oman; Saudi Arabia; Sudan; Syrian Arab Republic;
                                  United Arab Emirates; West Bank and Gaza (16)
Apply for a passport              Benin; Botswana; Cameroon; Congo, Rep.; Egypt, Arab Rep.; Fiji; Gabon; Hai-
                                  ti; Iran, Islamic Rep.; Jordan; Kuwait; Malawi; Oman; Pakistan; Saudi Arabia;
                                  Uganda; United Arab Emirates; Yemen, Rep. (19)
Source: World Bank 2013c.




   THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls                 ▪ 13
     5. Need for Gender-Disaggregated
        Identity Data
     In 2012 alone, 288 million infants—4 out of every 10 babies delivered worldwide that year—were not
      registered with civil authorities, and globally 750 million children under the age of 16 lack formal
     identification (Dunning, Gelb, and Raghavan 2014). Too many people are still uncounted. Too much
     information is out of date, unreliable, or simply not available. Too many people cannot access and use
     the data they need to make informed decisions and hold others accountable.


     GLOBAL BIRTH REGISTRATION DATA
     What, then, do we know about the rates of registration of males and females, respectively? Using
     survey data from 145 countries, UNICEF (2013) found no significant difference between the birth reg-
     istration rates of boys and girls.10 However, few data, let alone globally comparable ones, are available.
     Drawing on the evidence provided by Data2X and extending it where possible, we find the same result
     for the 178 countries covered by the World Bank’s ID4D global data set (figure 1).

                                 Figure 1: Birth Registration by Gender and Region, 2014


                                    South asia

                           Sub-Saharan Africa

                     East Asia and the Pacific

                 Middle East and North Africa

            Latin America and the Caribbean

                                      CEE/CIS

                                                 0          20         40        60         80        100        120

                                                      BR Male      BR Female

      Source: Based on World Bank ID4D global data set, 2015;
      Note: BR = birth registration, in percent; CEE/CIS = Central and Eastern Europe and Commonwealth of Independent States.


     Do these regional data mask cases of individual countries where the birth-registration gap between
     boys and girls is large? Among the regions, there are no gender differences11 in the Europe and Central
     Asia region or in East Asia and the Pacific, except in Narau, Micronesia, where there the birth registration
     rate of girls is 6 percentage points higher than that of boys. Table 3 shows gender gaps for individual


     10	 UNICEF (2013) used data are from Multi Indicator Cluster Surveys, Demographic and Health Surveys, and other na-
     tional household surveys and vital registration systems, 2005–12
     11	 meaning variation from the regional percentages shown in figure 1




14
countries in each region: the largest is a 6 percentage point difference in favor of boys’ registration
rates in Ecuador. For comparison, the gap is only about 1 percent in Afghanistan and Pakistan.

             Table 3: Birth-Registration Gap between Boys and Girls, Selected Countries, 2014
                                 percentage point difference in favor of boys

Two percentage points                         Four percentage points            Six percentage points
Cameroon                                      Nepal                             Ecuador
Mauritania                                    Sudan
Niger                                         Yemen, Rep.
Source: Source: Based on World Bank ID4D global data set, 2015



INDIA’S BIRTH REGISTRATION DATA
Delving deeper into the gender-disaggregated birth-registration data and looking at India, as a case
study, one notes that India’s birth registration system is updated daily, showing birth registration rates
of males and females at the district level for all states. This is quite impressive for the country’s size
and the scale of undertakings. Table 4 shows the registration rates of females per 1,000 males for
all Indian states in two age groups: 0–4 years and 5–17 years. Among those 5- to 17-years-old, more
males than females are registered except in Nagaland. Among those 0- to 4- years-old, the number of
registered girls equals or exceeds the number of registered boys only in Manipur and Tripura.

                 Table 4: Females Registered in India, by Age Group and by State, 20134
                                            females per 1,000 males
 State                            Ages          Ages                   State           Ages         Ages
                                 0–4 yrs.     5–17 yrs.                               0–4 yrs.    5–17 yrs.
Andaman and Nicobar Islands        933           955        Madhya Pradesh                906       875
Andhra Pradesh                     978           948        Maharashtra                   880       870
Arunachal Pradesh                  828           981        Manipur                       1,165     967
Assam                              954           935        Meghalaya                     652       841
Bihar                              941           860        Mizoram                       875       979
Chandigarh                         900           836        Nagaland                      629       1,007
Chhattisgarh                       975           956        Odisha                        962       925
Delhi                              876           832        Puducherry                    947       957
Goa                                971           931        Punjab                        848       798
Gujarat                            824           816        Rajasthan                     770       768
Haryana                            839           796        Sikkim                        950       960
Himachal Pradesh                   881           882        Tamil Nadu                    967       946
Jammu and Kashmir                  811           888        Tripura                       1,000     955




   THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls             ▪ 15
                                     Table 4 (contd.): Females Registered in India, by Age Group and by State, 20134
                                                                                  females per 1,000 males
     State                                                              Ages            Ages                  State                    Ages        Ages
                                                                       0–4 yrs.       5–17 yrs.                                       0–4 yrs.   5–17 yrs.
     Jharkhand                                                           892            928          Uttar Pradesh                      840        821
     Karnataka                                                           981            931          Uttarakhand                        851        838
     Kerala                                                              967            965          West Bengal                        921        941
     Source: India National Statistics Bureau data (accessed June 11, 2015).


     Of course, it is not possible to calculate whether the lower female registration per 1,000 males truly
     represents a gender gap without knowing the denominators: the percentages of girls and boys in each
     population cohort. The gender gaps shown in table 4 can reflect (a) that there are more boys than girls
     in each population cohort, (b) that more boys than girls are registered, or (c) some combination of
     both. Overall, the 2011 India census showed that the female-to-male population ratio was 914 girls per
     1,000 boys, with the lowest female-to-male ratio in Haryana, at 861 girls per 1,000 boys. In Haryana,
     Rajasthan, and Punjab, where fewer than 800 girls of ages 5–17 years are registered per 1,000 boys,
     it suggests that, at least in those states, more girls than boys have not been registered.

     Lower female-to–male registration ratios (among those of ages 5–17 years) are not associated with
     poorer states. Figure 2 shows that some of the poorer Indian states have higher female registration
     rates than richer, more populous states. (The size of the bubble indicates the relative size of the states’
     population, including Rajasthan [labeled] and Uttar Pradesh [the largest bubble].)

                                                       Figure 2: Registered Females per 1,000 Males (Ages 5–17 Years)
                                                                  in Indian States against State Income (log)

                                                1050


                                                1000
                                                                            Nagaland
                 Female per 1000 males (5-17)




                                                 950
                                                       A&N Islands

                                                 900                        Jammu & Kashmir


                                                 850
                                                                Meghalaya

                                                 800


                                                 750
                                                                                                                  +(,(&-.()$

                                                 700
                                                    3.50        4.00           4.50           5.00         5.50                6.00     6.50
                                                                                          GDP(log)

       Source: India National Statistics Bureau, 2015.




16
6. Making Everyone Count: a Global Agenda


T   hat women often struggle—for lack of personal ID and associated legal documents—to assert their
    rights and claim entitlements to public benefits is increasingly seen as a development issue, mobi-
lizing international advocacy.

The World Bank’s ID4D Strategic Framework sets out to help key stakeholders share a common un-
derstanding of the benefits, challenges, risks, and proposed processes involved in rolling out the ID4D
agenda (World Bank 2015). It may also be instrumental in recognizing the urgent opportunities afford-
ed by the post-2015 global development discussions as well as the availability of new technologies to
accomplish the ID4D goals.

In addition, new partnerships are oriented toward using digital identity and data to address specific as-
pects of gender inequality. A prominent example is the Data2X initiative, which seeks to improve data
collection on women and gender and promote the use of data on women and girls to enhance policy.
Data2X partnerships and initiatives have involved collaboration with (a) the UN Economic Commission
for Africa (UNECA) and the Africa Program for Accelerated Improvement of CRVS (APAI-CRVS), to pro-
vide expertise on gender considerations of CRVS systems; and (b) the ILO, the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), and the World Bank on gender issues for employment.12

Another response is the U.S. Girls Count Act, which gives executive branch agencies, such as the State
Department and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), authority to support
programs in developing countries that promote birth certification and some form of national ID to en-
sure that all citizens, including boys and girls of all ages, are counted and that there is no discrimina-
tion against girls (UN Foundation 2015a, 2015b).13

With the importance and promise of identification systems today, the World Bank Group intends to
expand its ID4D agenda in support of national, regional and sub-regional ID efforts. Currently, in collab-
oration with other development partners, the World Bank Group is engaging with countries and regions
and providing technical and financial support in addition to promoting specific objectives including
gender equality.




12	 Data2X, named for the power women have to multiply progress in their societies, is an initiative to advance gender
equality and women’s empowerment by building partnerships to improve data collection and demonstrating how better
data on the status of women and girls can guide policy, leverage investments, and inform global development agendas. For
more information, see the Data2X website: http://data2x.org/.
13	 By June 2015, the Act had passed unanimously in the U.S. House of Representatives (UN Foundation 2015a).




    THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls                         ▪ 17
     7. Critical Considerations for Policy Design


     G    iven the gender-related legal disparities, including those outlined in this paper, women and girls
          are at particular risk if ID policies do not incorporate appropriate measures for privacy and person-
     al data protection. In addition, there are risks that inequalities and negative attitudes and practices
     toward women will be reproduced in the digital world; that new threats, such as cyber-bullying and
     harassment, will emerge; or that women will simply be left behind for lack of knowledge and digital
     literacy skills (UN Women, n.d.). Privacy legislation or policies are a key foundational element of digital
     society and—in combination with sexual harassment and domestic violence legislation—may serve to
     address some of the risks.

     An Overseas Development Institute literature review assessing digital programs and initiatives to en-
     hance the voice of women and girls furthers this point by noting that information and communica-
     tions technologies “are a mirror on society” (Cummings and O’Neil 2015). The review highlights cases
     in which, without protections and safeguards, digital technology can reinforce gender norms and in-
     crease the vulnerability of women and girls.

     Complex feedback loops related to ID4D and gender equality policies may also lead to unintended
     consequences and other counterintuitive results. In the Republic of Korea, for example, a 2012 adop-
     tion law that required the registration of all babies available for adoption led to a decrease in domestic
     adoptions and the doubling of infant abandonment (Economist 2015). Indeed, the mothers of babies
     born out wedlock are at times hesitant to register the babies, for fear that their family or potential em-
     ployers will have access to the records.




18
8. Conclusions


D   espite progress toward gender equality over the past ten years, social and economic barriers re-
    main to women’s and girls’ access to services and to full participation in their economies and
societies. Limited access has often been institutionalized when woman lack official personal ID doc-
umentation. The right and need for an ID extends to newborns and children, because the legal ID can
provide the basis for accessing health care and education. Even today, however, many developing
countries have institutional barriers to registration of children by mothers who had them outside of
wedlock or by unknown fathers.

Ineffective CRVS and ID systems can result in incomplete statistics and data on women and girls. As
a result, both country-level policy makers and the development community are denied an operational
view of women’s status and progress toward gender equality, because lack of registration or incom-
plete records result in an inaccurate baseline picture.

This background paper has identified a set of important research questions and areas for future in-
vestigation and analysis. There are several distinct domains where identity matters, each of which has
bearing on gender equality and women’s empowerment:

▪	   Gender equality in access to services: improving access to services and entitlements, such as
     social protection, for women and excluded groups

▪	   Gender justice: enhancing women’s voice and influence through citizenship and civil rights

▪	   Women’s economic empowerment: legal identity as the foundation for exercising property rights,
     access to financial services and entering into and enforcing contracts

▪	   Measuring progress on gender equality : Data and evidence to monitoring and influencing policies
     and programs for gender equality

To make progress on this agenda, more data must be produced—disaggregated by sex, ethnicity, ability,
and other axes of exclusion—that show how many people lack ID documents and birth certificates and
to ascertain the consequences for progress in gender equality in each of the domains above, recogniz-
ing that implications for the ID4D agenda may vary. It is hoped that as more data and evidence is being
produced and gathered, this work will constitute a solid basis for policy paper and recommendations.




     THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls   ▪ 19
     References

     Buvinic, Mayra, Rebecca Furst-Nichols, and Gayatri Koolwal. 2014. “Mapping Gender Data Maps.”
          Data2X report, United Nations Foundation, Washington, DC. http://data2x.org/wp-content/up-
          loads/2014/11/Data2X_MappingGenderDataGaps_FullReport.pdf.

     Carter Center. 	 n.d. “Voter Identification Requirements and Public International Law: An Examination
          of Africa and Latin America.” Research study, The Carter Center, Atlanta.

     Cummings, Clare, and Tam O’Neil. 2015. “Do Digital Information and Communications Technologies In-
         crease the Voice and Influence of Women and Girls? A Rapid Review of the Evidence.” Literature
         review, Overseas Development Institute, London. http://www.odi.org/publications/9499-wom-
         en-icts.

     Dahan, Mariana, and Alan Gelb, 2015 “The Role of Identification in the Post-2015 Development Agen-
         da.” Working Paper, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     Dahan, Mariana, and Randeep Sudan. 2015. “Digital IDs for Development: Access to Identity and Ser-
         vices for All.” Connections Note 13, Transport and ICT Global Practice, World Bank, Washington,
         DC.

     http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/pubdocs/publicdoc/2015/6/81571434481297691/1515784-Trans-
           portICT-Newsletter-Note13-v2.pdf.

     DBTL (Direct Benefit Transfer for Liquefied Petroleum Gas) Review Committee. 2014. “Review of the
         Direct Benefit Transfer for LPG Scheme.” Committee report submitted to the Secretary, Ministry
         of Petroleum & Natural Gas, Government of India, New Delhi.

     http://petroleum.nic.in/docs/dhande.pdf.

     Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, Leora Klapper, Dorothe Singer, and Peter Van Oudheusden. 2015. “The Global
         Findex Database 2014. Bringing the 2 Billion Unbanked into the Financial System.” Findex Note
         14/2, World Bank, Washington, DC.

     http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/Research/GlobalFindex/PDF/N2UnbankedV5.
           pdf.

     Dunning, C., A. Gelb, and S. Raghavan. 2014. “Birth Registration, Legal Identity, and the Post-2015
         Agenda.” Policy Paper 46, Center for Global Development, Washington, DC.

     Economist. 2015. “South Korea’s Orphans: Pity the Children.” May 23.

     http://www.economist.com/news/asia/21651873-once-among-biggest-sources-infants-interna -
           tional-adoption-south-korea-stemming?fsrc=scn/fb/wl/pe/st/pitythechildren.

     European Commission. 2012. “Electronic Identification, Signatures and Trust Services: Questions &
          Answers.” Press release MEMO/12/403, June 4.	

     Gelb, Alan, and Sneha Raghavan. Forthcoming. “The Spread of National Identification Programs.” Un-




20
     published working paper, Center for Global Development, Washington, DC.

ICF GHK. 2012. “Financial Inclusion and Literacy Outcomes of Cash Transfers through the Banking
     System in Pakistan: Survey and Beneficiary Assessment.” Report commissioned by the World
     Bank through the Rapid Social Response Trust Fund, prepared by ICF-GHK, London.

Malik, Tariq. 2014. “Technology in the Service of Development: The NADRA Story.” Essay, Center for
     Global Development, Washington, DC.

Melhem, Samia, Tandon, Nidhi. 2009. “Information and communication technologies for women’s
     socio-economic empowerment”, World Bank policy toolkit, Washington, DC.

NDI (National Democratic Institute). 2012. “Burkina Faso Campaign Brings 16,000 Women Closer to
     Voter Registration.” NDI featured story, October 19 (updated October 23). https://www.ndi.org/
     burkina-faso-birth-certificates.

———. 2014. “Burkina Faso: Enhancing the Ability of Women Leaders to Engage Effectively in Pro-Poor
    Democratic Governance 2009–2013.” Final report, NDI, Washington, DC.

Nevitte, N., J. Cruz, and M. Estok. 2008. “Barriers to Electoral Participation in Guatemala: Diagnostic
      of 4 Municipalities.” Study report in conjunction with Mirador Electoral (Electoral Watch) 2007,
      Latin American Faculty of Social Sciences (FLACSO)-Guatemala, Guatemala City. https://www.
      ndi.org/files/2328_gt_report_elec_061908.pdf.

OPM (Oxford Policy Management). 2014. “Benazir Income Support Program: First Follow-Up Impact
    Evaluation Report.” Draft report, commissioned by the Government of Pakistan, Oxford Policy
    Management, Oxford, U.K.

Stiglitz. 2012. “The Price of Inequality: How Today’s Divided Society Endangers Our Future”, New York,
       2012.

Sudan, Randeep. 2013. “Using Digital Identities to Fight Poverty.” Information and Communications
    for Development (IC4D) Blog, World Bank, May 28. http://blogs.worldbank.org/ic4d/using-digi-
    tal-identities-fight-poverty.

UN (United Nations). 2000. “United Nations Millennium Declaration.” Resolution A/res/55/2, adopted
     by the UN General Assembly, New York. September 8.

———. 2013. “A New Global Partnership: Eradicate Poverty and Transform Economies through Sustain-
    able Development” Report of the High-Level Panel of Eminent Persons on the Post-2015 Devel-
    opment Agenda, UN, New York. http://www.post2015hlp.org/the-report/.

UN (United Nations) Foundation. 2015a. “Director of the United Nations Foundation’s Girl Up Cam-
     paign Hails Congressional Passage of the Girls Count Act as a Win for Adolescent Girls Every-
     where.” Press release, June 2.

———. 2015b. “Girls Count Act of 2015: S.802.” Girl Up brief, UN Foundation, Washington, DC. https://
    girlup.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/04/Girls-Count-Act-2015_Bill-Brief.pdf.

UN Women (United Nations Entity for Gender Equality and the Empowerment of Women). 2014. “Mille-
    nium Development Goals Gender Chart.” Special edition for the 58th session of the Commission
    on the Status of Women, March 10–21, New York.




   THE IDENTIFICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT (ID4D) AGENDA: Its Potential for Empowering Women and Girls     ▪ 21
     http://www.unwomen.org/~/media/7107C11333C046D8BBD0BE6BA5FD251A.ashx

     ———. n.d. “Gender and ICT – In Brief.” Fact sheet, UN Women, New York.

     UNESCO (United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization). 2014. “Teaching and
         Learning: Achieving Quality for All: Gender Summary.” Education for All Global Monitoring Report
         2013/4, UNESCO, Paris.

     UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 2013. “Every Child’s Birth Right: Inequities and Trends in
         Birth Registration.” Report of the Data and Analytics Section, Division of Policy and Strategy,
         UNICEF, New York.

     Wang, Tova. 2013. “Challenges to Women in the Voter Registration Process.” Case study, ACE Electoral
         Knowledge Network. http://aceproject.org/ace-en/focus/women-and-voter-registration/oneP-
         age.

     World Bank. 2011. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development. Washington,
          DC: World Bank.

     ———. 2013a. “Estonia 2013.” Data report, Women, Business and the Law database, World Bank,
         Washington, DC. http://wbl.worldbank.org/data/exploreeconomies/estonia/2013.

     ———. 2013b. Inclusion Matters: The Foundation for Shared Prosperity. New Frontiers of Social Policy
         Series. Washington, DC: World Bank.

     ———. 2013c. Women, Business and the Law 2014: Removing Restrictions to Enhance Gender Equal-
         ity. London: Bloomsbury.

     ———. 2014. “Gender at Work: A Companion to the World Development Report on Jobs.” Report, World
         Bank, Washington, DC.

     ———. Forthcoming “Identification for Development (ID4D) Strategic Framework.” Framework docu-
         ment, ID4D Working Group, World Bank, Washington, DC.




22
