                                                                                                                                 99637
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                                                                             THE WATER GLOBAL PRACTICE

                                                                 water-secure
                                                                aA                    forALL
                                                                                worldFOR
                                                                   WATER-SECURE WORLD     all
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               THE CHALLENGE
                               Water is at the center of economic and social development. It nurtures and sustains
                               livelihoods; it irrigates crops; it helps power industries and cities; and it preserves
                               the very ecosystems humans depend upon. The world will not be able to tackle the
                               challenges of the 21st century without improving management of water resources
                               and ensuring that people have access to reliable water and sanitation services.
                               Water insecurity can have devastating effects on economies and jeopardize the
                               well-being of entire populations, especially the poorest and most vulnerable. That is
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               why helping countries achieve water security for all lies at the core of the World Bank
                               Group’s twin goals: to eliminate extreme poverty by 2030 and boost shared prosperity
                               for the poorest 40 percent.


                               Climate change will alter hydrological cycles
                               and make water more unpredictable. A World
                               Bank report suggests that in a 4°Celsius warmer                2.4 billion people without
                               world, water stress will increase in areas around
                                                                                              improved sanitation
                               the world. The roughly 1 billion people living in
                               monsoonal basins and the 500 million people                    663 million people lack access to an
                               living in deltas are especially vulnerable.                    improved source of drinking water
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               Poorer countries, which contributed least to the
                               problem, will be most affected.                                by 2035, water needs to produce
                                                                                              energy will increase by 85%
                               THE WORLD BANK GROUP’S RESPONSE
                                                                                              70% of freshwater with-
                               The World Bank Group (WBG) has been addressing                 drawals used for irrigation
                               water issues globally with large-scale finance
                               and technical assistance to countries. To meet                 by 2025, 1.8 billion people will live in
                               the growing demand for investment financing                    areas with absolute water scarcity


                                   worldbank.org/water        WorldBankWater@worldbank.org        @WorldBankWater        blogs.worldbank.org/water
                driven by the best knowledge available, the WBG created a single, integrated Water
                Global Practice. Launched in 2014, the Global Practice brings together financing,
                implementation, and knowledge in one platform. By combining the Bank’s global
                knowledge with country investments, this model generates more firepower for
                transformational solutions to help countries grow sustainably into the 21st century.


                The WBG’s strategy places the poor and most vulnerable people at the center of its work.
                Efforts aim to ensure basic access to sustainable water and sanitation services.
                They also ensure that management of water resources addresses water considerations
                in other sectors such as agriculture, energy, disaster risk management, and health.
                Finally, they place water at the center of adaptation strategies to help countries cope with
                the effects of climate change and build a more resilient future for generations to come.


                Robust solutions to complex water issues incorporate cutting-edge knowledge and innovation.
                New knowledge products that draw on the WBG’s global experiences, as well as partner
                expertise are filling global knowledge gaps and transforming the design of water
                investment projects to deliver results. Multi-year, programmatic engagements in strategic
                areas are designed to make dramatic economic improvements in the long term and
                improve the livelihoods of millions of the world’s poorest people.


                A GROWING PORTFOLIO
                The Bank’s Water Global Practice is currently responsible for a portfolio of approximately
                US$23 billion in lending through more than 180 projects and about 300 knowledge products.
                The largest programs currently are in service delivery (urban and rural water
                supply and sanitation, as well as irrigation), with a growing portfolio in water
                resources management. In 2011-2014, WBG activities helped to provide access for
                36.7 million people to improved water sources, and 10 million people to improved
                sanitation services.


                OUR GLOBAL PRESENCE
                The WBG’s Water Global Practice houses more than 340 water professionals who
                serve client countries from 58 different locations globally. This highly-skilled,
                diverse workforce brings many years of expertise across all water sub-sectors such as
                water resources management, urban and rural water supply and sanitation,
                irrigation and agriculture, flood and drought management, groundwater management,
                water economics, and several others.



worldbank.org/water        WorldBankWater@worldbank.org        @WorldBankWater          blogs.worldbank.org/water
