                                  99646 V2


Economic Monitoring Report

to the Ad Hoc Liaison Committee
September 30, 2015




The World Bank

www.worldbank.org/ps




                       i
     This report was prepared by a team consisting of Orhan Niksic, Senior Economist and Nur Nasser
     Eddin, Economist (GMFDR) as well as Dana Almubaied (MNC04). Maha Muhammad Bali and Fifi
     Z. Antar (MNCGZ) provided administrative support.



Table of Contents
I.        Executive Summary .............................................................................................................................. 1
II.          Recent Developments ...................................................................................................................... 3
     a.      Economic Growth ............................................................................................................................. 3
     b.      Public Finance .................................................................................................................................. 5
     c.      Money and Banking .......................................................................................................................... 9
III.         State building through better public expenditures – a reform agenda for the PA ................. 10
     a.      Revenue Reforms ............................................................................................................................. 11
     b.      Oversized wage bill ......................................................................................................................... 12
     c.      Getting more value for money in the health sector ......................................................................... 14
     d.      A pension system in need of urgent reform ..................................................................................... 16
     e.      Inadequate local government revenues and indirect costs of municipal coping mechanisms ........ 18
     f.      Low level of public investments and an underdeveloped public investment management system .. 18
Annex I: An overview of disbursement and implementation of pledges made at the Cairo Conference on
Palestine “Reconstructing Gaza”, Cairo 12th October, 2014 ..................................................................... 20


Table of Figures
Figure 1: Real GDP Growth, 1995-Q1 2015 ................................................................................................ 4
Figure 2: Following a decline since 2010, PA debt increased again in 2015 after the suspension of
clearance revenue while credit to PA employees has been on the rise all along ........................................ 10
Figure 3: Average Public Salary (as a multiple of GDP per capita) in the Palestinian territories compared
to MENA and most other regions ............................................................................................................... 13
Figure 4: MOH wage bill, Palestinian territories, 2006-2012 ..................................................................... 14
Figure 5: Trends in Medical Referrals, Palestinian territories, 2000-2013 ................................................. 15
Figure 6: Pension Expenditure and % of Elderly Population ..................................................................... 17
Figure 7: Pension Expenditures and % of Beneficiaries over total Population .......................................... 17
Figure 8: Total Pledges announced at Cairo Conference (in million) …………………...……………….21
Figure 9: Support to Gaza Classification (in million……………………………………………………...21
Figure 10: Expected flow of support to Gaza ………………………………………………………….…22
Figure 11: Actual disbursements of support to Gaza announced at Cairo Conference by category (in
million) ……………………………………………………………………………………………………23
Figure 12: Funding received by UNRWA as part of Cairo Conference Pledges (in million) …………....23
Figure 13: Financing of DNA and Recovery Framework (in million)…………………………………....25

                                                                                ii
       I.       Executive Summary


1. Palestinians are getting poorer on average for the third year in a row. As evidenced in previous
   World Bank reports, the competitiveness of the Palestinian economy has been progressively eroding
   since the signing of the Oslo accords, in particular its industry and agriculture. Even though donor aid
   had increased government-funded services and fueled consumption-driven growth during 2007 to 2011,
   this growth model has proved unsustainable. Donor support has significantly declined in recent years
   and, in any case, aid cannot sustainably make up for inadequate private investment. Thus, growth has
   started to slow since 2012 and the Palestinian economy contracted in 2014 following the Gaza war. In
   early 2015, GDP was still lower than it was a year ago. Due to population growth, real GDP per capita
   has been shrinking since 2013. Unemployment remains high, particularly amongst Gaza’s youth where
   it exceeds 60 percent, and 25 percent of Palestinians currently live in poverty. Against the backdrop of
   weak economic growth, reduced donor aid, and temporary suspension of revenue payments by the
   Government of Israel (GoI), the Palestinian Authority’s reform efforts have not been able to prevent
   another year with a financing gap. The persistence of this situation could potentially lead to political
   and social unrest. In short, the status quo is not sustainable and downside risks of further conflict and
   social unrest are high.

2. Until there is a permanent peace agreement, the Palestinian economy will continue to perform
   below its potential. Political instability constitutes a significant risk to private investors and is a key
   reason why private investment levels have remained very low for many years. If the status quo persists,
   private investment will not pick up and the private sector, which ought to be the main engine of
   sustainable growth, will continue to function far below its potential. The internal divide between the
   West Bank and Gaza also creates difficulties for private investors that have to deal with two separate
   regulatory frameworks and tax systems in the West Bank and in Gaza. However, the lack of political
   horizon should not lead the parties to complacency. Even before a final peace deal, there are many
   actions that can be taken that would improve socio-economic development for Palestinians. These
   actions are essential, not just for economic development, but also for peace, since the international
   evidence is clear that economic development is conducive to peace.

3. Even without a final peace deal, there is substantial upside potential in the Palestinian economy
   if existing agreements are implemented and restrictions lifted. For example, the Oslo agreement
   foresaw a gradual transfer of Area C to Palestinian control, but this has not happened. World Bank
   estimates show that granting Palestinian businesses access to economic activity in Area C (excluding
   the areas subject to final status negotiations) would boost the Palestinian economy by about a third and
   lower the PA’s deficit by half. Similarly, the regular and predictable transfer of revenues collected by
   the GoI on behalf of the PA, and close cooperation with the PA to minimize tax leakages are critical to
   ensure fiscal predictability. On movement and access restrictions1, the recent statements by Israeli
   officials about the importance of Palestinian economic development are most welcome if followed up
   by action and implementation of existing agreements. Finally, full implementation of the Paris protocol
   and expansion of the joint work between Israeli and Palestinian public institutions across a number of
   areas would help create a more predictable business and fiscal environment. The blockade on Gaza
   imposed by countries neighboring the Strip needs to be lifted in a way that protects legitimate security
   concerns of those countries. Israeli measures to let more goods leave Gaza are welcome and they have
   expanded since the last AHLC meeting, but more needs to be done: only six percent of what left Gaza
   prior to the blockade is currently being allowed out. In general, granting Palestinians access to
   production inputs and external markets and enabling unimpeded movement of goods, labor and capital,

1
    According to the GoI, the restrictions are imposed to protect the security of Israeli citizens.

                                                              1
      as stipulated in the Paris protocol, would drastically improve growth prospects of the Palestinian
      economy.

4. Reforms by the PA of its revenues and expenditures ought to continue to improve fiscal
   sustainability and effective service delivery, even under the current political scenario. The PA has
   made very good progress in reducing its fiscal deficit and it has recently launched some important
   reform initiatives in this area. Through continued efforts to address key sources of inefficiency and
   ineffectiveness, the PA could do a great deal to avert fiscal crises and stop financing its budgets by
   accumulating arrears to the private sector. Not only can the PA put its finances on a more sustainable
   footing through reforms, but it can also create adequate fiscal space to increase the currently very low
   level of investment in public infrastructure and to enhance service delivery. A top priority should be
   the reduction of the wage bill, which could lead to large savings of up to 5 percentage points of GDP,
   but there is also substantial room for cost savings to be made on other categories of expenditures as
   well as for increasing tax revenues beyond what has already been done. There is also potential to
   substantially increase tax collection in Gaza once the PA takes charge of tax collection efforts there.
   Within some sectors, overall expenditures are not very high compared to other countries, but access to
   and the quality of those public services are significantly below what they could be if certain
   expenditures were better prioritized and more efficiently managed. For instance, the PA has recently
   made very good progress in reforming the health referral process, but significant inefficiencies related
   to public health spending remain; the reduction of these inefficiencies could generate savings to be used
   to further reduce the deficit or alternatively to invest them in programs that will improve the quality of
   public health services. As detailed in the body of this report, similar issues exist in a number of other
   areas of expenditure management and intensified reform efforts are urgently called for to address them.

5. Until private investment shoots up, donors need to increase aid provided to the PA, as the
   financing gap in the PA’s budget cannot be closed through reforms alone. Despite having managed
   to reduce the budget deficit, the PA still has a large financing gap in its 2015 budget and it is likely to
   continue accumulating arrears to the private sector. While further reform efforts should be made by the
   PA to reduce the 2015 budget deficit in line with the IMF recommendations, donors are also called
   upon to augment their 2015 budget support as it would be unrealistic to expect that the gap can be
   closed through reforms alone. Even if the PA were able to fully close the financing gap in the 2015
   budget, such sharp fiscal consolidation would be damaging to growth. Thus, fiscal consolidation has
   to happen gradually over a period of 2-3 years. Then, donors should be able to channel a larger share
   of their funds towards public investments in infrastructure, which are needed both to catalyze private
   investment and to improve the quality of public services. Furthermore, the financing of socioeconomic
   recovery in Gaza, following last year’s war, almost entirely depends on donor aid.

6. On a final note, slow donor aid disbursements and restrictions on imports are delaying the Gaza
   reconstruction process and both issues should be urgently dealt with. Out of the USD3.5 billion of
   pledges made at the Cairo conference for Gaza reconstruction, USD1.23 billion has so far been
   disbursed, which puts the disbursement ratio at 35 percent. Funds already disbursed are USD881
   million less than what was originally planned, mainly because payments by the largest donors remain
   lower than anticipated. The majority of disbursements made so far supported UNRWA activities, while
   less than 20 percent was used to finance interventions outlined by the Damage and Needs Assessment.
   Construction material imported into Gaza continues to be lower than what is needed, even though it
   has recently increased. Between August 2014 and August 2015, 1.6 million tons of construction
   material entered Gaza, which represents 6.7 percent of the total need.2 There has also been a delay in
   finalizing the residential stream of the Gaza Reconstruction Mechanism (GRM), which means that


2
    The amount of materials that entered Gaza through August 2015 is based on GoI estimates.

                                                          2
    totally destroyed homes are still not rebuilt, a year after the war ended, even though there has been good
    progress on partially destroyed homes.

7. The main body of the report is organized in two chapters and an annex. Chapter II focuses on the
   assessment of recent macroeconomic and fiscal developments in the Palestinian territories and the
   Palestinian Authority's (PA) related policies and actions. It also provides a near term macroeconomic
   and fiscal outlook. Chapter III draws on the just-completed public expenditure review providing
   insights into key issues related to public expenditure management as well as specific policy
   recommendations for reducing the PA's fiscal deficits and increasing the efficiency and efficacy of
   public spending. Finally, an annex summarizes the status of donor pledges from the Cairo conference
   on Gaza reconstruction.


    II.      Recent Developments

          a. Economic Growth


8. The economy of the Palestinian territories is unsustainable under the current paradigm. Due to
   long lasting restrictions on movement, access and trade, private sector activity has been severely
   constrained and private investment levels are amongst the lowest in the world. The situation is even
   more difficult in Gaza where the blockade has significantly eroded the competitiveness of private
   businesses. Even though the economy witnessed strong growth between 2007 and 2011 due to large
   amounts of aid, the trend started to wane in 2012 due to a sharp drop in budget support. Aid levels
   increased again in 2013, but growth continued to decline, providing further evidence that this growth
   model has exhausted its potential. Therefore, it is imperative that, until a final peace agreement is
   reached, serious efforts are made to look at medium term measures that can reverse current negative
   trends and put the Palestinian economy on a path to sustainable growth.

9. The Palestinian economy has been in recession since 2014. The economy of the Palestinian territories
   contracted in 2014 mainly as a result of the war in Gaza which had a devastating impact on economic
   activity, infrastructure and the livelihood of Palestinians living there. The recovery to the pre-recession
   economic output level in Gaza is still underway, and according to the Palestine Central Bureau of
   Statistics (PCBS), real GDP for the Palestinian territories is 0.8 percent lower in the first quarter of the
   year compared to the same period in 2014.

10. Gaza’s economy continues to suffer from the impact of the 2014 war, but a slow process of
    recovery has started. A comparison of figures for the first quarter of 2015 with those for the same
    period in 2014 indicates that year-on-year growth in Gaza amounted to minus 8 percent. However, the
    economy of Gaza grew by about 7 percent in the first quarter of 2015 compared to the fourth quarter
    of 2014, so some recovery is underway. This was mainly driven by a significant rebound in construction
    activity which has grown by more than 75 percent (from a very low base) since the war ended. As
    expected, activity in the wholesale and retail trade sectors also expanded by 22 percent quarter-on-
    quarter. The productive sectors including agriculture and manufacturing have also started to show signs
    of recovery albeit at a much slower rate. Notably, the GoI has been allowing exports of certain products
    from Gaza to the West Bank and some agricultural produce to Israel. On a monthly basis, Gaza exports
    are now at 6 percent of what they used to be before the blockade was imposed in 2007. Businesses in
    Gaza report that even though export restrictions have been relaxed, they are hesitant to invest in capacity
    expansion to reach export markets because of the extremely uncertain political outlook and the related
    likelihood of another war or restrictions being re-imposed.

                                                      3
                                 Figure 1: Real GDP Growth, 1995-Q1 2015

                          30

                          20

                          10
                     %     0




                                 2000
                                 1995
                                 1996
                                 1997
                                 1998
                                 1999

                                 2001
                                 2002
                                 2003
                                 2004
                                 2005
                                 2006
                                 2007
                                 2008
                                 2009
                                 2010
                                 2011
                                 2012
                                 2013
                                 2014
                                2015*
                          -10

                          -20

                                    Palestinian territories       West Bank           Gaza

                                    Source: Palestine Central Bureau of Statistics.
                                       * Data for 2015 is for the first quarter.



11. Estimates indicate that West Bank GDP expanded by 1.8 percent in the first quarter of 2015
    despite a liquidity squeeze that was caused by the GoI’s decision to suspend the transfer of taxes
    it collects on behalf of the PA. However, growth was the result of a statistical adjustment rather than
    an expansion in economic activity as gross value added actually contracted by 2 percent, while there
    was a strong increase in recorded import taxes as a result of a shift in the structure of imports. 3 The
    sectors that were most affected by the liquidity squeeze were manufacturing and construction which
    contracted by 11 and 8 percent, respectively, in the first quarter of 2015 compared to the same period
    in the previous year. Output of the agriculture sector also dropped by 2 percent year-on-year. Wholesale
    and retail trade was also negatively affected by the liquidity strain.

12. The unemployment rate has recently been declining in both Gaza and the West Bank, but a
    quarter of the Palestinian labor force is still unemployed.4 In Gaza, the unemployment rate
    skyrocketed to more than 47 percent during the 2014 war. It has, however, been declining since and
    latest available data shows that it dropped to 42 percent in the first half of 2015 as the reconstruction
    process started to slowly pick up and private firms have been rebuilding their capacity. Unemployment
    in the West Bank has also slightly declined from an average of 18 percent in 2014 to 16 percent in the
    first half of 2015. Notably, the drop in unemployment in the West Bank could be explained by the
    increase in the number of West Bank laborers in Israel which grew by 7 percent reaching 112,200 in
    the second quarter of 2015.

13. Poverty in the Palestinian territories reached 25 percent in 2014.5 The overall rate, however, masks
    wide regional divergence. Poverty in Gaza was 39 percent which is almost 2.5 times higher than that
    in the West Bank at 16 percent in 2014. And, according to the United Nation’s Relief and Works
    Agency (UNRWA), almost 80 percent of Gaza’s population is currently aid dependent.

14. Inflation in the Palestinian territories remains low and stable, but with significant regional
    differences. Between January and August 2015, it averaged 1.4 percent. In the West Bank, it was 0.9

3
  With the closure of illegal trade tunnels between Egypt and Gaza, legal imports into Gaza have increased
substantially and so has the amount of taxes on imports. Furthermore, imports from third countries into the Palestinian
territories have also been growing. This growth in taxes (commitment basis) was recorded in the national accounts
data (production approach), resulting in apparent GDP growth.
4
  Based on PCBS Labor Force Survey data.
5
  Based on latest available preliminary estimates by the Bank.

                                                              4
      percent while it was higher in Gaza at 1.8 percent. Inflation in Gaza started to rise following the
      crackdown of the tunnels with Egypt in the summer of 2013, as access to cheaper Egyptian fuel,
      construction material and other commercial goods significantly deteriorated.

15. During the first quarter of 2015 the Palestinian trade deficit declined by 6 percent relative to the
    same period in 2014, but at 38 percent of GDP it remains extraordinarily high.6 The decline was
    driven by a four percent drop in imports during the first quarter of 2015 (year-on-year), and a 3 percent
    increase in exports. The drop in imports can be explained by a decrease in imports from Israel (which
    represent 58 percent of total imports) by 24 percent. The drop in imports from Israel is the result of
    reduced economic activity, but also a growing trend among Palestinian consumers to substitute products
    imported from Israel by those from other countries, as a result of which non-Israeli imports were up 22
    percent. Despite the recent increase, the size of exports in the economy has remained very low
    averaging about 15 percent in recent years due to the low productive capacity of agriculture and industry
    that is held back by the Israeli restrictions. As a result of the reduction in the trade deficit, the current
    account deficit is estimated to have shrunk by as much as 18 percent.

16. The Palestinian economy is expected to slightly recover throughout the remainder of the year
    while real per capita income will continue to shrink. The overall growth rate in the Palestinian
    territories is projected at 2.9 percent in 2015. The West Bank economy is expected to grow by 1.8
    percent, which implies a reduction in real GDP per capita due to population growth of about 3 percent.
    This projection for sluggish growth assumes that the GoI will continue making stable monthly transfers
    of clearance revenues. It also takes into consideration a reduction in budget support to the PA and weak
    confidence due to high political uncertainty and also assumes no major changes in the overall restriction
    system in the West Bank. The pace of the reconstruction process in Gaza is expected to be slower than
    originally anticipated due to lower than needed aid, import restrictions on building materials and
    coordination issues within the PA. (See Annex 1 for further details on Gaza reconstruction). As a result,
    real GDP growth projections for Gaza have been revised downwards to 6.5 percent in 2015.7

           b. Public Finance


17. Despite the PA’s commendable efforts in managing the fiscal crisis resulting from the withholding
    of clearance revenues in early 2015, the fiscal situation remains precarious and expenditure
    growth is a concern. The Government of Israel (GoI) withheld clearance revenues from December
    2014 until April 2015, leaving the PA without 70 percent of its revenues. Consequently, the PA resorted
    to severe cash rationing only paying partial salaries while delaying most other expenditures and
    accumulating large arrears to the private sector and the pension fund and increasing its borrowing from
    local banks. Despite the sharp liquidity squeeze during the first four months of the year, public service
    delivery was well maintained and the PA’s efforts in managing the fiscal crisis were successful.
    However, the fiscal situation remains difficult even after the resumption of clearance revenues due to
    significant expenditure growth, particularly on transfers and goods and services.

      2015 Budget

18. In June, the PA passed the 2015 baseline budget with a financing gap of USD0.4 billion. Budget
    finalization was delayed due to uncertainty caused by the suspension of clearance revenues and the PA
    initially passed an emergency budget in March 2015. After the resumption of clearance revenues in
    April, the PA approved the 2015 regular budget which was signed by the president on June 30. The

6
    Preliminary data published by PCBS.
7
    GDP projections for 2015 were produced by the IMF.

                                                         5
  baseline budget assumes that total net revenues will increase by 9 percent while expenditure growth
  will be limited to about 3.6 percent. Particularly, the wage bill is expected to grow by 3.8 percent to
  account for an annual increase of 1.25 percent, a Cost of Living Allowance (CoLA) of 2 percent in
  addition to a 5 percent raise for teachers with the enforcement of a zero net hiring policy. However, the
  PA is taking additional measures and it aims to cap wage bill growth at three percent. Spending on
  goods and services is expected to decline by 4.6 percent, whereas transfers are expected to increase by
  17.8 percent due to higher social spending in Gaza following the 2014 war. Notably, the PA plans to
  reduce net lending by 21.7 percent in 2015. Based on the above, the recurrent deficit is projected to
  decrease by 7 percent year-on-year and amount to USD1.19 billion. The overall deficit, however is
  expected to be much higher at USD2.39 billion due to large development spending for Gaza
  reconstruction. The budget projects total aid in 2015 to be USD1.99 billion (USD838 million in budget
  support and USD1.15 billion in development spending) leading to a financing gap of about USD0.4
  billion. Notably, the budget assumes that the PA’s total stock of arrears will be reduced by USD3 14
  million in 2015 and that net domestic borrowing will increase by the same amount.

        Table 1: Palestinian territories / Central Government Fiscal Operations 2012-2015
                                                               2012    2013      2014    2015 Budget      2015 F

        Public finances (commitment basis)                                     In USD million
           Total net revenues                                  2072    2312      2744              2861    2821
           Recurrent expenditures and net lending              3525    3694      4068              4050    4109
                Wage expenditure                               1767    1919      2050              2045   2045*
                Non-wage expenditure                           1481    1565      1732              1790    1790
                Net lending                                     278     211       286               215     274

           Recurrent balance                                  -1453   -1382     -1324             -1189   -1288

            Development expenditures                            243     187       263              1204     250

            Overall balance (before external support)         -1696   -1569     -1587             -2393   -1538

        Financing                                              1696    1569      1587              2393    1538
          External Financing                                    930    1362      1230              1990    1144
           Budgetary support                                    774    1255      1027               838     894
           Development financing                                156     106       203              1152     250
        Residual/Financing gap after external financing         766     207       356               403     394

          Domestic Financing                                    813     221       352                 0     326
           Net domestic bank financing                          127    -248      -131               314     -85
           Domestic arrears                                     686     465       493              -314     411
           Other                                                  0       4       -10                 0       0
         Residual/Financing gap after total financing           -47     -14         4               403      68

        Public finances (commitment basis)                                    In percent of GDP
           Total net revenues                                  18.4    18.6        21.5            22.1     21.7
           Recurrent expenditures and net lending              31.4    29.7        31.9            31.2     31.7
                Wage expenditure                               15.7    15.5        16.1            15.8     15.8
                Non-wage expenditure                           13.2    12.6        13.6            13.8     13.8
                Net lending                                     2.5     1.7         2.2             1.7      2.1
           Recurrent balance (before external support)        -12.9   -11.1       -10.4            -9.2     -9.9
           Overall balance (before external support)          -15.1   -12.6       -12.5           -18.4    -11.9
           External budgetary support                           6.9    10.1         8.1             6.9      6.7
           Domestic arrears                                     6.1     3.7         3.9            -2.4      3.2

        Memorandum item:
          Nominal GDP (in USD million)                        11235   12419     12744             12974   12974

                                    Source: MoF, IMF and World Bank.
Note: The PA has recently taken some measures that aim to keep wage bill growth below budget. If implemented,
                          the 2015 wage bill could end up lower than forecasted here.



                                                          6
19. Bank staff projections are in line with the PA’s regarding the size of the financing gap, b ut not
    its contributors. Bank staff project the recurrent deficit to be USD1.29 billion which is larger than
    what is in the PA’s budget due to higher than expected expenditure, particularly on net lending.8
    Compared to the PA’s projections, staff foresees development spending in 2015 to be significantly
    lower due to the slow pace of the reconstruction process in Gaza (See Annex 1 for further details). This
    is expected to lead to an overall deficit that is smaller than what is in the PA’s budget , amounting to
    USD1.54 billion. Total aid to the PA’s treasury is expected to be USD1.1 billion, leading to a financing
    gap of USD0.4 billion. In contrast to the budget, which assumes a substantial reduction in the stock of
    arrears, and based on the trend during the first eight months of the year, it is expected that the stock of
    arrears to the private sector and the pension fund will grow during 2015 in order for the PA to close the
    financing gap. The Bank assesses that additional measures will be needed to boost revenues and control
    expenditures, but more donor aid is also urgently needed to buffer the negative impact of drastic fiscal
    consolidation on the economy.

    Fiscal performance January – August 20159

20. After a sluggish performance earlier in the year, domestic tax revenues finally picked up in July
    and August due to collection of tax arrears. VAT liabilities owed by some of the big corporations
    were collected in July and August causing domestic tax revenues for the first eight months of 2015 to
    grow by 11 percent year-on year. Some tax items, however, performed below previous year’s levels.
    For instance, receipts from excise on tobacco between January and August 2015 dropped by 24 percent
    year-on-year as customers have been shifting to imported cigarettes and rolled tobacco sold in the
    informal market due to the elimination of the tobacco subsidy. Collections from property tax also
    declined by 4 percent. The contraction in economic activity has also affected consumer spending and
    hence, tax collection.10 The Ministry of Finance (MoF) has so far in 2015 added 5,465 new taxpayers
    to its tax base and collections from income tax have increased by 2 percent through August, year-on-
    year. The PA’s decision to reduce the income tax rate from 20 to 15 percent and also to widen the
    exempted bracket from NIS30 thousand to NIS36 thousand per year, effective since May 2015, has
    negatively affected income tax collections. Efforts so far conducted by the MoF to strengthen revenue
    performance and increase the number of taxpayers are commendable, and more needs to be done.
    Ongoing efforts to widen the tax base should be carried out in a more targeted manner that focuses on
    increasing the number of files in the Large Taxpayers Unit (LTU). The MoF should also accelerate its
    efforts to strengthen tax enforcement and impose strict financial penalties on evaders. In addition to the
    West Bank, efforts to enhance revenue collection from Gaza will need to be pursued once governance
    arrangements over the territory are clarified.

21. Despite being withheld earlier in the year, clearance revenues performed well between January
    and August 2015. The GoI withheld clearance revenues for the months of December 2014, January,
    February and March 2015 and released them on April 20 after making an extraordinary deduction of
    NIS237 million to clear electricity debt the GoI claims is owed by the PA, on top of the usual monthly
    deductions11. Since then, the GoI has resumed the monthly transfer of these revenues, and between


8
   Recent statements by the Ministry of Finance officials corroborate the World Bank’s higher projection for
expenditures on net lending.
9
  Fiscal data for August is preliminary and may be revised.
10
   National account statistics produced by the PCBS show a growth in consumption, however, this growth does not
square with a drop in imports—a close proxy for consumption—nor with the output of specific economic sectors on
the production side so we assume that there is an error in the estimate of consumption by the PCBS.
11
   The PA contests the unilateral deductions by the GoI and states that the majority of the electricity debt is owed by
the Jerusalem District Electricity Company (JDECO) which is privately owned, and hence the debt should not be
deducted from public funds. Israel, however, rejects the PA’s claims.

                                                          7
     January and August 2015 they grew by 8 percent year-on-year on a commitment basis and exceeded
     their prorated budget target. This growth was mainly driven by a 17 percent (year-on-year) increase in
     customs, which are only collected on non-Israeli imports according to the Paris protocol. Another factor
     that contributed to the growth of clearance revenues is an 8 percent increase in collections from
     petroleum excise mainly due to larger imports of Israeli fuel into Gaza. Notably, it is not entirely clear
     what part of clearance revenue growth is due to actual increase in imports from third countries and what
     is due to the PA’s efforts in combating under invoicing through tax cooperation and information sharing
     with the GoI, which results in higher export values recorded by the authorities.

22. Expenditure growth in the first eight months of 2015 was high amounting to 6 percent and it was
    mainly driven by an increase in transfers which grew by 14 percent. The main reason behind the
    growth in transfers is the increase in social spending provided to poor households through the National
    Cash Transfer Program (NCTP), particularly in Gaza. The humanitarian situation in Gaza following
    the 2014 war got increasingly acute and the need for social assistance grew. As a result, 6809 new Gaza
    beneficiaries were added to the NCTP in 2015.

23. According to the MoF, spending on the use of goods and services also increased by 11 percent
    between January and August 2015. The majority of the increase in spending was at the Ministry of
    Health (MoH) due to an increase in the cost of medical referrals outside the public system. The MoH
    has been trying to control the issue of referral costs and given that the highest unit cost for referral cases
    is charged by Israeli hospitals, recent efforts have focused on reducing the cost of referrals to Israel 12.
    In fact, the MoH has successfully managed to reduce the cost of this category of referrals by 19 percent.
    Nevertheless, the overall cost of referrals continues rise due to an increase in the number and cost of
    cases referred to Palestinian hospitals in the West Bank and East Jerusalem. Hence, the urgent need for
    a comprehensive strategy that sets clear guidelines and procedures for the overall referral process. In
    addition, reforming the extremely generous Health Insurance System (HIS), which is the primary
    source of hemorrhage, should be a priority.

24. The MoF figures indicate that the wage bill was kept below its prorated budget target for the first
    eight months of 2015, but the PA seems to have underestimated its wage bill commitments.
    According to the MoF, the prorated wage bill grew by 2 percent—lower than the 3.8 percent assumed
    by the budget. Figures reported by the MoF on the wage bill do not include the planned Cost of Living
    Allowance (CoLA) and the increase for teachers which have so far not been fully paid. If those are
    added, the increase in the wage bill would reach about 5 percent. Notably, there was a net increase in
    the number of PA employees by 169 as of August 2015. 13 Despite the increase in staffing, the PA has
    restated its budget commitment to implement the net zero hiring policy for 2015 and it states that the
    net increase is temporary and is caused by the fact that hiring usually happens earlier in the year while
    retirements and exits take place towards the end.

25. The PA’s efforts to reduce net lending14 are starting to show results. Net lending increased by 17
    percent in the first eight months of 2015 compared to the same period in 2014, but due to extraordinary

12
   The MoH has already negotiated the price list of services provided with several major Israeli hospitals. It was also
agreed with these hospitals that invoices will be audited and scrutinized by the MoH before any deductions are made
from clearance revenues to cover the cost. Furthermore, several hospitals committed to admitting Palestinian patients
only when valid referral documents produced by the MoH are presented in order to eliminate self-referrals.
13
   429 employees departed from the public labor force in Gaza while 500 were hired in the West Bank. Net
employment in the national fund and embassies was increased by 98. Employment in the security, health and education
sectors increased by 94, 209, and 130 employees, respectively.
14
   Net lending represents deductions by the GoI from clearance revenues it collects on behalf of the PA for unpaid
utility bills by Palestinian public utilities and local governments.

                                                          8
     deductions made by the GoI from February clearance revenues. If figures are adjusted to assume
     standard deductions from February revenues, net lending would have declined by 17 percent due to the
     PA’s efforts, which is a commendable achievement. The PA has recently taken some steps to control
     net lending including entering into Memorandums of Understanding (MoU) with Palestinian electricity
     providers to ensure that fees collected are used to cover bills to the Israeli Electricity Company (IEC)
     and not to finance non-electricity related expenditures. In addition, the MoF has recently finalized an
     exercise to reconcile the amount of electricity debt owed to/by the distribution companies and
     municipalities. Other actions were also taken to increase the collection rate including installing
     additional prepaid meters and passing a resolution preventing consumers from obtaining clearance to
     some civil services, including renewing a driver’s license, applying for a visa, and obtaining travel
     permission, if they have accumulated unpaid bills. The MoF in cooperation with the Energy Authority
     currently aims to build upon these actions and produce a comprehensive action plan that aims to
     gradually reduce net lending until it is fully eliminated.

26. The PA continues to rely on arrears as a source of deficit financing. The PA’s total deficit amounted
    to USD866 million between January and August 2015. Aid received was USD563 million: USD506
    million in budget support and USD57 million in development financing. As a result, the PA ended up
    with a financing gap of USD303 million. Although the PA has been clearing its old arrears, new arrears
    were generated in 2015 and hence, net accumulation of arrears amounted to USD411 million15 during
    the first eight months of 2015 – more than what was needed to close the financing gap. Excess financing
    enabled the PA to reduce its net domestic bank financing by USD85 million.

         c. Money and Banking


27. The Palestinian banking sector is generally healthy. Data provided by the Palestine Monetary
    Authority (PMA) indicates that the sector’s net assets grew by 3 percent so far in 2015. There is ample
    liquidity in the banking sector as evidenced by the loans-to-deposits ratio which stood at 57 percent as
    of June 2015. Banks in general are risk averse which is explained by the high political uncertainty in
    the country. Private credit grew by 15 percent in 2015 with the majority of private lending comprising
    construction and consumption loans. This raises concentration risks that should be monitored
    particularly given the continued growth of this credit category during the recent economic slowdown.
    Encouragingly, the ratio of non-performing loans to gross loans continues to be stable and low at less
    than 3 percent.

28. Recent regulatory developments by the PMA include the drafting of a new central bank law and the
    launch of a financial inclusion strategy. The proposed central bank law is expected to provide greater
    independence for the PMA in conducting monetary policy, and would form the legal basis for the
    potential establishment of a central bank in the future. Following a series of consultations with
    stakeholders to discuss the draft law, the PMA is currently in the process of incorporating feedback
    received, with a goal of finalizing the central bank law before the end of 2015. In addition to drafting
    the new central bank law, the PMA recently also made progress in the development of the financial
    inclusion strategy, initiated back in 2014. Concrete steps taken by the PMA to facilitate greater financial
    inclusion include the expansion of the credit registry beyond the basic credit history to include
    information on financial leasing, mortgage history, and court judgment.

29. The banking sector’s credit exposure to the public sector remains a concern but the PMA has
    been closely monitoring the related risks and taking appropriate actions to mitigate them. As of

15
  About 40 percent of arrears accumulated in 2015 is to the private sector while the majority of the rest is to the
pension fund.

                                                        9
       June 2015, the PMA reports that the Palestinian banking sector has provided USD1.26 billion in credit
       facilities to the PA, which represents about 10 percent of the sector’s total assets and 91 percent of its
       equity. Credit to public sector employees has been growing since 2010 and it reached USD958 million
       by the end of June 2015. More than 40 percent of banks’ lending portfolios constitute loans to the PA
       and its employees. This high credit concentration is a serious risk that can threaten the viability of the
       overall sector, particularly given the PA’s precarious fiscal situation. As a result, the PMA has been
       regularly conducting stress testing in line with Basel II principles to evaluate the banking system’s
       stability. The PMA reports that the results of the June 2015 tests indicate that the banking sector is well
       capitalized and is able to withstand a wide range of economic, political and liquidity shocks.


     Figure 2: Following a decline since 2012, PA debt increased again in 2015 after the suspension of
               clearance revenue while credit to PA employees has been on the rise all along


                  16                                                                            2,500
                  14
                                                                                                2,000
                  12
                  10                                                                            1,500




                                                                                                        USD million
                   8
              %    6                                                                            1,000
                   4
                                                                                                500
                   2
                   0                                                                            0
                        2010      2011         2012          2013          2014        Jun-15
                                    PA employees loans
                                    PA loans
                                    PA loans as a percentage of the banking sector's assets

                                         Source: Palestine Monetary Authority.

30. The recent war in Gaza did not have a significant negative impact on the financial sector. Several
    risk mitigating measures were adopted by the PMA over the past year to ensure stability of the banking
    sector in light of the prevailing risks, including the continuous refinement of the stress testing
    methodologies.16 With support from the World Bank, the PMA is currently engaged in the design of a
    partial credit guarantee facility to help offset part of the political risks associated with lending in Gaza.
    The proposed facility aims to partially mitigate risks resulting from lending to the private sector in
    Gaza.


       III.       State building through better public expenditures – a reform agenda for the PA

31. There is substantial scope to improve the fiscal situation of the PA and improve the quality of
    public spending. While it is clear that economic growth through lifting of the restrictions would be
    essential to sustainably improve the fiscal situation of the PA, there are a number of measures that the
    PA can take to improve its fiscal position. In addition, the upcoming public expenditure review by the
    World Bank discusses a number of reforms that would improve equity and efficiency of public
    spending. This section will discuss the following reforms, some to reduce the deficit and others to

16
     Preparations are also underway to implement dynamic provisioning.

                                                                10
     improve the quality of spending: (1) increasing revenues; (2) reducing the wage bill; (3) improving
     efficiency of the health spending; (4) overhauling the inequitable and expensive public pension system;
     (5) fixing the intergovernmental fiscal relations system and (6) strengthening public investment
     management capacity.

32. No effort to substantially improve Palestinian public finances will be successful without a strong
    and sustainable rebound in economic growth. Without strong economic growth that leads to job
    creation in the private sector and a substantial increase in the tax base for the Palestinian Authority, it
    is difficult to imagine the degree of fiscal consolidation that is required to place Palestinian public
    finances on a sustainable footing—even with current level of donor aid. As an illustration of the
    importance of growth for deficit reduction under the same reform effort, it is noteworthy that, ceteris
    paribus, the wage bill to GDP ratio could be lowered by an additional five percentage points of GDP
    (or more than half a billion dollars) over a four year period with a seven percent average growth as
    opposed to two percent average growth (based on modeling conducted by the World Bank).17

33. In spite of the difficult economic and political situation, the PA has already implemented
    impressive reforms. The reduction in the recurrent deficit from 25 percent of GDP in 2007 to 10
    percent of GDP in 2014 is impressive and praiseworthy. It was achieved mostly through the reduction
    in the share of the wage bill and net lending to GDP. The wage bill peaked at 24 percent in 2006 and
    has since been reduced to 16 percent of GDP, largely thanks to strong GDP growth, but also due to
    hiring control and wage growth restraint. Net lending has been a significant source of fiscal burden for
    the PA. Fortunately, its relative size dropped from nearly 10 percent of GDP in 2007 to 2 percent of
    GDP in 2014. Analysis shows that it is possible to substantially further reduce net lending. Other
    categories of recurrent spending have fluctuated in the 13-14 percent range in recent years. Until 2014
    when clearance revenue performance started improving, government revenues did not contribute
    substantially to deficit reduction.


         a. Revenue Reforms

34. Tax revenues remain substantially below potential. The revenue to GDP ratio in the West Bank and
    Gaza is significantly below the world average and relevant comparators. An important reason behind
    the low level of revenue for the general government in the Palestinian territories is the very small
    amount of revenues collected by local governments, amounting to a mere 2 percent of GDP. Inadequate
    municipal revenues contribute to the PA’s deficit by increasing the need to finance local government
    operations through transfers.18




17
    Palestinian GDP grew on average at the rate of 8 percent between 2007 and 2011 and the same rate of growth
would be achievable again over the medium term if restrictions on movement and access were removed.
18
   Currently, there are no significant mandatory transfers to lower levels of government, but the PA indirectly finances
municipal budgets through deductions the GoI makes from taxes it collects on behalf of the PA for unpaid utility bills
that local government units owe to Israeli suppliers (this process is called net lending).

                                                          11
                     Table 2: General government revenues/GDP, selected regions

 Comparator                                                 General government revenue/GDP
 Emerging and developing Europe                                             36.9
 World average                                                              31.6
 Emerging and developing economies                                          28.6
 West Bank and Gaza w/ higher Gaza contribution*                            27.1
 West Bank and Gaza actual                                                  23.5

     Source: Economy Watch database, www.economywatch.com and World Bank staff calculations.
       Note: *Assuming Gaza contribution/Gaza GDP = West Bank contribution/West Bank GDP.


35. More efforts are needed to further expand the tax base and reduce tax holidays . Significant
    potential exists for increasing central government revenues by increasing the tax base, which is still
    relatively narrow. In particular, the tax base for internally collected direct and indirect taxes is small as
    a result of tax legislation that provides relatively excessive tax holidays (e.g., the investment promotion
    law that has recently been somewhat improved), as well as weaknesses in tax enforcement capacity, as
    a consequence of which many individuals and companies are not even registered to pay taxes.
    Improvements in tax enforcement require further capacity building (including recruitment of additional
    staff) of the Large Tax Payers' Unit in order to strengthen targeted audit activity and dispute
    management capacity. By reducing tax holidays and improving tax collections, the PA could generate
    sufficient additional revenues (worth 2-3 percentage points of GDP) to end its reliance on arrears for
    deficit financing. Furthermore, in addition to the effort to enhance tax revenues, the PA could generate
    about USD50 million in additional revenues by updating the pricing on a number of public fees and
    charges, which have not been updated for a number of years and its plans to do this are welcome. In
    sum, recent efforts by the PA to improve tax collections are welcome, but need to be intensified and
    accelerated.

36. Inadequate tax receipts from Gaza are another important reason behind suboptimal tax
    collection. As a result of the internal division between Fatah and Hamas, only about 12 percent of the
    PA’s current tax revenues come from Gaza while as much as 43 percent of the PA’s spending is in
    Gaza. Thus, tax collection effectiveness is significantly lower in Gaza than in the West Bank, which
    takes almost four percentage points off the share of general government revenue to GDP.

        b. Oversized wage bill

37. On the expenditure side, the PA’s very large wage bill remains a major drag on the sustainability
    of public finances. At 16 percent relative to GDP, the wage bill of the general government in the
    Palestinian territories is among the very largest in the world. For comparison purposes, the expected
    wage bill of a country at a level of development that is similar to that of the Palestinian territories would
    be below 10 percent of GDP. The wage bill of local government units is quite small compared to other
    countries due to a relatively low degree of de facto decentralization, as local governments do not
    provide many services which are within their jurisdiction de jure.

38. It is not the number of public sector employees that is the major contributor to the PA’s oversized
    wage bill, but the relatively high average salary of the PA’s employees. Even if one were to add
    the employees recruited by the de facto authority in Gaza to the PA’s wage bill, central government
    employment would still be below five percent of the Palestinian population, which puts West Bank and

                                                       12
       Gaza significantly below many countries in the world and close to the average for middle income
       countries (5.3 percent).19 While the overall numbers do not appear excessive, some sectors have large
       numbers of staff compared to international benchmarks. This is in particular the case with the
       Palestinian security sector. With close to 65 thousand staff, the PA’s security sector is not so large by
       the standards of the Middle East, but is very large by global standards. Furthermore, the number of
       administrative employees in the public health sector, for instance, is quite large (35 percent of total)
       and the availability of health workers in the Palestinian territories surpasses many countries with similar
       income levels and countries in the region.

39. Relative to GDP, the average public sector wage in the Palestinian territories is high. The average
    yearly public wage in the Palestinian territories was USD11,059 in 2013 according to payroll data
    provided by the MoF. When measured as a multiple of per capita GDP, it amounts to 3.5. This ratio is
    higher than the MENA average of 3.4 and exceeds the ratios in other regions including Asia, Europe
    and Central Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, in addition to OECD countries. Relatively higher
    average public wages in the West Bank and Gaza can be explained by the PA’s pay practices. One
    reason is that the PA implemented two large salary increases over the last decade. The first one took
    place in 2004 when average pay was increased by 8.4 percent following enactment of the 2003 Civil
    Service Law. In early 2006, average wages were increased by a further 12.3 percent. The increases
    significantly exceeded inflation in these two years, which led to a real increase in wages without a
    commensurate increase in revenues to fund them. Furthermore, promotion policies in the civil service
    overall, but in particular in the security sector, which result in “top heavy” hierarchical structures have
    also contributed substantially to growth in the average wage. The total security force comprises one-
    third officers and two-thirds Non Commissioned Officers (NCOs) and soldiers. This represents a
    disproportionately large officer corps. In other countries, structures are flatter with broader spans of
    control in the hierarchy.

      Figure 3: Average Public Salary (as a multiple of GDP per capita) in the Palestinian territories
                              compared to MENA and most other regions


                                Africa

                Palestinian territories

                                MENA

                                  Asia

                                  LAC

                                OECD

                                  ECA

                                          0   0.5   1   1.5   2    2.5   3   3.5   4   4.5   5   5.5   6

                             Source: World Bank staff calculations and World Bank 1999.
     Note: While African countries have significantly higher public pay/per capita GDP, the average number of public
                 sector employees per capita is much lower in Africa than in the Palestinian territories. `




19
     LABORISTA database, ILO.

                                                              13
40. Serious reform efforts will need to continue to contain the wage bill. First, staff increases, which
    have been the norm up until 2012, will have to be contained for several years. Empowering the MoF to
    determine the overall wage bill ceiling and its allocation among different units of government based on
    pre agreed criteria, as well as authority to approve any new hiring, would strengthen the PA’s ability to
    control wage bill growth. Second, wage growth will have to be contained until the wage gap between
    the public and private sectors is substantially reduced (currently average wages are 18 and 50 percent
    higher in the public sector than in the private sector for West Bank and Gaza, respectively). Folding
    most allowances now paid on top of base salary into base salary would also enhance control over wage
    inflation. These interim solutions will need to be followed up by deep reforms of pay and grade scales.
    The re-integration of the Gaza service delivery functions into the regular PA agencies would present a
    good opportunity to begin rationalizing the civil service.

         c.   Getting more value for money in the health sector

41. Although small by international standards, public health spending is on the rise, while the quality
    of public healthcare has not substantially improved. Consequently, patients rely on out-of-pocket
    spending to meet their health needs. This kind of spending is relatively high amounting to around 5
    percent of the Palestinian GDP and it is still growing. This is in spite of the fact that public spending
    on health almost quadrupled during the last decade. It stood at USD488 million in 2012, representing
    4.8 percent of GDP, which is higher than the MENA average of 2.6 percent and the Lower Middle
    Income Countries’ average of 1.7 percent of GDP. In addition to the inefficiencies outlined below, it is
    noteworthy that political uncertainty, recurrent conflict, and restrictions on the movement of people
    and goods have important implications on planning and management of health services and thus hinder
    the overall efficiency of the system.

42. A significant factor contributing to the rise of healthcare expenditures is the rise of the health
    sector wage bill. The MoF reports that the health sector wage bill increased from USD97.8 million in
    2006 to USD176.8 million in 2013. The overall wage bill also increased in this period, and not always
    in line with the expansion of the Ministry of Health (MoH) workforce. For instance, the largest increase
    in the health sector wage bill, amounting to 26 percent, took place between 2007 and 2008 and in 2011
    it also increased by 9 percent. These increases were almost entirely due to pay raises and not workforce
    expansion, which in fact slightly contracted in 2011. Thus in addition to staff increases, salary raises
    contributed significantly to the growth of the PA-financed health sector wage bill.

                       Figure 4: MOH wage bill, Palestinian territories, 2006-2012

              Health Sector Wage Bill (right axis)       Rate of expansion in MOH employment (left axis)
    6%                                                                                                  180

    4%                                                                                                 160
                                                                                                       140
    2%
                                                                                                       120
    0%                                                                                                 100
   -2%                                                                                                 80
               2006         2007          2008          2009       2010         2011        2012
                                                 Source: MoF 2014.




                                                       14
43. Another driver of higher spending is the inefficient system of medical referrals outside of the
    public healthcare system, which the PA has started to reform with some success already. In recent
    years, a large and increasing number of patients requiring tertiary-level care are referred to a mix of
    private (for profit) and nonprofit service providers outside of the public health system. Many referrals
    are justified and they pertain to the conduct of complex medical procedures for cancer and cardiac
    patients, but a significant number of referrals currently made may not be necessary and the costs of
    referrals could be reduced through better control systems. A recent World Bank study audited the
    appropriateness of outside medical referrals and concluded that a significant majority of documentation
    on specific referral decisions lacked accurate information.20 A set of guidelines with clear criteria for
    referral decisions has recently been developed and put to use by the Ministry of Health in order to
    reduce unwarranted discretion in the referral process described above.

44. Another issue with the system has been that a large proportion of patients circumvents the
    referral system. A World Bank initiated audit showed that 35 percent of patients received referrals
    directly from the higher medical committee without going through the referral system and over 10
    percent received a referral without any reference. Of the 10 percent of referrals with proper
    documentation, the medical audit revealed that only 60 percent were medically justified. Currently the
    Ministry of Health (MoH) is preparing a strategy that defines which services it would like to invest in
    internally and which services it would like to purchase from other service providers within the
    Palestinian territories, as well as neighboring countries.


                                       Figure 5: Trends in Medical Referrals, Palestinian territories, 2000-2013

                                                   West Bank           Gaza          Cost of Referrals (right axis)
        number of refered patients




                                     70,000                                                                      160,000,000
                                     60,000                                                                      140,000,000
                                                                                                                 120,000,000




                                                                                                                               in US dollars
                                     50,000
                                                                                                                 100,000,000
                                     40,000
                                                                                                                 80,000,000
                                     30,000
                                                                                                                 60,000,000
                                     20,000                                                                      40,000,000
                                     10,000                                                                      20,000,000
                                          0                                                                      0



                                                                      Source: MoH 2014.
                                          Note: No data were available for referrals from Gaza for 2000-2002 and 2004.


45. Another factor contributing to high health costs is pharmaceutical expenditure which accounted
    for 47 percent of non-salary public expenditures in 2013. Expenditure on drugs has shown large
    fluctuations increasing by 29 percent between 2010 and 2011, mirroring and partially driving the
    increasing overall public expenditures in health. A further discrepancy exists between the cost of drug
    tenders and overall pharmaceutical spending over the years. The MoH pays relatively high prices for
    pharmaceuticals, and import restrictions and large arrears owed to suppliers hamper its ability to
    negotiate better prices. Pharmaceutical companies factor in the cost of delayed payments in their

20
  Approximately 90 percent of all audited referral files lacked a reason for referral; 73 percent did not have a clinical
summary; and 35 percent lacked an explanation of the initial diagnosis. Furthermore, 31 percent of the referral files
lacked sufficient information to determine whether the case was referred for inpatient or outpatient services.

                                                                              15
     pricing. In addition, MoH officials and NGO representatives claim that restrictions by the Israeli
     government on pharmaceuticals that can be imported limit the choices available and, in some instances,
     force Palestinians to buy from Israeli companies at high prices. The review compared the top 20 tenders
     by cost from the 2013 Center for Medical Services list with international benchmark prices based on
     the WHO’s International Drug Price Indicator Guide. The conclusion was that Palestinian territories
     are typically overpaying for drugs.

46. The health insurance system is not sustainable. The system is characterized by a significant
    imbalance between the government health insurance (GHI) revenues and expenditures, which have
    been growing. In 2012, public expenditure on health reached USD 488 million and GHI revenues were
    USD31 million, representing a financing gap of USD457 million, five times the size it was in 2000.

47. The PA can substantially improve the value for money and quality of healthcare services through
    reform. In addition to reforming the referral system which is already underway, it will be important
    to reform the health insurance system, rationalize staffing and improve pharmaceutical procurement.

         d. A pension system in need of urgent reform

48. The pension system is expensive and covers a small share of the elderly population. Total pension
    expenditure was NIS1,089 million21 in 2013, or around 3 percent of GDP. Even though this is close to
    the MENA average of 3.6 percent, it is considered extremely high in the Palestinian context given the
    demographic profile, with only 3 percent of the population currently above the age of 65, and only
    about a third of that population receiving pension benefits. For instance, as of September 2014, the
    system had 154,986 active contributors, including 86,359 civil servants, 65,277 security personnel, and
    3,350 private sector employees.22 Together, these represent around 16 percent of the total labor force,
    and 7 percent of the working-age population (ages 15 to 64). On the other hand, the system provides
    benefits - whether for old-age, disability, or survivorship - to 46,596 beneficiaries who represent only
    1 percent of the total population. This coverage rate is very low compared to the share of pension
    expenditure in the Palestinian economy. Countries with similar low coverage ratios such as Paraguay
    and Ghana have much lower pension spending as a percentage of GDP.

49. Even though the system covers a small share of the population, the PA is unable to meet its
    obligations under the law. The Palestinian pension system is, de jure, a funded, multi-pillar system,
    but it is, de facto, run as a pay-as-you-go system. The PA has been making regular payments to pay
    current pension benefits, while making only sporadic contributions towards the funded pillar of the
    pension system, and consequently accruing considerable arrears. Contributions transferred by the PA
    to the Palestinian Pension Authority (PPA)23 have increased since 2014, but they are still well below
    the amounts stipulated by the Unified Pension Law. Since May 2011, the PA has transferred to the PPA
    NIS70 million per month to make pension payments, even though its monthly commitment by law is
    about NIS96 million. Since November 2014, the MoF has started to also transfer an additional NIS10
    million per month in contributions. Even though this is commendable, it has not been enough to cover
    the monthly commitments and the MoF therefore continues to accrue significant monthly arrears to the
    pension system. In total, arrears accumulated to civil servant schemes over the years are estimated at


21
   Based on December 2013 data (the amount includes regular and lump-sum payments).
22
   The first NGO joined the pension system in October 2011. By the end of 2013, 38 NGOs had joined the pension
scheme. Low coverage in the private sector is mostly due to high informality, unemployment, and under-employment.
23
   According to the UPL enacted in 2005, all pension schemes should be centralized in the PPA. Centralization has
been improved, but there are still a few constraints. The main ongoing challenge with the accounting systems of all
pension schemes is that in practice the PA transfers to the PPA less than what is required by the UPL.

                                                        16
     USD1.8 billion (July 2015 estimate). No information is yet available on arrears accumulated to the
     security services schemes.24

50. The combination of high benefits and low coverage raises important equity concerns. The fact
    that the system provides generous and unsustainable retirement benefits for those few Palestinians of
    retirement age who had worked in the public sector, while leaving out those who have not been
    employed or have worked in the private sector makes the system rather inequitable. Future pension
    costs are projected to continue increasing and, at some point, they will start crowding out spending on
    other key areas including social assistance, healthcare, and education. Thus, the system is expected to
    become not only less sustainable without reforms, but also less equitable if it reduces fiscal space for
    expenditures that disproportionally benefit poorer segments of the Palestinian population.



     Figure 6: Pension Expenditure and % of                                                         Figure 7: Pension Expenditures and % of
                Elderly Population                                                                     Beneficiaries over total Population

                                                                                                   16.0%


                                                                                                   14.0%                                                                  Italy
                                                                                                                                                                          Portugal
                                                           Pension Spending as percentage of GDP



                                                                                                   12.0%                                                                          Slovenia

                                                                                                                                                                              Bulgaria
                                                                                                                                                                             Germany
                                                                                                   10.0%

                                                                                                                                                                                     Austria
                                                                                                    8.0%
                                                                                                                                                                                               Lithuania
                                                                                                                                                           United Kingdom
                                                                                                                                                                       Finland
                                                                                                    6.0%
                                                                                                                           Tunisia
                                                                                                                                                              Norway
                                                                                                           West Bank and Gaza
                                                                                                    4.0%               Iraq
                                                                                                                  Morocco
                                                                                                                Lebanon                                                      y = 0.391x
                                                                                                    2.0%                                                                     R² = 0.7017
                                                                                                            Paraguay
                                                                                                            Ghana
                                                                                                    0.0%
                                                                                                           0%         5%         10%       15%         20%         25%       30%             35%       40%
                                                                                                                                 Percentage of Beneficiaries over Total Population


 .
                                          Source: HDNSP Pensions Database.

51. Thus, the Palestinian public pension system is not sustainable as currently designed and
    implemented and there is an urgent need for deep reforms. Reform efforts would need to: a)
    consolidate the currently fragmented pension system and make the system not only, de facto, pay-as-
    you go, but also, de jure, by changing the pension law in order to: a) increase the retirement age; b)
    tighten the criteria for disability and survivorship pensions; d) render the pension level more in line
    with international practices to make it affordable.




24
   A joint committee that includes members from the MoF and the PPA was set up a few years ago to calculate the
total amount of arrears owed to the pension system. The committee has so far focused its work on civil servant schemes
and it plans to expand its work to include the security services schemes soon.




                                                         17
        e. Inadequate local government revenues and indirect costs of municipal coping mechanisms

52. Local governments fulfill a fraction of their mandates mostly due to inadequate and partly
    unpredictable revenue sources. The size of most local government units (LGU) in the West Bank
    and Gaza is relatively small and their revenues are insufficient to fulfil many of the LGU’s functional
    mandates. Local government expenditures account for 6 percent of expenditures, which is only a
    fraction of what is observed in other countries around the world. LGUs are assigned 27 different
    functions, but the large majority of the LGUs (around 80 percent) on average exercise only 12 of those.
    The main reason for this is inadequate LGU revenues as a consequence of which most LGUs run budget
    deficits. The reasons for inadequate LGU revenues is not only related to inadequate tax assignments
    and relatively inefficient tax collection, but it is also due to the fact that transfers from the central to
    local governments are irregular and relatively small in size. At present, there are no formalized and
    regular grants or transfers available from the PA to supplement the shortage of LGUs’ own -source
    revenues. The criteria applied to decide on the distribution of transfers are not always clear either. This
    opens room for arbitrary allocations, which may not best serve government policy objectives, such as
    the reduction in inequality and poverty. For instance, poorer Palestinian municipalities have much
    lower revenues and consequently much lower expenditures per capita than wealthier ones.
    Furthermore, unpredictable transfer allocations also limit the ability of LGUs to plan their budgets.

53. Many LGUs rely on utility revenues (mostly electricity) to finance their operational expenditures,
    rendering the utility sector unsustainable. This behavior represents a significant source of fiscal
    burden on the Palestinian Authority because the GoI deducts most of the unpaid bills by distribution
    companies and LGUs from the indirect taxes it collects on behalf of the PA and it ends up costing the
    PA in excess of USD200 million per year. In addition to paying for unpaid electricity bills, the PA also
    pays an 11 percent late payment fee. The practice results in inadequate investments in maintenance
    and upgrading of the electricity sector, which leads to significant technical losses that amount to another
    USD200 million in purchased, but lost electricity.

54. Ensuring solvency of Palestinian public utility service provision, among other things, requires
    efforts to increase municipal revenues, including transfers. The Bank’s analysis shows that some
    municipalities critically depend on revenues from electricity to cover their operational expenditures.
    Thus, in addition to efforts to increase municipal own revenues and reduce unnecessary expenditures,
    it is recommended that a formal and transparent government transfer be instituted to enable poorer
    municipalities to stop diverting electricity and other utility revenues to finance their operational and
    sometimes also development expenditures.

55. A sound utility sector and sound municipal finances also require the transfer of responsibility for
    the management of utility services away from LGUs to dedicated public corporations. Utility
    management requires skills and governance structures that are most often not found in government
    units, in particular in local governments. Moreover, without direct access to utility revenues, LGUs
    would no longer be tempted to divert them to finance operational expenditures. Finally, the transfer of
    these functions to dedicated public corporations would reduce the fragmentation of service provision,
    leading to some efficiency gains.


        f.   Low level of public investments and an underdeveloped public investment management
             system

56. The Palestinian economy suffers from low levels of public investment. In 2006 and 2007, public
    investment spending amounted to 5.6 percent and 5.7 percent of GDP, respectively, but the level was
    reduced gradually to an average of 2 percent between 2012 and 2014. While total public investment is

                                                      18
     slightly higher, in the range of 4 percent (i.e., including local governments and off-budget public
     investment), public investment is still low compared to well-performing developing countries and
     significantly below Palestinian needs, especially if the Palestinian population continues to grow at an
     annual rate of 3 percent. Low level of public investment results in poor quality of infrastructure such
     as roads and electricity transmission networks and poor sanitation services, in particular in Gaza. Poor
     public infrastructure is visible in the West Bank and it is very conspicuous in Gaza.

57. However, to effectively increase the level of public investments, it will be necessary to build the
    key features of a functioning public investment management system. The PA currently lacks an
    adequate legal framework and institutional capacity for public investment management. First, the PA
    lacks a clear definition of public investment needs that is based on expenditure on fixed capital assets
    and related equipment costs. Furthermore, the PA needs to build a legal and institutional framework
    for public investment management to ensure that core functions starting with project identification,
    evaluation and appraisal, procurement, implementation monitoring and finally ex-post evaluation are
    effectively executed.25 Furthermore, public investment should be separated from the wider
    development project categorisation which, particularly in the case of international development partner
    (IDP) funded projects, can include significant operational and service delivery spending. Despite
    significant progress in recent years in bringing IDP funded projects into the PA budget, in many sectors
    the major share of these remains off-budget. A plan should be made to work with donors and bring all
    IDP funded projects into the budget. Finally, since there is a need to substantially increase investments
    at the local government level to improve the infrastructure services whose provision sits within local
    government domain, an effort should be made to consolidate public investment management by local
    government units and to improve the oversight of local government investments. The responsibilities
    and functions of the Ministry of Local Government (MoLG) with respect to the oversight and reporting
    of public investment by local governments should be fully elaborated and the required analytical
    capacities put in place.




25
  Regulations issued under the organic budget law and detailed guidelines for the main requirements of the public
investment management system (PIM) will need to be developed. Responsibility for PIM procedures and oversight of
the capital investment program should be consolidated within the MoF for both PA and IDP financed capital projects.

                                                        19
Annex I: An overview of disbursement and implementation of pledges made at the Cairo
Conference on Palestine “Reconstructing Gaza”, Cairo 12th October, 2014


58. The Cairo Conference on Palestine “Reconstructing Gaza” was convened to address urgent needs
    in Gaza after the 2014 war. On October 12th 2014, Egypt, Norway and the Palestinian Authority (PA)
    convened the Cairo Conference on Palestine “Reconstructing Gaza” to respond to the humanitarian
    needs of the Palestinian people in the aftermath of the Gaza war that took place in July and August
    2014, and to enable early recovery and the reconstruction of the Strip.

59. The World Bank is leading a stocktaking exercise to track the disbursement of Cairo Conference
    pledges to support Gaza. At the request of Norway, as chair of the Ad-Hoc Liaison Committee
    (AHLC), and the Palestinian Authority (PA), the World Bank has been leading a stocktaking exercise
    to overview the disbursement and implementation progress of support to Gaza pledged at the
    conference. The Bank’s findings are updated regularly and presented in the World Bank’s report to the
    AHLC twice a year.26

60. This stock-take updates the disbursement figures from the May 2015 AHLC report. The main
    findings are that:

     a) Since the May 2015 AHLC report, disbursements have increased by USD262 million (27 percent).
        This mainly reflects additional disbursements (USD141 million), additional information from
        Turkey and UAE (USD82 million), and amendments of previous figures (USD39 million).

     b) While USD1.229 billion has been disbursed this is almost USD0.9 billion less than the amount
        projected by donors during 2014 and 2015 when indicating the timing of their disbursements at
        Cairo. It is important that disbursements are accelerated.

     c) Almost half of the USD3.5 billion in pledges made at the Cairo Conference have not been allocated
        to specific activities or projects.

     d) Only USD227 million of the allocated disbursements relate to the Gaza Detailed Needs
        Assessment (DNA) and Recovery Framework. The PA should work with donors to allocate funds
        towards priority areas.
     e) We have not been able to include information on actual expenditure in this report and would
        encourage donors to share this information so it can be included in future updates.


     Pledges of support to Gaza announced at Cairo Conference

61. USD3.5 billion was captured as support to Gaza during Cairo Conference, of which USD2.5
    billion is new funding. A review of total pledges captured at the Cairo Conference shows that
    participant countries and agencies pledged approximately USD5 billion to the Palestinian territories
    over the period 2014-2017, of which USD3.5 billion is intended to support Gaza over the same period.27
    About 72 percent of the support to Gaza captured at the conference is new funding committed by


26
   Findings can also be found online at (http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/rebuilding-gaza-donor-pledges)
27
   Figures for pledges announced at Cairo Conference were revised due to some inaccuracies in recording original
pledges and for the use of inflated commodity prices for the valuation of in-kind contributions. Check Glossary for
terms and definitions.

                                                        20
     participants to support Gaza recovery and reconstruction after the 2014 war.28 The remainder, as shown
     in figure 9, is a reallocation of existing commitments, or assistance that was already disbursed during
     the war.29




         Figure 8: Total pledges announced at                      Figure 9: Support to Gaza
            Cairo Conference (in million)                          classification (in million)
                                                                                     $194
                                                                                      5%     $314
                                                                                              9%

                      $1,575
                       31%                                                                          $477
                                                                                                    14%

                                    $3,512                                  $2,526
                                     69%                                     72%


                                                                         Assistance disbursed during conflict
                                                                         Existing commitment
                                                                         Reallocation of Existing Commitments
                  Support to Gaza   Other support
                                                                         New funding




     Disbursement progress of support to Gaza announced at Cairo Conference

62. As of August 31st, 2015, USD1.229 billion of support to Gaza announced at the Cairo Conference
    was disbursed, and disbursement efforts need to be accelerated. Since the May 2015 AHLC report,
    total disbursements have increased by USD262 million. This mainly reflects additional disbursements
    (USD141 million), additional information from Turkey and UAE (USD82 million), and amendments
    of previous figures (USD39 million). As a result, almost a year after the 2014 war, total disbursement
    of pledges to support Gaza is estimated at USD1.229 billion,30 and hence, the overall disbursement ratio
    of support to Gaza announced at Cairo Conference reached 35 percent.31 However, this is USD881
    million less than the expected disbursements in 2014 and the first eight months of 2015 based on
    information provided at the conference. Figure 10 shows the expected flow of funding to Gaza over the
    period 2014-2017 and more than 70 percent of total support was expected to be disbursed over the
    period 2014-2015.

63. Even though 23 out of 54 participants have already fully delivered their pledges, disbursement
    by the largest donors remains lower than anticipated. Based on data provided by participant
    countries, 23 participants have already fully delivered their original pledge announced at the conference
    to support Gaza. However, their overall disbursements (USD228 million) represent only 6.5 percent of
    total support to Gaza. Pledges from the top seven donors combined represent around 78 percent of total
    support to Gaza announced at the conference for the period 2014-2017 (USD2.7 billion).32 Total

28
   Check Glossary for more details about classification of support to Gaza.
29
   Classification of funding may be subject to change in cases where donors have not yet verified their figures.
30
   Support to Gaza figure refers to pledges made at Cairo Conference and therefore does not reflect all support spent
in Gaza after 2014 war.
31
   This estimate may change once further data is collected from donors who have not yet provided information about
disbursements and allocations of pledges.
32
   The top seven donors are Qatar, Saudi Arabia, European Union, USA, Kuwait, Turkey and UAE.

                                                         21
     disbursements so far by the top 7 donors amounted to USD742 million –27 percent of their total original
     pledges.33
                                 Figure 10: Expected flow of support to Gaza
                       $1,600
                                                  $1,349
                       $1,400      $1,211
                       $1,200
                       $1,000
                         $800                                        $631
                         $600
                         $400                                                  $320

                         $200
                          $-
                                    2014           2015             2016       2017
                                               Support to Gaza (Million)




64. Out of the USD1.229 billion that has been disbursed, only USD227 million was disbursed on
    priority interventions outlined in the Gaza DNA and Recovery Framework, which represents 5.8
    percent of total recovery needs.34 By analyzing donors’ interventions in Gaza financed through
    pledges announced at the Cairo Conference, the World Bank in a joint effort with the National Office
    for Reconstructing Gaza (NORG) concluded that only USD227 million of actual disbursements as of
    August 31st, 2015 are attributed to the recovery framework outlined in the DNA across five sectors
    impacted by the 2014 war. An overall view of actual disbursements made so far by donors is shown in
    figure 11. USD470 million (38 percent) of actual disbursements made so far by donors financed
    UNRWA’s activities and programs. On top of the funding directed to UNRWA, USD207 million was
    disbursed by donors to finance emergency aid operations and provide humanitarian aid to people in
    distress in Gaza. Another USD210 million supported the Palestinian budget either directly through the
    Single Treasury Account (STA) or through EU- PEGASE mechanism and World Bank PRDP trust
    fund. In addition, USD27 million- Others financed ongoing programs and projects in Gaza, while
    USD88 million was used to purchase fuel.




33
   This figure may change once further data is collected from donors who have not yet provided information about
disbursements and allocations of pledges.
34
   All recovery interventions undertaken by UNRWA are classified under a separate category- UNRWA funding.

                                                          22
                       Figure 11: Actual disburesements of support to Gaza announced at Cairo
                                          Conference by category (in million)

                                                                               Humanitarian and emergency aid
                         $470                                                  Budget support
                                                            $54
                                                  $16                          Others
                                                                   $56
                 $88                   $227                                    Fuel
                                                         $101                  UNRWA funding
           $27
                       $210     $207                                           Infrastructure
                                                                               Productive
                                                                               Social protection
                                                                               Social development



65. Almost 38 percent of actual disbursements by donors supported UNRWA’s activities, but this
    still falls short of the funding requested by the Agency. Figure 12 shows the distribution of UNRWA
    funding among its General Fund, Gaza Flash Appeal 2014, Emergency Appeal 2015 and UNRWA
    projects. According to UNRWA, there remains a deficit of USD493 million for the emergency shelter
    program supporting families whose homes were impacted during 2014 war.35On top of the
    unprecedented financial distress faced by UNRWA this year, the Agency claims it incurred USD7.5
    million in additional costs in 2014 alone, which is equivalent to the cost of building four UNRWA
    schools, as a result of Israeli requirements on access and monitoring of imported materials into Gaza. 36
    The additional costs include extra staffing, transit and logistical cost resulting from Israeli requirements
    on access and monitoring of imported materials.37


                              Figure 12: Funding received by UNRWA as part of
                                    Cairo Conference pledges (in million)

                         Gaza Flash Appeal 2014

                         Gaza Emergency Appeal              $76
                         2015                                         $120
                         General Fund

                         Projects                                        $52
                                                          $222




35
   UNRWA donor Communiqué 21st of August to September 3rd, 2015
36
   UNRWA, department of external relations and communications, Gaza Headquarters.
37
   Israel allows goods into the Gaza Strip except for items it defines as “dual use” materials, which are only permitted
to enter for approved projects by international organizations. Since 2010, Israel has permitted construction materials
to enter for approved UNRWA projects. Imports of construction materials by UN Agencies into Gaza remain subject
to a lengthy and cumbersome approval process imposed by Israeli authorities.

                                                          23
Total disbursements of Cairo Conference pledges to finance recovery interventions outlined in the
Gaza DNA and Recovery Framework

66. The Gaza DNA and Recovery Framework lays out the economic and human costs of the conflict and
    the set of strategies to help Gaza recover (see Table 3 below). Each recovery framework proposal was
    identified by the National Consensus Government of the Palestinian territories and has the support of
    local and international partners that took part in the assessment process. The PA will use these recovery
    framework interventions to mobilize and direct international support, including the remaining donor
    funds that were pledged at the Cairo Conference in October 2014 but have not yet been disbursed.38

67. Based on interventions outlined in the DNA, actual disbursements, excluding UNRWA funding,
    financed a mere 5.8 percent of the overall recovery needs.39 USD227 million of actual
    disbursements40 as of August 31st, 2015 financed interventions outlined in the DNA. The infrastructure
    sector attracted the highest funding of USD101 million, followed by the social development and social
    protection sector, which received USD56 million and USD54 million, respectively. While the
    productive sector received the lowest share with funding of USD16 million.41

                       Figure 13: Financing of DNA and Recovery Framework (in million)
            $120
                            $101
            $100

             $80

             $60                                                      $54                  $56


             $40

             $20                                  $16


              $-
                    Infrastructure sector   Productive sector   Social protection   Social development
                                                                     sector                sector

68. The Palestinian Authority needs to work with donors to mobilize the remaining funds that were
    pledged at the Cairo Conference but not yet been disbursed or allocated towards interventions
    outlined in the recovery framework. Out of the USD3.5 billion of funds announced at the Cairo
    Conference, USD1.229 billion has been disbursed so far and another USD550 million of undisbursed
    pledges are allocated to specific projects and programs leaving USD1.73 billion to still be allocated.42
    It is key that the PA works with donors to direct these finds towards to priority areas outlined in the
    DNA.




38
   Detailed Needs Assessment and Recovery Framework, State of Palestine: Gaza, August 2015.
39
   Total recovery needs in Gaza DNA and Recovery Framework are estimated at USD3.875 billion.
40
   Support to Gaza figure refers to pledges made at Cairo Conference and therefore does not reflect all support spent
in Gaza after 2014 war.
41
   A more detailed breakdown of the disbursement figures for each sector is provided on the World Bank website
http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/rebuilding-gaza-donor-pledges
42
   Based on data collected from donors.

                                                           24
Table 3: Summary table of damage, losses and recovery needs (Gaza Detailed Needs Assessment and
Recovery Framework) (USD million).43

                                                                                      Recovery
 Sector               Subsector                            Damage        Losses
                                                                                      Needs

 Infrastructure       Housing                              780           -            930

                      Energy                               58            924          238

                      Water                                33            94           156

                      Transport                            42            -            54

                      Explosive Ordinance Disposal                                    5

                      Subtotal                             913           1,018        1,383


                      Agriculture                          266           284          297


                      Non-Agriculture Productive           144           136          301
 Productive
                      Tourism                              8             -            1

                      ICT                                   -            31           3

                      Subtotal                             418           451          602

                      Livelihoods and social protection    5             52           763
 Social Protection
                      Subtotal                             5             52           763

                      Health                               24            149          383

                      Education                            35            16           150
 Social Development
                      Culture                              1             2            13

                      Subtotal                             60            167          546
 Governance           Governance                           32            -            581

                      Subtotal                             32            -            581

                      Total                                1,428         1,688        3,875




43
     Ibid.

                                                 25
Glossary:
Currency: Total pledges announced at Cairo Conference are in USD million. All original pledges in other
currencies were converted into USD using the historical currency exchange rates obtained from
(www.oanda.com) dated October 9th 2014. For donors with pledges in currencies other than USD, actual
disbursed amounts may slightly differ from figures in table due to fluctuations in exchange rates. Disbursed
amounts in other currencies were converted to USD based on historical exchange rate to reflect accurate
progress in disbursement.
Pledges defined: The output of the pledging exercise in Cairo Conference was a combination of two types
of pledges; pledges by donors of total support for the Palestinian territories for the period 2014-2017 and
pledges by donors of support to Gaza only over the same period. 44 The difference in pledges reporting by
donors at Cairo Conference required a classification of total support figures to better reflect support to Gaza
for the period 2014-2017 and to allow tracking disbursement of support to Gaza over that period.
Support to Gaza: Funds pledged during the Cairo Conference intended to support Gaza recovery and
reconstruction.45
Support to Gaza classification
Total support to Gaza that was announced at Cairo Conference is classified into 4 main categories:
Humanitarian assistance disbursed during conflict and prior to Cairo Conference that was part of the pledge
declared at the conference.
Existing commitments by donors that were planned and programmed for Gaza for the period 2014-2017
prior to conflict and were part of the pledge.
Reallocation of existing commitment by donor to support Gaza in response to the conflict.
New funding announced at Cairo Conference to support Gaza recovery and reconstruction.
Disbursement defined: Disbursement of support to Gaza does not necessarily reflect actual expenditures
made on purchasing project-related goods and services but that a donor funds have been made available for
use by the relevant implementation agency.46
Disbursement ratio of support to Gaza: This is the ratio of the amount disbursed of support to Gaza, as per
the disbursement definition above, to the amount pledged to support Gaza at the Cairo Conference.




44
   The pledging exercise at Cairo Conference took two forms; some participant countries declared all their
commitments to the Palestinian territories over the period 2014-2017 while other participant countries declared Gaza
specific funds only in their pledge.
45
   Support to Gaza figure refers to pledges made at Cairo Conference and therefore does not reflect all support spent
on Gaza after 2014 war.
46
   When a pledge (part of pledge) is disbursed that means that funds were received and secured by implementation
agency and donor had fulfilled the pledge committed at Cairo Conference.

                                                         26
