                      99648
     PHILIPPINE ECONOMIC UPDATE
Making Growth Work Better
       for Small Businesses
                   October 2015
Report No. 99648-PH




PHILIPPINE Economic update

making growth work better
for small businesses



October 2015




Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice
Philippine Country Office
East Asia and Pacific Region


	
                                  Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



                                          PREFACE
The Philippine Economic Update (PEU) provides an update on key economic and social
developments, as well as policies over the past six months. It also presents findings from recent
World Bank studies on the Philippines. It places them in a longer term and global context, and
assesses the implications of these developments and policies on the outlook for the Philippines.
Its coverage ranges from the macroeconomy and financial markets to indicators of human
welfare and development. It is intended for a wide audience, including policymakers, business
leaders, financial market participants, and the community of analysts and professionals
engaged on the Philippines.

The PEU is a report of the World Bank’s Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management (MFM) Global
Practice (GP), in partnership with the Trade and Competitiveness (T&C) GP. It was prepared by
Joseph Louie Limkin (Research Analyst and Task Team Leader), Kevin Cruz (Research Analyst),
and Justin Chan (Research Assistant), all from the MFM GP, Griselda Santos (Operations Officer)
from the Finance and Markets GP, and Roberto Galang (Operations Officer), Beatrice Tanjangco
(Research Assistant), Jean Francois Arvis (Senior Transport Economist), Teresita Lacerna (Legal
Adviser), Gerard McLinden (Lead Specialist), Marcin Piatkowski (Senior Financial Economist),
Daria Taglioni (Senior Trade Economist), and Guillermo Arenas, Christina Busch, Claire Hollweg,
Jonathon Kirby, and Marieta Patag (all Consultants), all from the T&C GP.

The team worked under the guidance of Karl Kendrick Chua (Senior Country Economist) and
Rogier van den Brink (Lead Economist and Program Leader). Mathew Verghis and Mona Haddad
are the Practice Managers for MFM and T&C, respectively. Logistics and publication support by
Maria Consuelo Sy (Program Assistant), Ayleen Ang, and Rita Angela Rivera (both Team
Assistants) are gratefully acknowledged. The Manila External Communications Team,
comprising David Llorito (Communications Officer), Justine Letargo (Online Communications
Officer), and Geralyn Rigor (Program Assistant), prepared the media release, dissemination, and
multimedia products for the web.

The report benefited from the advice, comments, and views of various stakeholders in the
World Bank, the government, business, labor, academe, and civil society. The team is very
grateful for their time and inputs. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in
this Update are those of World Bank staff and do not necessarily reflect the views of its
management, executive board, or the governments they represent.

To be included in the email distribution list of the PEU and related publications, please contact
Maria Consuelo Sy (msy@worldbank.org). For questions and comments on the content of this
publication, please contact Karl Kendrick Chua (kchua@worldbank.org). Questions from the
media can be addressed to David Llorito (dllorito@worldbank.org).

For information about the World Bank and its activities in the Philippines, please visit
www.worldbank.org/ph.



                                                                                                I
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




                                     TABLE OF CONTENTS


  PREFACE                                                             I
  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                                                   III
  RECENT ECONOMIC AND POLICY DEVELOPMENTS                             1
       Output and demand                                              1
       Employment and poverty                                         5
       Financial markets                                              7
       Prices and monetary policy                                     9
       Fiscal policy                                                  11
  PROSPECTS, RISKS, AND POLICIES                                      14
       Prospects and risks                                            14
       Policies                                                       22
  MEDIUM-TERM REFORM AGENDA                                           29
       Simplifying business regulations to enhance inclusive growth   29
  SPECIAL FOCUS 1                                                     45
       The real cost of starting and maintaining a business           45
  SPECIAL FOCUS 2                                                     60
       Export transaction costs in the Philippines                    60
  DATA APPENDIX                                                       75




  II
                                        Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses




                                      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Philippines is among the strongest performers in the region, bucking the trend. In the first
half (H1) of 2015, among the major economies in the region, the only countries to accelerate
their quarterly growth rates were the Philippines, from 5 to 5.6 percent, and Vietnam. In spite
of this acceleration, for the two quarters combined, Philippine growth rate came out at 5.3
percent—its lowest half year growth rate since 2011. On the demand side, the strong
performance of private domestic demand at 8.1 percent, supported by record low inflation and
robust remittances, drove GDP growth. However, the slow pace of public spending and the
contraction in net exports pulled down GDP growth. On the supply side, the onset of El Niño led
to stagnant agriculture growth. Meanwhile, growth in industry and services was respectable,
with both sectors growing by around 5.8 percent. In Q3, available high frequency data suggest
an improving economy, in particular, an acceleration in government spending.

Continued job gains in the services and industry sectors could not compensate for the
substantial job losses in agriculture caused by El Niño.1 Based on the latest round of the Labor
Force Survey (LFS) in July 2015, job generation continued to be led by the services sector,
majority of which belonged to the informal services sector, followed by industry. In industry,
the construction sector, not manufacturing, drove job creation. However, job generation in
both sectors were not enough to offset the substantial job losses in the agriculture sector,
which lost some 877,000 jobs as agricultural production fell as a consequence of El Niño. In all,
the country experienced a net loss of around 96,000 jobs between July 2014 and July 2015.2

In recent years, strong economic growth and effective government programs are improving
poverty reduction, but, in 2014, natural disasters and delays in state-managed rice
importation harmed the poor. Between 2012 and 2013, poverty fell by three percentage points
(ppt), as underemployment among the poor fell significantly and domestic cash transfers to the
bottom income quintile grew substantially. This suggests that the government’s conditional
cash transfer (CCT) program is well-targeted and reaching the poor. However, in the first half of
2014, the latest Annual Poverty Indicators Survey3 suggests that poverty increased. The
increase is attributed to Typhoon Yolanda (a one time, unprecedented event) and high rice
prices (due to rice importation delays by the state monopoly). Nevertheless, poverty fell by
around two ppt from 2012 to 2014.




1
  This paragraph is based on government press release. Further breakdowns are not available as the July 2015
round of the Labor Force Survey (LFS) included the province of Leyte while all 2014 LFS rounds excluded Leyte due
to survey constraints caused by Typhoon Yolanda.
2
  This is based on preliminary estimates and is subject to change.
3
  To produce comparable annual estimates of poverty, the FIES (Family Income and Expenditure Survey) income
module was adopted in the APIS starting 2013. The APIS is conducted during non-FIES years, but is only a first-
semester estimate.
                                                                                                              III
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  Like the rest of the region, the domestic financial market experienced large volatilities in
  recent months, but underlying fundamentals remain sound. After reaching a record high early
  in the year, the equity market experienced a sharp decline. By late August, year-to-date gains
  were wiped out. However, the sovereign bond market bucked the trend and prices rose,
  discounting uncertainties brought about by the anticipated hike in US interest rate and
  concerns about China’s economy. The domestic financial market remains strong, with low levels
  of non-performing loans, high capital adequacy ratios, and prudential measures in place to
  mitigate risks. Likewise, monetary policy remains supportive with room to respond to higher
  global interest rates. The peso is stable in real terms, is flexible, and is in line with market
  fundamentals, offering a cushion to large capital outflows.

  Gains from higher revenues and unprecedented increases in the budget have yet to translate
  into commensurate increases in government spending to support an investment-led growth.
  In H1 2015, tax effort increased to 14.1 percent of GDP from 13.7 percent in H1 2014 due to
  strong private sector growth and improved tax administration. However, government spending
  continued to be slow, led by the contraction in public infrastructure spending in Q1, before
  rebounding in Q2. Since 2010, government budgets have increased by an average of 15 percent
  annually, with sharp increases coming in the latter years. Existing government systems and
  procedures are facing considerable difficulties expanding at this pace. For instance, from H1
  2014 to H1 2015, while the budget increased by 18.5 percent, government expenditures only
  increased by 8.5 percent. A counterfactual analysis shows that bringing spending closer to the
  budget could have yielded higher economic growth. For example, had the government
  increased its 2010 to 2014 average spending-to-budget ratio from 79.7 to 85 percent, GDP
  growth in the same period would have risen to an average of 6.9 percent, compared to the
  actual average of 6.2 percent.

  In the medium-term, growth prospects remain positive. In 2016, growth is expected to
  accelerate to 6.4 percent before tempering to 6.2 percent in 2017. However, for 2015, growth
  projection is revised downwards to 5.8 percent. This takes into account the relatively weak first
  half growth brought about by slow government spending, negative net exports, and the initial
  impact of El Niño. In contrast, second half growth is projected to improve as government
  spending is ramped up. In addition, accelerated implementation of public-private partnership
  projects, valued at around 0.6 percent of GDP for 2015, and the continuing effect of lower food
  inflation and declining oil prices can further support growth. On the other hand, a stronger El
  Niño and weaker exports can pull down growth considerably.

  Poverty reduction is expected to continue if the country is able to maintain the relatively high
  economic growth and better job trends in recent years. Using full-year estimates from the
  Family Income and Expenditure Survey, extreme poverty is projected to further decrease to 8.2
  percent in 2017 (using the new international poverty line of USD 1.90/day PPP, new 2011 PPP
  prices, and the above growth assumptions), down from 10.5 percent in 2014. Government
  transfers to poor households are projected to continue to grow. However, official poverty
  estimates are particularly sensitive to food price inflation. Even as the outlook for international



  IV
                                  Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



prices is favorable, poverty results will also depend on how the government manages its food
policy, and rice imports in particular.

Simplifying business regulations can unleash the full potential of the private sector, in
particular, small and micro businesses, as they are important contributors to inclusive
growth. In H1 2015, private domestic demand grew by 8.1 percent compared to an economy-
wide growth of 5.3 percent. However, business regulations have long been a cumbersome
process in the Philippines. They limit the growth of innovative entrepreneurship and
investments, contribute to large scale informality, and hence prevent the country from creating
more and better jobs and reducing poverty at a faster rate. To make growth more inclusive,
reforms to simplify business regulations are needed. Priority needs to be given to three major
hindrances that affect micro and small businesses the most: starting and maintaining a
business, paying taxes, and accessing finance. These are discussed in detail in the medium-term
reform section.

The total costs, both direct and opportunity, of starting and maintaining a business, especially
for MSMEs, need to be brought down (Special Focus 1). Reforms to reduce these costs would
free up substantial resources and make growth more inclusive. Overall, the cost imposed on
MSMEs in starting a business is very high. They not only have to pay for legitimate fees
equivalent to 17 to 36 percent of per capita income (PHP 21,000 to 45,000), they also spend a
considerable amount of time moving from one agency to another and waiting in line to process
their documents, often resulting in significant loss of productive time and income. In some
instances, businesses report that they need to pay bribes or give gifts to obtain various permits
and government services. After a business commences, numerous annual regulatory
requirements are needed to maintain the business, which can take many days every year.
Moreover, there are tax and contribution payments that have to be paid frequently within the
year. This productive time lost translates to an estimated annual opportunity cost of at least
PHP 100 billion annually. Moreover, opportunity cost of around PHP 40 billion can arise from
discouraged Filipinos who could have started a business if only the cost was reasonable. This
translates to forgone employment of around 60,000, which is equivalent to about five percent
of new labor force entrants every year.

Recognizing the adverse impact on the economy of costly business start-up, the government
has begun to address a number of doing business constraints. For instance, the government
enacted the “Go Negosyo Act” in 2014, which calls for the establishment of service centers to
facilitate business start-up and operations of micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs),
and re-engineered the process of starting a corporation in Quezon City. However, more can be
done to unleash the full potential of MSMEs. This includes: i) further simplifying and
automating key business registration processes, ii) fully implementing the Philippine business
registry and the regulatory simplification program, iii) introducing alternative payment systems
such as online and mobile payments, iv) reducing the frequency of renewals of government
licenses, permits, and clearances for employment purposes, iv) adopting a risk-based approach
for business permitting purposes, and v) simplifying the tax regime for micro and small
businesses to reduce compliance costs and encourage movement of firms to the formal sector.


                                                                                               V
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  Finally, Philippine export procedures and costs are very high for small exporters (Special
  Focus 2). Export transaction costs are high, relative to its neighbors. Not only is de jure
  exporting cost very high, exporters reveal that they have to pay more than the legally-
  mandated fees to expedite the process. For small exporters, the cost of exporting can be high
  enough to discourage them from entering or remaining in business. To lower export transaction
  costs, the report recommends: i) enhancing coordination among trade-related government
  agencies through the National Single Window and improving the efficiency of Bureau of
  Customs’ information technology system, ii) establishing and publishing clear performance
  standards, and setting up a national trade website to provide information on export processes
  and procedures, and iii) eliminating or re-engineering redundant or inefficient export steps.
  These reforms would complement reforms to reduce non-tariff barriers, enhance logistics
  support, and improve productivity of key export products.

  The remaining eight months of the Aquino Administration present an opportunity to clearly
  and practically define the “unfinished business” in the structural reform agenda. These are
  challenging reforms, as they would reverse decades of bad policies which have undermined the
  economy’s capacity to generate more and better jobs. They include:

       •	 Institutionalizing current reforms to increase budget transparency and accountability,
          and laying the foundation for more comprehensive budget reforms,
       •	 Crafting a simpler, more equitable, and more efficient tax system to finance an
          investment-led growth, in particular, rationalizing tax incentives that are neither
          transparent nor performance-based, and adjusting taxes that have not been indexed
          to inflation (i.e., taxes on petroleum products and property valuations),4
       •	 Further opening up the economy to more competition by tackling monopolistic
          practices and reducing the investment negative list,
       •	 Securing property rights through land governance reforms, and
       •	 Re-engineering business regulations to make them simpler and far less costly.

  When sustained, these reforms can support high growth, accelerate good job creation, and
  eliminate extreme poverty.




  4
    The current low oil price regime provides a good opportunity to adjust petroleum excise taxes without affecting
  real income.
  VI
                                               Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



                                   RECENT ECONOMIC AND POLICY DEVELOPMENTS5

                                                   Output and demand

1.	    The Philippines is among the strongest performers in the region, bucking the trend,
because of strong fundamentals. In the first half (H1) of 2015, among the major economies in
the region, the only countries to accelerate their quarterly growth rates were the Philippines,
from 5 to 5.6 percent, and Vietnam. In spite of this acceleration, for the two quarters
combined, Philippine growth rate came out at 5.3 percent—its lowest half year growth rate
since 2011. On the demand side, the strong performance of private domestic demand at 8.1
percent, supported by record low inflation and robust remittances, drove growth. However, the
slow pace of public spending and the contraction in net exports pulled down overall growth. On
the supply side, the onset of El Niño slowed agriculture growth to only 0.3 percent. Meanwhile,
growth in industry and services was respectable, with both sectors growing by around 5.8
percent. In Q3, available high frequency data suggest an improving economy, in particular, an
acceleration in government spending.

                                              Table 1. GDP growth by sector

                                                    H1   H1                                                    H1   H1
                                                   2014 2015                                                  2014 2015
Supply side                                                       Demand side
  Agriculture, fishery, & forestry                  1.9    0.3      Household final consumption                5.9    6.1
    Agriculture & fishery                            2.8    0.8     Government consumption                     0.9    2.9
    Forestry                                        -2.3   -2.2     Capital formation                         10.6   14.3
  Industry                                          7.3    5.8        Fixed capital                            4.2    9.5
    Mining & quarrying                               4.9    0.1        Construction                            5.0   10.2
    Manufacturing                                    9.0    5.3        Durable equipment                       3.9   10.4
    Construction                                     4.3   10.5        Breeding stock & orchard development   -3.3    0.4
    Electricity, gas, & water                        1.7    4.0       Intellectual property products          20.0    2.6
  Services                                          6.3    5.8        Changes in stocks                       48.2   75.5
    Transportation, communications, & storage        7.5    7.1     Exports                                   10.2    5.0
    Trade                                           6.3    5.8        Merchandise exports                     13.2    0.4
    Finance                                         5.9    5.1        Non-factor services                      0.1   22.4
    Real estate, renting and business activities    9.3     6.6     Imports                                   10.4   10.6
    Government services                             3.5    -1.8       Merchandise imports                      9.9    9.8
    Other services                                  3.7     7.8       Non-factor services                     12.4   14.0
  Gross domestic product                            6.2    5.3      Gross domestic product                     6.2    5.3
    Source: Philippine Statistics Authority




2.	     On the supply side, the onset of El Niño exerted a further drag on a perennially
underperforming agriculture sector (Figure 2). In the last six years, the agriculture sector grew
very slow at an average rate of 1.2 percent, the consequence of decades of policy distortions



5
 This section was prepared by Kevin Cruz (Research Analyst) under the guidance of Karl Kendrick Chua (Senior
Country Economist) and Joseph Louie Limkin (Research Analyst), all from the Macroeconomics and Fiscal
Management Global Practice.
                                                                                                                        1
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  and underinvestment in key public goods such as irrigation. The onset of “El Niño” in March
  2015 (see Box 3 for more discussion) further exposed the sector’s vulnerability, contributing to
  a much slower growth of 0.3 percent. The crops sub-sector contracted by 0.5 percent,6 led by
  rice, corn, and sugarcane, all water-intensive crops. The fisheries sub-sector also declined by 2.2
  percent as El Niño has begun to affect fish distribution. Livestock and poultry—the third
  subsector—may soon be affected as feed production feels the brunt of El Niño.

  3.	    Meanwhile, growth in services and industry was respectable, although manufacturing
  decelerated significantly. The industry sector grew slower at 5.8 percent compared to 7.3
  percent in the same period in 2014, brought down by the deceleration in manufacturing growth
  from 9 to 5.3 percent. Slower manufacturing growth, in turn, was driven by food
  manufacturing,7 which grew by just 2.1 percent, reflecting lower agriculture production and
  contraction in food exports. Several other manufacturing sub-sectors also underperformed as
  exports to Japan (-7.5 percent) and China (-32 percent) fell.8 On the other hand, the services
  sector grew at a slightly slower pace of 5.8 percent relative to a year ago, but continued to be
  the main driver of growth, accounting for 3.3 percentage points (ppt), given its dominant size.
  Expansion of most sub-sectors in services continued to remain strong at more than five
  percent. Government services was the exception, which contracted by 1.8 percent.


           Figure 1. The Philippines remained among the stronger                             Figure 2. On the supply side, services and industry
           performers in the region.                                                         continued to drive growth while agriculture stagnated.


                                Regional GDP growth                                                        Supply side: Contribution to GDP growth
                10                                                                                    10
                                Thailand           Indonesia   Malaysia                                          Agriculture              Manufacturing
                                                                                                                 Other industries         Services
                 8              Philippines        Vietnam     China                                   8         GDP growth



                 6                                                                                     6
                                                                                   Percentage point
      Percent




                                                                                                       4
                 4

                                                                                                       2
                 2

                                                                                                       0
                 0
                      Q1         Q2           Q3         Q4    Q1             Q2
                                                                                                      -2
                                      2014                             2015                                 Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2    Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2
                -2
                                                                                                                  2012                2013                 2014           2015




       Sources: CEIC, Reuters                                                       Source: Philippine Statistics Authority




  6
    According to the Philippine Statistics Authority, water-intensive crops such as rice and corn were affected the
  most, contracting by 2.8 and 15.7 percent, respectively, in Q2. However, crops requiring less water such as
  pineapple, mango, abaca, monggo (mung beans), sweet potato, and cassava still grew due to hot weather
  conditions favorable to their production.
  7
    Food manufacturing is the largest manufacturing sub-sector and typically comprises around 40 percent of total
  manufacturing output. The fast pace of population growth, at 1.9 percent, is a major driver.
  8
    Japan is the Philippines’ top export market, while China is the country’s third largest export market.
  2
                                                                                   Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



     Figure 3. On the demand side, strong private                                                              Figure 4. Although rising, the Philippines still
     consumption, in the midst of weak government                                                              attracts much less FDI compared to its ASEAN
     spending and falling net exports, continued to drive                                                      neighbors.
     growth.

                        Demand side: Contribution to GDP growth                                                                   Net foreign direct investment
                        14                                                                                              25             Indonesia          Malaysia
                        12                                                                                                             Philippines        Thailand
                        10                                                                                              20             Vietnam
                         8
                         6




                                                                                                         USD billions
                                                                                                                        15
                         4
     Percentage point




                         2
                                                                                                                        10
                         0
                        -2
                                                                                                                         5
                        -4
                        -6
                                                                                                                         0
                        -8




                                                                                                                             05


                                                                                                                                  06


                                                                                                                                            07


                                                                                                                                                     08


                                                                                                                                                          09




                                                                                                                                                                      11




                                                                                                                                                                                13
                                                                                                                                                                 10




                                                                                                                                                                           12




                                                                                                                                                                                     14
                             Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4      Q1   Q2   Q3   Q4   Q1   Q2    Q3   Q4     Q1   Q2




                                                                                                                             20


                                                                                                                                  20


                                                                                                                                          20


                                                                                                                                                     20


                                                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                               20




                                                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                   2013                   2013                2014              2015
                              Private consumption        Govt consumption         Investment
                              Discrepancy                Net exports              GDP growth

                                                                                                         Source: World Development Indicators;
    Source: Philippine Statistics Authority                                                              Country statistics oﬃces




4.	     On the demand side, the strong performance of private domestic demand at 8.1
percent continued to drive growth. Stronger growth of household consumption at 6.1 percent
(Figure 3), was supported by low food inflation, the continued decline in fuel prices, and
sustained increase in remittances. Stronger household consumption also suggests that more
Filipinos are recovering from the effects of natural disasters such as Typhoon Yolanda. In
addition, robust private fixed capital formation (11.2 percent growth) in both construction and
durable equipment provided additional support. Stronger growth in durable equipment at 10.4
percent and the country’s inclusion in the EU’s Generalized Scheme of Preference Plus (GSP+)9
in December 2014 suggest a near-term expansion of manufacturing.10

5.	    Government spending, which had a slow start, began to recover in Q2. Slow budget
execution continued in Q1 2015, particularly for infrastructure, due to a number of execution
bottlenecks. This resulted in the contraction of government spending by two percent, pulled
down by a 24 percent decline in public construction in Q1. Government spending recovered in
Q2 by 6.9 percent as public construction bounced back by 20.4 percent. This brought
government spending growth to three percent in H1 and contributing only 0.4 ppt to GDP




9
   The GSP+ grants duty free access to a number of Philippine exports. These include marine products (fisheries),
processed fruit, prepared food, animal and vegetable fats and oils, textiles, garments, and chemicals. The
government estimates that it can generate 200,000 jobs and raise exports to the EU by 11 percent (source:
Department of Trade and Industry).
10
    Despite its slowdown in H1 2015, optimism for the country’s manufacturing sector remains. The government
continues to support the manufacturing sector through its Manufacturing Resurgence Program (MRP), which aims
to increase the contribution of manufacturing to 30 percent of GDP and 15 percent of employment by 2025.
                                                                                                                                                                                          3
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  growth. The fiscal policy section discusses the reasons for slow government spending in more
  detail.

  6.	    In addition, a weaker global economy reversed the performance of merchandise
  exports, while imports continued to grow. Stagnant merchandise export growth at 0.4 percent
  in H1 largely reflected weak global demand, specifically in Japan and China. In particular,
  exports of agricultural products (-31 percent) and electronics data processing (-14 percent)
  were the hardest hit. However, despite weak global demand, total electronics exports
  recovered by 16 percent as demand from the US improved. In addition, merchandise export
  growth was outpaced by merchandise import growth, which grew by 9.8 percent. As a result,
  net exports took away some 2.6 ppt from GDP growth. Growth in merchandise imports was
  driven by a 56 percent increase in electronic parts imports. Within this product group,
  components and devices for semiconductors grew by 82 percent. This development suggests
  that growth of electronics exports will be sustained in H2 as parts are typically assembled and
  shipped in a short time span. In addition, import of office, electrical, and telecommunications
  equipment was strong and supported the growth of private investment.

  7.	    Despite a growing trade deficit, the country’s current account balance remained in
  strong surplus, as exports of services and remittances remained resilient. In H1 2015, the
  current account balance yielded a surplus of USD 4.7 billion (3.3 percent of GDP) compared to
  USD 3.9 billion (2.9 percent of GDP) in H1 2014. This was fueled by the strong performance of
  services exports (growth of 9.7 percent), which is still being led by the country’s fast-growing
  business process outsourcing (BPO) industry. In H1 2015, the industry generated USD 8.5 billion
  in revenues and is expected to create an additional 170,000 jobs this year. Despite concerns
  about a slowing global economy, cash remittances maintained its respectable growth of 5.6
  percent. However, in recent months, households receive eight percent more in peso terms
  given the peso’s depreciation. Remittance growth was robust across all regions except Europe,
  which contracted by eight percent, reflecting its easing economy. Despite much lower oil prices,
  cash remittances from the Middle East remained robust, growing by 6.8 percent in the same
  period as deployment of overseas Filipino workers to the region was sustained.

  8.	      After reaching a record high last year, net foreign direct investment (FDI) slowed in H1
  2015. The perennially low levels of FDI highlight the country’s low level of capital accumulation
  relative to the region.11 Through June 2015, the Philippines registered a net FDI inflow of USD 2
  billion, which was 40 percent lower than the same period in 2014. Despite the sharp decline,
  net FDI inflows in H1 2015 was comparable to the average FDI achieved since 2010.12 However,
  compared to its East Asian neighbors, FDI attraction still lags significantly behind (Figure
  4),  indicating much scope to improve the investment climate and open the economy to more
  foreign players (see the policy section for more discussion). For example, full liberalization of



  11
     For a more detailed discussion on the Philippines’ investment deficit, see the August 2014 edition of the PEU.
  This is available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/philippines/publication/philippines-accelerating-public-
  investment-to-sustain-growth-that-benefits-the-poor.
  12
     H1 net FDI inflows averaged PHP 1.9 billion from 2010 to 2014.
  4
                                         Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



the Philippine banking industry in 2014 helped to attract USD 1.3 billion in FDI to the sector
from an average of just USD 35 million since 2005. On the other hand, following heightened
volatility in the global financial market, net portfolio investment reversed its trend starting Q2,
resulting in a September year-to-date net outflow of USD 64 million (see the financial sector
section for more discussion).

9.	     With a strong current account and stable financial account, the balance of payments,
which was in deficit in 2014, returned to a surplus in H1 2015. As a result, the country’s gross
international reserves (GIR) recovered to USD 80.6 billion in June before falling slightly in
August to USD 80.3 billion as the central bank intervened to lessen the peso’s volatility. This
level of GIR remains high, is still at comfortable levels, and well in excess of the IMF’s suggested
reserve adequacy. Reserves are enough to cover 10.3 months of imports or 4.5 times the value
of the country’s short-term external liability by residual maturity.13

10.	    In Q3, available high frequency data suggest an improving economy. The country’s
private sector is poised to continue its strong performance in Q3 2015. In particular, sustained
growth of remittances in July, which grew by almost eight percent in peso terms (given the
peso’s four percent depreciation in recent months), and record low inflation in July and August
are expected to drive consumption growth. In addition, the country continues to benefit from a
vibrant tourism sector, which generated 16 percent more revenues and attracted 14 percent
more tourists in July. Moreover, the public sector continues to recover. In July, government
spending increased by 25 percent, the largest increase for the year, driven by a 93 percent
increase in capital outlay. These gains are likely to offset further slowdown in external demand
as the global economy eases, and in agriculture as El Niño intensifies.14 In July, merchandise
exports and manufacturing contracted slightly. However, the country’s top export,
semiconductors, grew strongly by 55 percent.


                                         Employment and poverty

11.	   Continued job gains in the industry and services sectors could not compensate for the
substantial job losses in agriculture caused by El Niño.15 Based on the latest round of the
Labor Force Survey (LFS) in July 2015, job generation continued to be led by the services sector,
majority of which belonged to the informal services sector, followed by industry. In industry,
the construction sector, not manufacturing, drove job creation. However, job generation in




13
   Short-term external liability by residual maturity, as defined by the central bank, refers to external debt with
original maturity of one year or less, plus principal payments on medium and long-term loans of the public and
private sectors due in one year or less.
14
   The Philippine Statistics Authority estimates that rice production may decrease by 14 percent in Q3 2015, while
corn production is expected to remain the same compared to Q3 2014.
15
   This paragraph is based on government press release. Further breakdowns are not available as the July 2015
round of the Labor Force Survey (LFS) included Leyte Province while all 2014 LFS rounds excluded Leyte due to
survey constraints caused by Typhoon Yolanda.
                                                                                                                 5
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  both services and industry were not enough to offset the substantial job losses in the
  agriculture sector, which lost some 877,000 jobs as production fell as a consequence of El Niño.
  In all, the country experienced a net loss of around 96,00016 jobs between July 2014 and July
  2015. (Figure 5).

  12.	    Moreover, underemployment increased significantly while the labor force
  participation rate fell. Although the rate of unemployment fell to 6.5 percent in July 2015, the
  rate of underemployment increased by 2.5 ppt to 20.8 percent, indicating that the quality of
  jobs remains a challenge. High underemployment, in turn, reflects the high rate of informality,
  which covers over 75 percent of workers (see the medium-term reform section for more
  discussion). These workers are vulnerable to job losses or income shocks. At the same time, the
  labor force participation rate declined by 1.4 ppt. There are three possible reasons for the
  decline. First, the number of discouraged workers increased.17 Second, there was an increase in
  other sources of income, such as remittances, thereby reducing the need to find work. And
  third, workers are going back to school to retool. All three reasons are valid but their respective
  magnitudes are difficult to gauge. On the one hand, the stark increase in underemployment and
  net job losses suggest that job opportunities are limited and may push up the number of
  discouraged workers. On the other hand, sustained growth of remittances and the peso’s
  depreciation, have led to higher household income, which may reduce the need to find work. It
  may also create incentives to go back to school, especially in light of improving public education
  system, including vocational schooling.

  13.	    Since 2012, poverty is trending downwards, although recent data shows a slight
  uptick. After declining by three ppt between H1 2012 and H1 2013, poverty incidence increased
  by around one ppt between H1 2013 and H1 2014.18 The increase is attributed to Typhoon
  Yolanda and artificially high rice prices due to importation lags, which are believed to have
  offset income growth of the poor.19 Even though poverty increased slightly, the overall
  downward trend still suggests that growth is becoming more inclusive. Apart from higher
  growth in recent years, the expansion of the conditional cash transfer (CCT) program in 2014
  is credited for raising the poor’s income. In fact, according to the APIS, the first three income
  deciles saw the largest growth in domestic transfers (Figure 6).20




  16
     This is based on preliminary estimates and is subject to change.
  17
     Discouraged workers are those who are without a job and not seeking work because they are tired of looking for
  work or believe there is no work available. Discouraged workers who looked for a job in the six months prior to the
  interview date for the LFS were treated as unemployed.
  18
     This is based on official poverty estimates from the 2014 Annual Poverty Indicators Survey (APIS).
  19
     The tight supply of rice in H1 2014 led to a 12.2 percent increase in rice price, which could have effectively wiped
  out income growth of the poor.
  20
     In 2013, the first two income deciles experienced a 30 percent growth in domestic transfers, which includes
  transfers received from the government’s CCT program. This slowed down to an average of four percent in 2014,
  as transfer income was broadly sustained. The large growth of transfer income in the third income decile suggests
  that the CCT program is reaching more poor Filipinos, as the CCT program expands.
  6
                                                                                  Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



     Figure 5. Net job losses were recorded in July 2015,                                                       Figure 6. The large increase in domestic transfers in
     brought about by large job losses in the agriculture                                                       the ﬁrst three income deciles suggests that the
     sector.                                                                                                    government’s CCT program is reaching more poor
                                                                                                                Filipinos.
                       Net job creation, unemployment, and                                                                                 Real percent change
                                 underemployment                                                                                          in domestic transfers
                2.0                                                                             24                        35
                                                                                                                                                            2012-13    2013-14
                1.5                                                                             18                        30

                1.0                                                                             12                        25




                                                                                                     Percent
                                                                                                                          20




                                                                                                                Percent
     Millions




                0.5                                                                             6

                                                                                                                          15
                0.0                                                                             0
                          Jan       Apr          Jul   Oct       Jan        Apr       July
                                                                                                                          10
                -0.5                      2014                             2015                 -6
                                                                                                                           5
                -1.0                                                                         -12
                       Services job creation (lhs)                Other ind. job creation (lhs)                            0
                       Manf. job creation (lhs)                   Agriculture job creation (lhs)




                                                                                                                                                                                  t
                                                                                                                                    e




                                                                                                                                                       e




                                                                                                                                                                  e
                       Unemployment rate                          Underemployment rate




                                                                                                                                                                                en
                                                                                                                                   il




                                                                                                                                                      cil




                                                                                                                                                                 cil
                                                                                                                                ec




                                                                                                                                                                             erc
                                                                                                                                                    de




                                                                                                                                                             de
                                                                                                                               td




                                                                                                                                                                           0p
                                                                                                                                                  d




                                                                                                                                                            d
                                                                                                                               1s




                                                                                                                                                                         p7
                                                                                                                                                2n




                                                                                                                                                            3r




                                                                                                                                                                       To
 Source: Labor Force Survey
 Note: Net job generation for July 2015 was computed using the distribution of employment by sector
 including the province of Leyte. Since Leyte makes up only 2.3 percent of the population, results would be
 broadly comparable.                                                                                           Source: PSA, World Bank staﬀ computations




                                                                                             Financial markets

14.	    Like the rest of the region, the domestic financial market experienced large volatilities
in recent months but underlying fundamentals remain sound. The Philippine Stock Exchange
had a strong start in the year with its main index (PSEi) reaching a record high of 8,127 points
in April 2015 or 12.4 percent higher compared to the start of the year (Figure 7). However,
concerns brought about by the timing of the US Federal Reserve’s interest rate hike have
dampened expectations for the local equity market. More recently, the rapid decline of China’s
stock market, together with the depreciation of its currency and concerns about a more
pronounced slowdown, contributed to a sell-off in the local stock market, which wiped out
year-to-date gains. On August 24—the new “Black Monday”—the PSEi, contracted by 6.7
percent. This was the fourth largest decline since the global financial crisis of 2008.21

15.	   However, the bond market saw prices rise. Despite expectation of higher interest rates
and the turmoil in the China, bond prices increased slightly as a result of the low inflation
outlook and as investors rebalanced their asset holdings. For instance, bond prices of the
benchmark ROP 2032 and 2034 (i.e., government external debt papers) increased from 146 to
156 and 156 to 163, respectively, since the start of the year (Figure 8).




21
     PHP 764 billion in total market value (six percent of GDP) was wiped out in a single day.
                                                                                                                                                                                      7
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  16.	    Increased volatility in global financial markets have led to a sharp reversal in net
  foreign portfolio investments (FPI), leading to a net outflow in the first eight months of the
  year. After posting net inflows of USD 1.8 billion in the first two months of 2015, consecutive
  net outflows since March led to a year-to-date net outflow of USD 64 million by September
  2015. Capital outflow and regional currency depreciation led by the Chinese yuan have exerted
  pressure for the peso to depreciate against the US dollar by almost five percent as of
  September, resulting in its lowest value in five years. However, in real terms, the peso remained
  stable in recent months after appreciating for almost a decade now (Figure 9), making it one of
  the strongest currencies in the region in real terms. This has naturally led to concerns about the
  competitiveness of Philippine exports.22

       Figure 7. The PSEi was not immune to volatility in                         Figure 8. Recently, bond prices have increased given
       global ﬁnancial markets as year-to-date gains were                         benign inﬂation outlook and as investors
       wiped out.                                                                 repositioned their asset holdings in the market.

                  Philippine stock market performance                                               Bond prices: ROP 32 and 34
               8,500                                    20                                    200
                                                                                              190                                ROP 32
               8,000                                    15                                    180                                ROP 34
                                                                           Bond price index


                                                                                              170
               7,500                                    10
                                                                                              160
                                                                                              150
               7,000                                    5
                                                                                              140
                                                             PHP billion
       Index




               6,500                                    0                                     130
                                                                                              120
               6,000                                    -5                                    110
                                                                                              100
               5,500                                    -10
                                Net Foreign Buy (RHS)
                                                                                                   3




                                                                                           Ju 5
                                                                                   No be 3




                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                   4

                                                                                   No be 4
                                                                                          M 3




                                                                                          M 5
                                                                                          ar 3




                                                                                          M 4




                                                                                          ar 5
                                                                                          ar 4
                                                                                         nu 3




                                                                                         nu 4
                                                                                           b 3




                                                                                           b 4
                                                                                                -1




                                                                                                -1
                                                                                        em -1




                                                                                                -1
                                                                                        em -1
                                                                                                -1




                                                                                                -1
                                                                                        M y-1




                                                                                                -1




                                                                                        M y-1
                                                                                        M y-1
                                                                                       Ja er-1




                                                                                       Ja er-1
                                                                                       ve r-1




                                                                                       ve r-1




                                                                                              ly-
                                                                                             ay




                                                                                             ay
                                                                                      pt July




                                                                                             ay
                                                                                      pt July
                                                                                             ch




                                                                                             ch
                                                                                             ch
                                                                                            ar




                                                                                            ar
                                                                                           ar




                                PSEi
                                                                                         nu




                                                                                         m




                                                                                         m
               5,000                                    -15
                                                                            Ja
                   n2 5
                   n2 4




                   c 4

               M 20 5
                   b 4




                 Ju 014
                   g 4
                   p2 4




               Fe 2014




                          5
                   t 4




                                                                                   Se




                                                                                   Se
                  ay 15
                  ay 14




                         5
                         4




                   v 4




                  ar 15
                  ar 4




                   g2 5
                Ju 015
               Ju 201
               Ju 1




               De 201
                Ja 201
               Fe 201




               Au 201
               Se 201




                       01
               Oc 01




               Ap 01
               Ap 201




               No 201
               M 201




               Au 01
                      20




               M r20
               M r20




                     2




                    l2
                   n
                   n




                    l




                   b
                Ja




   Source: Philippine Stock Exchange                                       Source: Bloomberg




  17.	    The domestic financial market remains strong with a number of prudential measures
  in place to mitigate risks. However, careful monitoring is still needed given the possibility of
  more global volatility and certain data gaps. Non-performing loans are very low at 2.4 percent
  of total loan portfolio (TLP) and the banking sector is well capitalized at more than twice the
  Basel standard of eight percent and higher than BSP’s 10 percent standard, providing sufficient
  capital to absorb any possible shock on their credit exposures.23 A number of macro-financial
  prudential measures are also in place to mitigate risks. In particular, lending to real estate is




  22
     For a more detailed discussion on the movement of the peso, see the August 2014 edition of the PEU.
  23
     Under BSP Circular 839, universal and commercial banks must meet the requirement of 10 percent capital
  adequacy ratio of qualifying capital. Their subsidiary thrift banks are also required to maintain a common equity
  tier one level of at least six percent of qualifying capital.
  8
                                                    Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



capped at 20 percent of TLP under a more conservative measure.24 However, measuring the
exposure of non-bank financial institutions to real estate credit suffers from data gaps.25 Finally,
the peso remains flexible and is broadly in line with market fundamentals, providing a cushion
for large capital outflows.

                                Figure 9. Following signiﬁcant real appreciation in
                                the last decade, the peso has been relatively stable
                                in the past few months, while it generally
                                depreciated in nominal terms.

                                            Nominal and real eﬀective exchange rates
                                                      (REER) (2010=100)
                                            125                                                                  0.024

                                                                                                                 0.023
                                            120
                                                                                                                 0.023




                                                                                                                         USD/PHP
                                            115                                                                  0.022
                               REER index




                                            110                                                                  0.022

                                                                                                                 0.021
                                            105
                                                                                                                 0.021

                                            100                                                                  0.020



                                              Real eﬀective exchange rate (lhs)                Nominal exchange rate (rhs)
                              Note: Nominal exchange rate expressed in USD/PHP. An increase in the REER index,
                              and the exchange rate in USD/PHP represents an appreciation.
                              Source: Bank for International Settlements, BSP




                                                    Prices and monetary policy

18.	    CPI inflation continued to decelerate, averaging 1.7 percent in the first eight months
of 2015, below the central bank’s target of two to four percent for 2015. Several supply side
factors explain the slower rate of inflation, which reached 0.6 percent in August (Figure 10).
Lower inflation was driven by the deceleration of food inflation to 1.2 percent in August from
8.3 percent a year ago as ample inventory26 kept food supply sufficient despite lower
agriculture output (Table 2). In particular, timely and adequate importation of rice kept prices
from increasing as it did last year.27 In addition, oil prices, which fell by 54 percent in August



24
   Under BSP’s Memorandum No. M-2012-036, which supplements BSP Circular 600, the BSP lifted all exemptions
in the computation of bank exposure to real estate and expanded them to cover funds channeled into securities of
property firms. The guidelines under the memorandum provide a more comprehensive measure of banks’ 20
percent cap on real estate exposure.
25
   For more discussion, please see the IMF Article IV consultation 2015, Policies for macroeconomic and financial
sustainability. This is available at: http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/scr/2015/cr15246.pdf
26
   For instance, rice inventory increased by 31 percent.
27
   The total volume of rice imports reached 1.8 million metric tons (mt) as of September 2015. This includes
500,000 mt imported in February, 250,000 mt in June, and 250,000 mt in September, all via the government-to-
government procurement scheme. In addition, the private sector was contracted to import 787,000 mt under the
minimum access volume (MAV) commitment for the year.
                                                                                                                                   9
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  2015 compared to the same period in 2014,28 also contributed to lower inflation given its pass
  through on electricity, transportation, and manufactured goods prices. On the other hand, core
  inflation, which excludes certain food and energy items to better capture underlying price
  volatilities, was higher at 2.2 percent year-to-date. This suggests that low inflation is largely
  driven by volatile goods and is transitory in nature, and is not indicative of the slowing
  economy.

                Table 2. Breakdown of food inflation by commodity; total rice stocks
                                                                   2014                            2015
                                                         Q1         Q2        Aug         Q1        Q2    Aug
              Inﬂation (percent)
                Food and non-alcoholic beverages         5.6        6.8        8.3        4.8      3.0     1.2
                Food                                     5.9        7.1        8.7        5.0      3.1     1.1
                 Bread and cereals                       8.6       10.2       10.7        5.7      2.6    -0.5
                  Rice                                  10.8       12.9       13.2        7.2      3.3    -0.9
                  Corn                                   3.7        5.9        9.1        2.4      0.2    -0.7
                 Meat                                    2.7        4.0        5.9        4.2      1.3     0.3
                 Fish                                    4.1        5.4        6.4        5.1      5.3     3.1
                 Milk, cheese and eggs                   2.2        2.8        4.2        4.4      3.3     1.8
                 Oils and fats                           1.3        4.9        7.5        2.7      0.9    -0.3
                 Fruit                                   5.2        5.5        8.3       11.4      9.6     4.7
                 Vegetables                             11.0        9.7       15.0        1.1      0.4     2.0
                 Sugar, jam and honey                    2.5        4.8        7.5        3.8      4.2     2.9
                 Food products nec                       4.1        8.7        9.6        4.8      4.6     4.3
                Non-alcoholic beverages                  1.7        1.5        1.8        2.1      2.2     1.9
              Alcoholic beverages and tobacco            9.6        4.0        3.5        4.0      3.8     3.7

              Rice Stock (millions metric tons)
               Total Rice Stock                            1.8      2.3        1.7         2.3     3.0    2.2
               NFA Rice Stock                              0.5      0.5        0.4         0.6     0.6    0.8
              Source: Philippine Stati sti cs Authority (PSA), Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP)



  19.	    Monetary policy remains supportive with room to respond to higher global interest
  rates. Given the relatively stable inflation outlook, the Monetary Board kept policy rates steady,
  but announced that it was prepared to respond to developments in the global market. Since
  mid-September 2014, overnight borrowing and lending rates remained at four and six percent,
  respectively. The interest rate on special deposit accounts (SDA) also remained steady at 2.5
  percent and the reserve requirement ratio was also left unchanged at 20 percent for universal
  and commercial banks and eight percent for thrift banks. These have helped keep money
  supply (M3) growth stable, growing by an average of nine percent through June 2015,
  compared to an average of 33 percent over the same period in 2014 (Figure 11).




  28
    Oil prices continued to decline on account of weaker global demand, stable production of oil, and more
  competition from natural gas.
  10
                                                                    Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



     Figure 10. Inﬂation reached its lowest level in 20                                     Figure 11. Money supply growth remained low and
     years as a result of deceleration in food prices and                                   stable given appropriate monetary policy and
     the continued decline in oil prices, bringing inﬂation                                 prudential measures.
     down to 1.7 percent as of August (year to date).

                               Contribution to y-o-y CPI inﬂation                                                    Money supply growth breakdown
                               6                                                                               45
                                                                                                                        Net domestic assets - Private
                                       Food and beverage   Fuel, light, & water
                                                                                                               40       Net domestic assets - Public
                                       Transport           Others                                                       Net foreign assets - Other Depository Corp
                               5
                                       Inﬂation rate                                                           35       Net foreign assets - BSP
                                                                                                                        Liquidity aggregates growth
                               4                                                                               30       M3 growth




                                                                                            Percentage point
                                                                                                               25
                               3
            Percentage point




                                                                                                               20
                               2                                                                               15

                                                                                                               10
                               1
                                                                                                                5
                               0
                                                                                                                0

                               -1                                                                               -5

                                                                                                               -10



 Source: Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP)                                                 Source: BSP




                                                                                  Fiscal policy

20.	    Continuous improvement in tax effort is helping build adequate fiscal space for the
government to ramp up investment to accelerate growth. Tax effort increased to 14.1 percent
of GDP in H1 2015 from 13.7 percent of GDP in H1 2014. The Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR),
which accounts for around 80 percent of total tax revenues, collected 10 percent more taxes
compared to the same period in 2014. In the absence of new tax policy, the BIR continues to
rely on improved tax administration and higher private sector growth to meet its collection
target. In contrast, collections by the Bureau of Customs (BOC) increased by only three percent
in H1 2015, driven by the decline in oil prices over the past year.29

21.	   However, gains from higher revenues and unprecedented increases in the budget
have yet to translate into commensurate increases in government spending. Since 2010,
government budgets have increased by an average annual rate of 15 percent, with sharp
increases coming in the latter years. Existing government systems and procedures face
considerable difficulties expanding at this pace. From H1 2014 to H1 2015, while government
budget increased by 18.5 percent, government expenditures only increased by 8.5 percent. This
slow pace is most evident in Typhoon Yolanda reconstruction spending,30 which indicates that




29
   The BOC estimates that it is likely to lose some PHP 40 billion (0.3 percent of GDP) in VAT revenues due to lower
oil prices.
30
   As of June 30, 2015, only 53 percent of the total PHP 167 billion Yolanda rehabilitation fund was released to
different agencies, more than a year and a half after the typhoon hit the country.
                                                                                                                                                                     11
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  existing government systems are not designed to cope with large increases in the budget.
  According to the government, slow disbursement is largely the result of structural weaknesses
  within key departments and agencies, which includes i) poor planning, ii) weak program and
  project design, and iii) procurement difficulties such as frequent bid failures, weak capacity to
  procure, right-of-way-issues, difficulties in securing permits, and coordination problems. To
  address budget execution bottlenecks, the president issued Administrative Order (AO) No. 46 in
  March 2015 to improve spending efficiency and expedite the implementation of priority
  programs and projects under the 2015 budget.31 Procurement units are also being
  strengthened, including provision of extra staff positions in the bids and awards committee. In
  addition, amendments to right of way acquisition are being discussed in congress to address
  procurement bottlenecks.

  22.	    In particular, public infrastructure spending contracted in Q1 2015 before rebounding
  in Q2. In Q1, public infrastructure spending fell by 11 percent in nominal terms but recovered in
  Q2 by 37 percent, in line with the government’s pronouncements to ramp up spending for the
  rest of the year. While not part of the budget, construction of much needed public
  infrastructure projects could see a boost from the government’s public-private partnership
  (PPP) program. After much delay, the Muntinlupa-Cavite expressway, the country’s first PPP
  road project, was opened in July 2015. Another project, the automatic fare collection system,
  which unites the ticketing and fare collection for the country’s various railway lines, is currently
  undergoing public testing and is expected to be fully operational shortly. Following its
  completion, the government expects to see three more PPP projects completed by 2016 (Table
  3). However, challenges still remain, as multiple hurdles such as right-of-way issues, bidding
  failures, and other legal complications have caused a number of PPP projects to fall behind
  schedule.

  23.	     The country’s fiscal position is sustainable. In H1 2015, the government recorded a
  budget surplus of 0.2 percent of GDP before returning to a year-to-date deficit of PHP 18.5
  billion in July. Prudent fiscal management has resulted in better financing terms and sustained
  decline in its debt burden. The government continues to have a fully funded fiscal deficit with
  an efficient mix of local and foreign sources. Borrowing costs continue to decline, which has
  also allowed the government to swap old, high cost, short-term debt for newer, lower cost,
  long-term debt. For instance, the latest domestic debt swap enabled the government to save
  PHP 2.4 billion in interest expense. In H1 2015, the national government debt to GDP ratio
  improved to 44.9 percent of GDP, on track to meet the government’s goal of 40 percent in the
  medium-term. Total external debt is also falling at a similar pace towards 20 percent in the
  medium-term from 25.7 percent of GDP in H1 2015.




  31
     Under AO 46, agencies are required to complete the disaggregation of project listings and submit all
  documentary requirements for their allotment releases by end-April. They are also required to submit to the
  Department of Budget and Management and the Office of the Cabinet Secretary the implementation plans for
  programs and projects noted in the 2015 General Appropriations Act.
  12
                                              Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



24.	   Going forward, the government needs to review and improve budget planning and
execution so that improved revenues can translate into better spending and improved public
investment. This calls for effectively addressing key bottlenecks including procurement issues,
and reforming the public financial management system (see the prospects and policies sections
for more discussion).


                                             Table 3. Status of PPP projects

                                                                                      Expected
                                                   Project   Bidding date/contract
                                                                                      projected               Status as of
              PPP projects in the pipeline       amount (PHP        award/
                                                                                     completion             September 2015
                                                   billion)    construction start
                                                                                        date

    Completed projects                                2.0
     Munti nlupa-Cavite expressway (MCX)              2.0         May 2013           Jul 2015     Opera ti ona l


    Projects in the pipe line                       503.1
    Contract awarded                                187.0
     Automati c fare collecti on system               1.7         Mar 2015             2015       Ongoi ng publ i c tes ti ng
     project
     LRT line-1 Cavite extension project             64.9          Oct 2014            2019       Ongoi ng pre-cons tructi on
     Cavite-Laguna expressway                        55.5          Jul 2015            2017       Ongoi ng procurement of
                                                                                                  i ndependent cons ul ta nt (IC);
                                                                                                  contra ct s i gned on Jul y 10,
                                                                                                  2015.

      PPP for school infrastructure projects         20.3          Sep 2013            2016       Pha s e I: 98.6 percent
                                                                                                  compl ete, pha s e II: 31.1
      (Phases I and II)
                                                                                                  percent compl ete
      Mactan-Cebu Internati onal Airport             17.5         Nov 2014             2020       7.0 percent compl ete
      passenger terminal building
      NAIA expressway project (Phase II)             15.9          Jan 2014            2016       51.1 percent compl ete
      Modernizati on of the Philippine                8.7          Oct 2014            2017       Ongoi ng procurement of
                                                                                                  i ndependent cons ul ta nt (IC) ;
      Orthopedic Center
                                                                                                  a wa i ti ng i s s ua nce of
                                                                                                  certi ﬁ ca te of pos s es s i on for
                                                                                                  the project s i te

      Southwest integrated transport                  2.5          Jul 2015            2017       Ongoi ng pre-cons tructi on
                                                                                                  a cti vi ti es a nd IC procurement
      system
    Bidding stage/for bid submission                220.1
     Laguna lakeshore expressway dike               122.8         Nov 2015             2021       For bi d s ubmi s s i on
     project
     Regional prison facili ti es                    50.2          Sep 2015            2018       For bi d s ubmi s s i on
     Bulacan bulk water supply project               24.4          Sep 2015            2017       For bi d s ubmi s s i on
     New centennial water source - Kaliwa            18.7          Jul 2015            2020       For bi d i nvi ta ti on
     dam project
     Intergrated transport system - south             4.0          Jul 2015            2017       For i s s ua nce of no ti ce of
                                                                                                  a wa rd
     terminal project
    Other projects                                   96.0
     MRT line-7                                      69.3            2015              2018       Ongoi ng pre-cons tructi on
     Metro Manila skyway (Phases I and II)           26.7          Apr 2014            2016       Pha s e I: 4.4 percent compl ete,
                                                                                                  pha s e II: 1.8 percent compl ete


    Source: PPP center




                                                                                                                                         13
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




                                                            PROSPECTS, RISKS, AND POLICIES32

                                                                                           Prospects and risks

  25.	    The Philippines’ strong macroeconomic fundamentals provide the necessary
  conditions for rapid, sustained, and inclusive growth. The country is increasingly characterized
  by robust economic growth, low and stable inflation, healthy current account surplus, more-
  than-adequate international reserves, and a sustainable fiscal position (Figure 12)—a
  combination never seen in its history. Globally, this strong performance was recognized by all
  three major credit rating agencies with sovereign credit rating upgrades to two notches above
  investment grade and by a record high foreign direct investment inflows last year. With a solid
  macroeconomy that has proven to be resilient against shocks, the country can now focus its
  attention on implementing crucial structural reforms that can sustain growth, create more and
  better jobs, and eradicate extreme poverty.

       Figure 12. Strong macroeconomic fundamentals                                                                        Figure 13. International recognition for the
       underpinned growth in the last ﬁve years.                                                                           Philippines’ good performance is seen in
                                                                                                                           investment-grade credit ratings and record FDIs in
                                                                                                                           2014.

                     Selected macroeconomic indicators                                                                                             FDI and credit rating
            12                                                                                    120                                7
            10                                                                                    100                                                    FDI
                                                                                                                                     6                                             Baa2
                                                              1990-99    2000-09    2010-14
                 8                                                                                80
                                                                                                                                     5
                                                                                                                                                         Credit rating (Moody's)
                                                                                                                                                                                   Baa3
                                                                                                                                                         (RHS)
                                                                                                                      USD thousand




                 6                                                                                60
                                                                                                                                     4                                             Ba1
                                                                                                        USD billion




                 4                                                                                40
       Percent




                 2                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                     3                                             Ba2

                 0                                                                                0                                  2                                             Ba3
             -2                                                                                   -20                                1                                             B1
             -4                                                                                   -40
                                                                                                                                     0
             -6                                                                                   -60
                     Per capita       Current     Inﬂation rate Debt service (in International
                      growth          account                   percent of GDP) reserves (USD
                                    balance (in                                   billion, RHS)
                                  percent of GDP)
   Source: PSA, BSP, World Bank staﬀ computations                                                                     Source: BSP, Moody's investors service




  26.	    Near term economic growth will remain robust and is projected to improve from 5.8
  percent in 2015 to 6.4 percent in 2016 (Table 4). Lower 2015 growth takes into account the
  relatively weak first half growth brought about by slow government spending, negative net
  exports, and the initial impact of El Niño. Second half growth is projected to improve as
  government spending catches up. In addition, accelerated implementation of public-private




  32
    This section was prepared by Joseph Louie Limkin (Research Analyst), with inputs from Kevin Cruz (Research
  Analyst), and under the guidance of Karl Kendrick Chua (Senior Country Economist), all from the Macroeconomics
  and Fiscal Management Global Practice.
  14
                                                             Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses




partnership (PPP) projects, valued at 0.6 percent of GDP in 2015, and the continuing effect of
lower food inflation and declining oil prices can further support growth (see Box 1 for more
discussion). Lower prices of oil and slower inflation of other commodities has enabled the
central bank to keep key rates low to support growth. However, a stronger El Niño and weaker
exports can pull down growth considerably.33 In 2016, growth is expected to accelerate to
6.4 percent as the country recovers from the 2015 slowdown and as election spending lifts
government spending34 before tempering to 6.2 percent in 2017.

                               Table 4. Philippine, East Asia, and global growth projections
                                                                             2015                     2016       2017
                        Philippines                                                                           
                          Revised                                             5.8                     6.4        6.2
                          Previous                                            6.5                     6.5        6.3
                        East Asia                                                                                  
                          Revised                                             5.7                     5.8        5.8
                          Previous                                            6.7                     6.7        6.6
                        Global                                                                                
                          Revised                                             2.5                     3.0        3.1
                          Previous                                            2.8                     3.3        3.2
		Source: World Bank staff estimates
  Note: Previous projections refer to those reported in the June 2015 Global Economic Prospects




27.	    Poverty reduction is expected to continue if the country is able to maintain relatively
high economic growth and better job trends in recent years, despite recent shocks to
agriculture. Using full-year estimates from the 2012 Family Income and Expenditure Survey,
poverty is estimated to have decreased from 11.2 percent in 2012 to 10.5 percent in 2014 and
is projected to decrease further to 8.2 percent in 2017 (using the new international poverty line
of USD 1.90/day purchasing power parity [PPP], new 2011 PPP prices, and the above growth
assumptions). Although government spending was reduced overall in 2015, government
transfers to poor households were not impacted and are being ramped-up. However, official
poverty estimates are particularly sensitive to food price inflation. Even as the outlook for
international prices is favorable, poverty results will also depend on how the government
manages its food policy, and in particular, rice imports.




33
   The current El Niño is projected to be one of the strongest in history. The two strongest El Niño episodes in
1982-83 and 1997-98 led to a contraction in agriculture by four and seven percent, respectively.
34
   The May 2013 edition of the Philippine economic update (PEU) estimates that H1 GDP growth could be
one percentage point (ppt) higher during a presidential election year, as election spending and transfers lift
government spending. This is available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/EAP/Philippines/Philippine_Economic_Update_
May2013.pdf.
                                                                                                                        15
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




                   Box 1. Lower oil and rice prices: potential impact on growth and poverty

  Over the past year and a half, oil prices have fallen significantly, and are likely to stay below USD 60
  per barrel over the medium-term. Previous episodes of major oil price declines35 were more transitory
  in nature (i.e., 1991 Gulf war, 1997 Asian financial crisis, 2001 September 11 attacks and the dot-com
  bubble, and 2008 global financial crisis). In contrast, the current decline in oil prices appears to be more
  prolonged due to both supply and demand factors: i) expansion of non-OPEC sources of oil such as
  shale, ii) change in OPEC policy stance from price targeting to market share protection, and iii) the global
  economic slowdown, led by China.

  Given that the country is a major net importer of oil, the Philippine economy stands to benefit
  significantly. Lower oil prices will have direct and indirect effects on growth. Using the 2006 input-
  output table, the economy wide share of petroleum to total production cost is around eight percent. In
  industry, this is higher at almost 11 percent. This means that the halving of oil prices since 2014 could
  have reduced the cost of goods by roughly five percent, not including multiplier effects. All in all,
  through various transmission channels such as greater consumption and a lower import bill, the country
  is estimated to gain an additional one-half to one ppt in GDP growth in 2015.36

  Lower oil prices and low food inflation also affect households positively, and more so among poor37
  households given that food accounts for 40 percent of their consumption basket. Households directly
  benefit from lower food and transportation costs, and indirectly from lower input costs for agriculture
  and lower manufactured goods prices. Even smallholder farmers can benefit from lower commodity
  prices, as most of them are net food buyers, even if they are involved in agricultural production.

  While the precise impact of lower food and oil prices is difficult to measure, the household survey
  suggests that it can be significant. For instance, using the 2012 Family Income and Expenditure Survey,
  the average poor household can save around PHP 6,000 annually (equivalent to around 32 percent of
  the national poverty gap) from lower oil, transport, and rice prices.38 Compared to the average price of
  oil in 2014, the poor have effectively gained PHP 4,400 year-to-date due to low oil prices. If oil prices fall
  further as projected and this is completely passed on to consumers, and rice prices stay at their current
  levels, the poor could save an additional PHP 1,600 for the rest of the year.39 This is money that can be
  used to increase basic consumption and bring some households out of poverty.




  35
     An oil price decline is considered a major episode if the decrease in crude oil prices surpassed 30 percent over a
  six month period.
  36
      See the East Asia and Pacific Update April 2015 edition for more discussion. This report is available at:
  http://www.worldbank.org/en/region/eap/publication/east-asia-pacific-economic-update
  37
     In this box, the poor is defined as the bottom 30 percent of the population, roughly coinciding with the official
  poverty incidence.
  38
      Together, these three items account for around 32 percent of the total consumption basket of the poor,
  compared to only 22 percent for the rest of the population.
  39
     The consumption of oil and rice by the poor in 2014 is projected from the 2012 FIES by applying the historical
  growth rate of consumption compared to the 2009 FIES. The projected expenditure in 2014 is divided by the
  average prices in 2014 to get the quantity consumed. This quantity is then multiplied with the prevailing (lower)
  price, and the product is subtracted from the 2014 consumption to get potential savings in 2015, which could be
  used to increase other consumption and thus overall welfare.
  16
                                              Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



Finally, the poor can benefit even further if excise taxes on petroleum products are increased and the
revenue is redistributed in the form of better social services, including social protection. Raising excise
taxes on petroleum products is equitable as consumption of petroleum products is highly skewed
towards the rich (i.e., the richest 10 percent consumes almost 60 percent of total petroleum products).40
Box 3 of the January 2015 edition of the Philippine economic update discusses an option to raise some
PHP 20 billion in petroleum excise taxes that the government could use to help address poverty.

                          Box table 1.1. Impact of lower oil and rice prices on the poor
                                                                                                   Consumption if oil
                                                                              Consumption at 2015
                                                   Projected consumption                          prices fall further as
                                                                                 current prices
                                                   at 2014 average prices                          projected and rice
                                                                                  (September)
       PHP                                                                                        prices stay the same
       Oil and oil related expenditure                               10,430                   6,929                   6,234
       Rice                                                          21,441                  19,106                  19,106
       Total                                                         31,871                  26,035                  25,340
       Freed up money*                                                                        4,377                   1,633
       Source: PSA, WB sta ﬀ es ti mates
       *Freed up money is pro-rated from the start of the year up to the current month (September), while the potenti al
       gains if prices fall further are pro-rated from October up to the end of the year.


                                                    Selected references

Kose, M. A., F. Ohnsorge, & M. Stocker. 2015. The great plunge in oil prices: Causes, consequences, and
policy responses. World Bank Group, Development Economics.

World Bank. 2015. East Asia and Pacific Update (April 2015). Available                                                        at:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/region/eap/publication/east-asia-pacific-economic-update


28.	    With private domestic demand growing by an average of 6.9 percent since 2010,41
realizing the administration’s end-term growth target of seven to eight percent will primarily
hinge on its ability to significantly increase public spending to offset weak external demand.
This requires spending 95 percent of the primary budget instead of the average trend of 79.7
percent (see Box 2 for more discussion). In the short-term, meeting the 95 percent target
requires more effectively addressing well known procurement bottleneck issues. In the long-
term, significant reforms in the public financial management system are necessary to address
limited absorptive capacity of the government in light of the growing fiscal space (see the policy
section for more discussion).




40
   For a more detailed discussion on the manner and benefits of raising petroleum excise tax as prices fall,
please see the PEU January 2015 edition.
41
   Since 2010, average growth of private domestic demand at 6.9 percent has been higher compared to average
GDP growth of 6.2 percent.
                                                                                                                              17
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




                                               Box 2. What if the government spent the budget as planned?

  A simple static analysis (without multiplier effects) shows that if the government spent closer to the
  budget, growth would be higher, even reaching the administration’s end-term target of seven to eight
  percent.42 Despite the vibrant performance of the private sector, slow public spending of around 4.5
  percent since 2010 has significantly limited economic growth. With an average spending-to-primary
  budget ratio43 of 79.7 percent, GDP growth averaged 6.2 percent from 2010 to 2014, significantly lower
  than the eight percent high-end target by 2016. If the spending ratio had improved by five percentage
  points (ppt) each year to 85 percent, average GDP growth could have been 6.9 percent. With a 15 ppt a
  year improvement to 95 percent, average growth would reach 8.2 percent. However, this assumes that
  ramping up spending does not entail significant productivity and efficiency losses.

                                                                          Box table 2.1. Summary of scenarios
   Cases                                                                        2010                      2011                      2012                      2013   2014   Average
   Actual spending ratio*                                                       83.7                      73.6                      80.7                      82.7   78.0     79.7
   Actual government spending growth                                             4.0                      -6.2                      15.7                       6.7    2.4     4.5
   Actual private domestic demand growth                                         8.9                       6.2                       3.9                      10.1    5.4     6.9
   Actual overall GDP growth                                                     7.6                       3.7                       6.7                       7.1    6.1     6.2
   Spending ratio scenarios
       85 percent                                                                 7.6                      4.5                       7.5                      7.8    6.9      6.9
       90 percent                                                                 7.6                      5.3                       8.3                      8.6    7.7      7.5
       95 percent                                                                 7.6                      6.1                       9.1                      9.4    8.5      8.2
   Source: WB staﬀ esti mates
   *Deﬁned as the ratio between government spending, as measured in the national income accounts, and primary appropriations, as calculated using DBM data.




  29.	   The government has identified a number of executive and legislative measures to
  speed up public spending, especially on infrastructure. These measures—reducing lump sums,
  more proactive management of procurement delays (as provided by AO 46), shift to bank
  processing of payments, amendments to the right-of-way acquisition and the build-operate-
  transfer law, and a new public financial management law—need to be fast-tracked if they are
  to make a difference on 2015 and 2016 growth.

  30.	    Efforts are also needed to fast-track bidding and implementation of the PPP program.
  Currently, there are 15 projects worth PHP 503.1 billion (four percent of 2014 GDP) that are at
  least in the bidding stage, including 10 projects that were already awarded, have started
  construction, or nearing completion. With construction costs assumed to be spread equally
  over their projected duration, PPPs are projected to raise investments by 0.6 percent of GDP in
  2015 and 0.8 percent of GDP in 2016. In addition, up to 18 more PPPs are expected to be
  approved by June 2016, including the biggest PPP in history, the North-South commuter rail,



  42
    Growth of at least eight percent in a single year has not been achieved since the 1970s.
  43
     Government spending is defined as the sum of government consumption and public construction from the
  national income accounts. Primary budget is equal to the sum of new appropriations, continuing appropriations,
  supplemental appropriations, and automatic appropriations less interest payment. Interest payment is deducted
  since it does not affect GDP.
  18
                                                                                   Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



worth around PHP 171 billion (1.4 percent of GDP). Fast-tracking would shift spending to earlier
years and reap multiplier effects to spur growth in the coming years.

31.	    Higher spending that is in line with budget targets will not increase the country’s debt
burden. National government debt has gone down significantly from 75 percent of GDP a
decade ago to just 45 percent of GDP in 2014. Debt service as share of revenues fell even more,
from 85 percent in 2006 to just 27 percent in 2014, freeing up a lot of resources for an
investment-led growth, which should be a priority given a falling output gap. With good fiscal
management, the government can afford a deficit equivalent to two percent of GDP and still
see its debt burden fall in the medium-term even with an interest rate or exchange rate shock
(Figures 14 and 15). Raising fiscal space beyond moderate deficit spending requires new
sources of tax revenues (see the policy section for more discussion).

  Figure 14. National government debt will continue                                                  Figure 15. … or an exchange rate shock.
  to fall over the medium-term even with an interest
  rate shock…

                           Interest rate shock (in percent)                                                                  Interest rate shock (in percent)
                      80                                                                                                80



                      70                                                                                                70
     Percent of GDP




                                                                                                       Percent of GDP




                      60                                                                                                60                                                                  Real
                                                                                                                                                                                        depreciation
                                                                                                                                                                                           shock
                      50                                                            Interest rate                       50
                                                                                        shock

                      40                                                                                                40

                                                                                     Baseline                                                                                            Baseline
                      30                                                                                                30




 Source: World Bank staﬀ estimates                                                                  Source: World Bank staﬀ estimates
 Note: The dotted line represents debt projections with a one standard deviation                    Note: The dotted line represents a one-time, real exhange rate depreciation of 30
 shock to interest rates.                                                                           percent, with real depreciation deﬁned as nominal depreciation minus inﬂation.




32.	     Near-term growth projections are tilted towards the downside. Philippine external
demand hinges primarily on the strength of recovery of the US, Euro, and Japanese
economies. These economies account for about half of Philippine exports, not including
Chinese-assembled electronic products using Philippine-made parts. However, Philippine
merchandise exports are not expected to return to pre-crisis growth rates as global trade
remains sluggish in the medium-term. To raise external demand amidst slower trade and more
global competition, the Philippines needs to start raising productivity to lower unit labor cost,
especially in light of an appreciating peso in real terms. Increasing infrastructure, reducing non-
tariff barriers, and improving logistics support are all needed.

33.	   The upcoming increase in US policy rates may yet again disrupt the local financial
market. The long anticipated tightening of US monetary policy is likely to begin in Q4 2015.
However, unlike the taper tantrum in 2013, the local markets have internalized the inevitable
increase in interest rates, and as such, the impact on the financial market should be more

                                                                                                                                                                                                       19
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  manageable. Capital outflow is still likely, but the country’s strong fundamentals will cushion its
  transmission into the real sector. Moreover, room for domestic monetary policy tightening
  exists given improving growth prospects and manageable inflation.

  34.	    But the greater concern lies in its impact on the cost of financing, both for the public
  and private sectors. The Philippine economy has benefited significantly over the years from the
  low interest rate environment. Lower borrowing costs have helped create significant fiscal
  space while allowing debt burden to fall substantially. It has also helped boost the construction
  and real estate sectors. All these are about to change as domestic interest rates rise in response
  to higher US policy rates, and this will have a more material impact on near-term growth as
  opposed to short-term capital outflow. Responding to this threat lies in both securing long-term
  fiscal space through revenue mobilization (see the policy section for more discussion) and
  macro-financial prudential measures to manage risk from increasing leverage.

  35.	    Closer to home, while the Chinese stock market volatility poses little risk for the
  Philippine financial sector, the effect of a Chinese slowdown could be more pronounced.44
  Financial linkages between China and the Philippines are low, thus capital outflows stemming
  from the volatile Chinese financial market are manageable. However, Philippine exports to
  China comprise around 13 percent of total exports and thus could have some effect on growth.
  On the one hand, agricultural exports to China are rising (currently valued at USD 400 million)
  and could affect farmers’ income.45 On the other hand, as the bulk of exports to China are
  electronic parts, exports to China may not fall significantly as final demand for electronics
  comes predominantly from high-income countries, reflecting China’s role as a global assembly
  hub for these products. Moreover, the Chinese yuan’s depreciation can make its exports more
  competitive, thereby benefiting the Philippines as it is a key supplier of parts. China’s slowdown
  could also have more pronounced effects on tourism, as China is fast becoming a major source
  of foreign tourists for the Philippines. Tourist arrivals from China have grown exponentially
  from just 15,000 in 2000 to almost half a million in 2014. The key response to slower external
  demand from China is to improve productivity on the goods side and improve tourism
  infrastructure and facilities on the services side.

  36.	    On the domestic side, El Niño is the main threat, not so much on GDP growth per se
  but on the quality of growth, as tens of millions of farmers’ lives may be affected. Current
  growth projections assume that agriculture will not expand in 2015 given the adverse effects of
  El Niño. However, a stronger El Niño could lead to a major contraction in agriculture, thereby
  pulling down GDP growth and more importantly farmers’ income, while increasing inflation.
  Simulations show that if agriculture contracts by four percent, as in the 1983 El Niño, GDP
  growth in 2015 could drop to 5.4 percent, holding other factors constant. If agriculture



  44
     For more discussion on the linkages between the two countries, see the January 2015 edition of the PEU. This is
  available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/philippines/publication/philippine-economic-update january-
  2015.
  45
     For instance, in 2012, the local banana industry suffered when exports to China were halted due to phyto-
  sanitary concerns.
  20
                                        Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



contracts by seven percent, as in the 1998 El Niño, GDP growth could drop to as low as 5.1
percent.46 With a fall in farm production, farm prices will inevitably lead to higher inflation,
once the currently adequate food inventory is depleted. The combined effect of higher food
prices and lower farm output will have significant impact on poverty (see Box 3 for more
discussion on El Niño). The key response to El Niño in the immediate-term is to ensure
adequate food stock, especially through timely importation of rice and other key food items. In
the medium-term, reforms in food policy are essential (see the January 2015 edition of the
Philippine economic update for more discussion).


                Box 3. The likely consequences of El Niño and the government’s response

Latest forecasts indicate that the current El Niño episode may rival the 1997-98 episode, which
resulted in a large contraction in the country’s agriculture sector. The strongest episode of El Niño was
recorded in 1997-1998, causing a dry spell from June 1997 to August 1998.47 As a result, the country’s
agriculture sector contracted by seven percent in 1998, with a negative contribution of one ppt to
overall growth. The losses in agriculture were highlighted by double digit declines in output for the
country’s major crops such as rice, sugar, and yellow corn. The large contraction in output caused a
significant increase in food prices, as food inflation rose to 8.3 percent in 1998 compared to 2.9 percent
in 1997. Had the government not over-imported rice in 1998, food inflation could have been much
higher.

As a consequence, the impact of El Niño on poverty was pronounced. Datt and Hoogeveen (2000)
showed using the 1998 Annual Poverty Indicators Survey (APIS) that the combined effects of the
financial crisis of 1997 and the 1997-98 episode of El Niño resulted in an increase in poverty incidence
from 29.1 to 31.7 percent in 1998. The El Niño shock alone contributed about 46 percent to the increase
in the poverty incidence.

The current episode of El Niño has begun to take its toll on the country’s agriculture sector, albeit not
yet as pronounced as the 1997-98 episode. In H1 2015, the country’s agriculture sector grew by only 0.3
percent, with bleak outlook for the rest of the year as the government expects 70 out of the country’s
81 provinces likely to be affected by drought by year end.48 The Department of Agriculture (DA)
estimates that the agriculture sector already incurred PHP 3.3 billion in production losses due to El Niño
as of August. Despite the negative impact on output, food inflation is still low, in large part due to
adequate and timely importation of rice, which has dampened the effects of lower farm output on
prices.




46
   The fall in GDP growth as a result of agriculture contraction is likely to be less severe nowadays given that
agriculture value-added now comprises just 11 percent of total value-added.
47
   As a comparison, the agriculture sector also experienced a contraction in the 1982-83 episode of El Niño—the
second strongest in history—with agriculture contracting by four percent and food inflation rising to 8.6 percent.
48
    Based on statistical analysis by the Philippine Atmospheric, Geophysical, and Astronomical Services
Administration (PAGASA) using historical and just-in-time rainfall data, provinces that are projected to be least
affected by El Niño are: Agusan del Norte, Agusan del Sur, Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur, Compostela Valley,
Davao del Norte, and Davao Occidental, all from eastern Mindanao; Benguet, Ifugao, and Mountain Province, all
from the Luzon highlands; and Siquijor in Visayas.
                                                                                                               21
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  For the rest of 2015 to early 2016, the effects of El Niño on farm output may pose an upside risk to
  inflation and poverty as the current bout of El Niño is expected to intensify in the last quarter of the
  year and persist until early 2016.49 Indicative simulation shows that if food inflation increased to 8.3
  percent similar to the 1998 episode, then poverty incidence could increase by around 0.8 ppt in 2016
  compared to 2014.50 As a response, the government is carefully monitoring the situation and planning
  the appropriate rice import quantity. In September 2015, the government bid out contracts to import
  750,000 metric tons of rice to serve as buffer stock in case El Niño intensifies and adversely impacts
  domestic rice production. Furthermore, the DA has requested a supplemental budget of PHP 1.9
  billion,51 while the National Economic and Development Authority has created a task force to help
  mitigate the negative effects of El Niño. The government has indicated that it will continue to monitor
  the supply of rice and stands ready to import rice to keep prices stable.

                                                Selected references

  Datt, G. and H. Hoogeveen. 2000. El Niño or El Peso? Crisis, Poverty, and Income Distribution in the
  Philippines. World Bank East Asia and Pacific Region. Washington, DC.

  Dy, R.T. 2015. What to expect from the 2015-2016 drought. Business World. Available at:
  http://www.bworldonline.com/content.php?section=Opinion&title=what-to-expect-from-the-2015-
  2016br-drought&id=114871




                                                      Policies

  37.	    The remaining eight months of the Aquino Administration present an opportunity to
  clearly and practically define the unfinished business in the structural reform agenda. These
  are challenging reforms, as they would reverse decades of policies which have undermined the
  economy’s capacity to generate more and better jobs. They include i) institutionalizing current
  reforms to increase budget transparency and accountability, ii) crafting a simpler, more
  equitable, and more efficient tax system to finance an investment-led growth, iii) further
  opening up the economy to more competition by reducing the investment negative list, iv)
  securing property rights through land governance reforms, and v) unleashing the full potential




  49
     The current bout of El Niño is expected to peak in November 2015 and will likely continue until March to April
  2016.
  50
     The 2014 APIS was used to run the simulation. To compute for poverty incidence in 2016, the following steps
  were taken: i) compute 2016 projected per capita income by using 2014 per capita income as base and income
  growth from 2012 to 2013 of 3.5 percent compounded for the bottom 50 percent (income growth from 2013 to
  2014 is not used given the presence of exogenous shocks), ii) compute projected 2016 poverty threshold by
  adjusting the 2014 poverty threshold under the assumption of two percent overall inflation in 2015, 8.3 percent
  food inflation in 2016, and three percent non-food inflation in 2016, and iii) count the number of poor households
  whose income falls below the poverty threshold in 2016.
  51
     The proposed supplemental budget is broken down into i) production support for rice, corn, high-value crops,
  livestock (PHP 804 million), ii) water management (PHP 989 million), iii) information and education campaign (PHP
  73 million), and iv) project management (PHP 65 million).
  22
                                        Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



of the private sector, in particular, small and micro firms, by re-engineering business regulations
to make them simpler and far less costly. When sustained, these reforms can sustain high
growth, accelerate good job creation, and eliminate extreme poverty.

38.	     The Aquino Administration made substantial progress on improving the
macroeconomy and governance, in particular, with respect to fighting corruption and
increasing transparency. This improved macro-governance climate provided an environment
conducive to inclusive growth. In 2010, the reform-minded Aquino Administration commenced
office with a strong governance agenda and commitment to strengthen macroeconomic
stability. These efforts have borne fruit and are well recognized locally and globally. At home,
according to a recent survey by the Social Weather Stations, 41 percent of Filipinos are satisfied
with the government52 even on its last year—a feat that no recent administration had
achieved.53 Globally, the country’s rank in Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions
Index improved by 49 places from 134 in 2010 to 85 in 2014. In addition, as discussed above,
the country is now rated two notches above investment grade by all three major credit rating
agencies—a testament to the country’s strong macroeconomic fundamentals.

39.	   The administration’s focus on improving fiscal revenues and public financial
management allowed a considerable ramping up of spending, including on programs which
benefit the poor directly. The proposed budget for 2016 is nearly double than that of 2010,
implying an annual growth rate of about 12 percent. This is substantial by international
standards. One fiscal management measure which paid off significantly was enabled by better
creditworthiness of the country. In particular, it allowed the government to replace high-cost
with low-cost debt. This caused debt servicing as a percentage of government revenues to
decline from 53 percent in 2011 to 27 percent in 2014.

40.	    The growing fiscal space was rightly targeted towards priority areas, led by social
services. The budget for education, health, and social protection grew by almost three times
between 2010 and 2016. As a result, the country today has a world class conditional cash
transfer (CCT) program that replaced a corrupt patronage system of subsidies. The public
education system now provides 13 years of free schooling. Universal healthcare coverage is
close to being achieved. A larger budget for community-driven development and bottom-up
budgeting programs is giving the people direct voice in development interventions.
Infrastructure spending, while progressing slower, has also been ramped-up, with the aim of
reaching five percent of GDP by 2016. These spending reforms were made possible by better
tax administration and the passage of the “sin tax” law, both of which created significant fiscal




52
   The net satisfaction rating is defined by the SWS as the difference between the percent of respondents who say
they are satisfied with the president and the percent of respondents who say that they are unsatisfied with the
president.
53
   In the third quarter preceding a presidential election, no other president among the last four surpassed a net
satisfaction rating of 40 percent (i.e., C. Aquino: 10 percent, Ramos: 35 percent, Estrada: impeached, and Arroyo:
negative 38 percent!).
                                                                                                               23
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  space of around 1.9 percent of GDP, and by better transparency and accountability of public
  spending.

  41.	   On the structural reform agenda, the Aquino Administration has begun to address
  decades-long constraints that have held back the potential of the private sector. These
  reforms include:

       •	 Passing an overarching competition policy law: Under the competition law, economic
          agents can be charged with monopolistic behavior. The law has been decades in the
          making, as it was always successfully opposed by the large business conglomerates.

       •	 Allowing foreign transshipment of goods: Cabotage liberalization was another long-
          awaited, but nonetheless welcome structural reform with the objective of increasing
          competition in order to bring down transportation costs and improve safety standards.
          The new law allows foreign ships to on and off-load foreign freight along domestic
          routes, instead of being forced to completely on and off-load in one international port.
          The reform is not a full liberalization, as foreign ships will not be allowed to take in
          domestic cargo, but it is a good start. In addition, implementing rules and regulation still
          need to be drafted.

       •	 Fully liberalizing the banking industry: The banking sector liberalization opens up the
          banking sector to foreign competition—five foreign banks have already been approved
          for entry. Moreover, full liberalization in 2014 helped to attract USD 1.3 billion in FDI to
          the financial sector from an average of just USD 35 million since 2005.

       •	 Simplifying business registration: Finally, progress was made on key aspects of the
          investment climate for SMEs, including business registration. However, the positive legal
          and regulatory reforms undertaken seem to need stronger coordination and
          enforcement on the ground to ensure that SMEs actually experience an improved
          investment climate.

  Moreover, the push for the rationalization of fiscal incentives will likely attract rather than
  discourage both domestic and foreign investment, as the playing field will be leveled, compared
  to the current system in which incumbent firms are treated as “infants” with unfair incentives.

  42.	    Taken together, the administration’s governance and structural reforms led to a
  significant acceleration of economic growth since 2010. However, it seems that the
  governance reforms—the reduction of corruption, the increased transparency, and the higher
  and improved spending patterns—contributed more to higher growth than the structural
  reforms per se, as many are awaiting concrete implementation and further reforms. A recent




  24
                                        Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



growth decomposition by the IMF54 suggests that the unexplained part of the growth—the
growth increase which cannot be explained by the growth of capital and labor—was the most
important contributor to growth. As it is unlikely that a sudden improvement in technology
adoption—the usual explanation for the unexplained part—occurred across the economy,
improved governance would be a strong candidate to explain the growth acceleration.

43.	     The reforms are also beginning to translate into more and better job creation and
faster poverty reduction. As discussed above, but worth repeating, the 2013 Annual Poverty
Indicator Survey (APIS) suggests that poverty fell strongly between 2012 and 2013. The 2013
data also suggest that real income of the bottom 20 percent grew much faster than the rest of
the population, through a substantial 30 percent growth of domestic cash transfers to this
quintile versus four percent for the rest of the population—confirming that the government’s
CCT program is well-targeted and reaching the poor. Moreover, underemployment among the
poor significantly decreased in the same period. However, in 2014, the APIS data showed an
increase in poverty, attributed to Typhoon Yolanda (a one time, unprecedented event) and
artificially high rice prices (due to rice importation lags by the state monopoly), which offset the
income growth of the poor. Nonetheless, poverty reduction is expected to continue if the
country is able to maintain the speed and quality of growth achieved in recent years.

44.	   The reforms undertaken by the Aquino Administration signal a break from the past.
What is now needed is to cement the gains in the last five years by institutionalizing the
reforms made and clearly laying out the unfinished reform agenda, which would address the
remaining structural issues that impede investment and thus the creation of more and better
jobs. These reforms, covering the areas of public finance, competition, property rights, and
business regulations, are well known and are discussed in depth in the Philippine development
report “Creating more and better jobs,”55 and in previous editions of the Philippine Economic
Update.56

45.	   This closing discussion highlights the key recommendations that the administration
can consider as it ends its term:

     •	 Institutionalize current public sector reforms to increase budget transparency and
        accountability, and spending efficiency: The administration’s well known transparency
        and accountability reforms can be institutionalized by passing the Freedom of
        Information Bill. This would help institutionalize “open data,” which means making
        government data publicly available in user-friendly forms that can easily be analyzed




54
   For more discussion, please see the IMF article IV consultation 2015 selected issues. “Philippines: real and
financial cycles.”
55
    The 2013 Philippine development report “Creating more and better jobs” is available at:
http://www.worldbank.org/content/dam/Worldbank/document/EAP/Philippines/PDRFullReport.pdf.
56
           The       past       editions       of        the         PEU        are        available         at:
http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/philippines/publication/philippine-economic-updates
                                                                                                             25
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




          (i.e., in Excel format as opposed to PDFs or images).57 Budget reporting reforms to allow
          the public and the government itself to track spending from appropriations to results on
          the ground can be institutionalized by adopting an automated and government-wide
          financial management and information system. These reforms can help the government
          fully utilize the growing fiscal space, which remains a challenge given limitations of the
          current public financial management system and the inclination of civil servants to still
          operate in the old mentality of rationalizing spending given severe cash constraints.58

       •	 Craft a simpler, more equitable, and more efficient tax system to sustainably finance
          an investment-led growth:59 Following the passage of the landmark sin tax law, the
          following measures can be considered: i) rationalize tax incentives by making them
          more targeted, transparent, performance-based, and temporary, including timely
          release of a tax expenditure statement, which enumerates all existing and proposed tax
          incentives and who benefits from them, and ii) index tax rates and valuations which
          have not kept up with inflation, such as petroleum excise taxes and property valuations.
          Rapidly falling oil prices provide an opportunity to adjust petroleum excise taxes to
          make the tax system more equitable. Only if new revenues are raised should reforms to
          reduce tax rates be considered. These could include i) lowering the top marginal income
          tax rate to 25 percent, ii) reducing the gap between regular and special corporate
          income tax rates, and iii) simplifying the tax regime for micro and small enterprises. For
          tax policy to be effective, improved tax administration is necessary. Relaxing the bank
          secrecy law when fraud is detected would help improve tax administration significantly.

       •	 Further open up the economy to more competition by reducing the investment
          negative list:60 Following the passage of the competition policy law, proper formulation
          of its implementing rules and regulations is needed. Moreover, further opening up
          priority sectors of the economy to international players is recommended by removing
          them from the foreign investment negative list. The following sectors are likely to have
          the largest gains in terms of competition, capital, and technology: telecoms,61 shipping




  57
     Compared to the open data initiative, the FOI has a larger scope as it seeks to give the public easier access to a
  wide range of public documents, such as complete statement of assets, liabilities, and net worth of elected
  officials, government project documents, and minutes of official proceedings (e.g., congressional debates).
  58
     Using the 2014 budget as a frame of reference, the government’s analysis showed that failure to meet the
  disbursement goal was a result of structural weaknesses within key departments and agencies, which includes
  poor planning, and program and project design, procurement difficulties, including frequent bid failures and weak
  capacity to procure; and other bottlenecks including right-of-way-issues, difficulties in securing permits, and
  coordination problems.
  59
     For more discussion, please see the August 2014 edition of the PEU and the upcoming report “Tax policy for more
  inclusive growth.”
  60
     For more discussion, please see the January 2015 edition of the PEU.
  61
     For instance, in its latest household download index, internet metrics provider Ookla (which owns the popular
  website speedtest.net), ranked the Philippines as 21st out of 22 countries in Asia in terms of average internet speed
  at 3.64 megabytes per second (mbps), behind Laos and Myanmar, and only ahead of Afghanistan. Comparing the
  Philippines to its neighbors, the country’s average internet speed is dwarfed by Thailand at almost 20 mbps, and
  26
                                          Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



         construction, and rice. They are also the sectors likely to generate jobs, increase real
         income, and improve quality while lowering prices.

    •	 Secure property rights through land governance reforms: Following the near
       completion of the cadastral survey,62 and efforts to streamline land registration, the
       following reforms could be considered to address long standing issues in securing
       property rights: i) accelerate the systematic and administrative adjudication of property
       rights in rural and urban land, plot by plot, ii) adopt and strictly enforce zoning
       regulations in a systematic and consistent way, iii) implement the land reform program
       using a more community-driven and decentralized approach, and iv) improve land
       administration by passing an effective Land Administration Reform Act and National
       Land Use Act.

    •	 Overhaul business regulations to make them simpler and far less costly: The private
       sector is the main contributor and beneficiary of economic growth. In H1 2015, private
       domestic demand grew by 8.1 percent compared to an economy-wide growth of 5.3
       percent. The full potential of the private sector, in particular, small and micro firms, can
       be realized by re-engineering business regulations to make them simpler and far less
       costly. When sustained, these reforms can accelerate good job creation among micro
       and small firms and help eliminate extreme poverty by increasing their productivity and
       reducing informality. Being a major theme and recommendation of this report, the
       details are discussed in the medium-term reform section while the special focus looks
       in-depth at the total cost of starting and maintaining a business, and transaction costs
       in exporting—two areas with great potential to create more and better jobs when
       reformed substantially.

46.	     A number of these recommendations are currently being addressed. In his last state-
of-the-nation address (SONA) in July 2015, President Aquino asked congress to pass the 2016
General Appropriations Act on time, as is the practice in the last five budgets, so that i) there
would be no recurring funding for projects that are already completed, and ii) there would be
no delay in the delivery of public services. In addition to the economic reform bills, such as the
fiscal incentives rationalization bill, the president certified the passage of an anti-dynasty law as
urgent—the first such high level directive to reform the country’s political system,63 and the




even Vietnam at 18 mbps. As a reference, high-income economies like Singapore and Hong Kong both have
average internet speeds of over 100 mbps. More glaringly, despite being particularly slow, internet costs in the
Philippines are extremely expensive, costing around USD 18 per mbps against a global average of around USD 5
per mbps, as measured by Ookla.
62
   In 2015, the Department of Environment and Natural Resources reported that it completed field survey activities
for the cadastral survey. This covers over 30 million hectares in all of the country’s 1,634 cities and municipalities.
However, 118 cities and municipalities in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao are still undergoing
inspection and verification.
63
    Research from the Asian Institute of Management Policy Center suggests that Philippine provinces with the
highest concentration of political dynasties also tend to have the highest poverty rates.
                                                                                                                    27
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  Bangsamoro Basic Law, which is expected to help sustain peace in Mindanao. Outside the
  SONA, the President has expressed support in securing the revenue base by not supporting the
  lowering of tax rates without the appropriate offsetting measures.

  47.	    To conclude, achieving inclusive growth is within reach, now more than in any
  previous period. The government now needs to maximize the chances that the country will
  follow a more inclusive growth path by accelerating reforms to secure property rights, promote
  more competition, and simplify regulations to trigger more private investments by firms of all
  sizes, while sustainably ramping up public investments in infrastructure, education, health, and
  social protection.




  28
                                       Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



                            MEDIUM-TERM REFORM AGENDA

            Simplifying business regulations to enhance inclusive growth64

1.	    Complex Philippine business regulations are major hindrances to inclusive growth.
They limit the growth of innovative entrepreneurship, contribute to large scale informality, and
hence prevent the country from creating more and better jobs. To reduce poverty and share
the benefits of higher growth more broadly, reforms to simplify business regulations are
needed. Priority needs to be given to three major hindrances that affect the smallest businesses
the most: starting and maintaining a business, paying taxes, and accessing finance.


A complex set of business regulations

2.	     Philippine business regulations are complex and among the costliest in East Asia,
undermining firms’, especially micro and small firms’ ability to create jobs. Various measures
of competitiveness show a big room for improvement. The Doing Business 2015 report ranks
the Philippines at 95 among 189 economies in overall ease of doing business.65 Among major
economies in the ASEAN region, only Indonesia was ranked lower. For most indicators, the
Philippines ranks in the bottom half of the world (Table MT1). Firms find starting a business to
be among the costliest in the world, with a ranking of 161. Paying taxes and getting credit fare
better, but still at the low end of the spectrum at 127 and 104, respectively. All other indicators
except trading across borders and resolving insolvency, have rankings of 100 or higher (i.e.,
worse). In contrast, Malaysia and Thailand are among the easiest places to do business, with
overall rankings of 18 and 26, respectively. Indonesia, despite falling behind the Philippines in
recent Doing Business surveys, does a better job in protecting investors (ranked at 49 compared
to the Philippines’ 128). Even though the country’s ranking improved from the 72nd percentile in
2007 to the 50th percentile in 2015, there is still much room for improvement.

Starting and maintaining a business

3.	    Cumbersome regulations and procedures in starting and operating a business deter
new firm entry and business expansion, especially among micro and small firms. For example,
using available data, the number of procedures required to start a corporate business in the




64
   This section draws from the Philippine development Report “Creating more and better Jobs” (World Bank 2013).
It was prepared by Karl Kendrick Chua (Senior Country Economist, Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management
[MFM] Global Practice) with inputs from Joseph Louie Limkin (Research Analyst, MFM), Hans Shrader (Senior
Program Manager, Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice) and Griselda Santos (Operations Officer, Finance
and Markets Global Practice).
65
   Rankings are from one (best) to 189 (worst).
                                                                                                            29
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  Philippines, at 16, is substantially higher than in other countries in the region.66 The average firm
  spends 34 days securing licenses required to start a business and spends around PHP 21,156
  for these (equivalent to 16.6 percent of the country’s per capita income)—an amount very high
  relative to the micro firm’s startup capital. Firms in the Philippines also have to apply for licenses
  annually, more often than in other countries (Figure MT1). Up to 18 licenses, permits, and forms
  have to be approved before a business can commence. In many cases, firms report that they
  need to pay bribes or give gifts to obtain various permits and government services (Figure MT2).


                                 (and
                 Table MT1. Rank Rank   percentile rank)1 in Doing Business 2015 and selected sub-indicators
                                      (and percentile rank) in Doing Business 2015 and selected sub-indicators
                           Components                                               Philippines Indonesia                    Malaysia           Thailand              China     Vietnam    Singapore
       Overall ease of doing business                                                 95 (50)    114 (60)                     18 (10)            26 (14)             90 (48)     78 (41)       1 (1)
         Starting a business                                                         161 (85)    155 (82)                      13 (7)            75 (40)            128 (68)    125 (66)       6 (3)
            Number of procedures                                                         16         10                            3                 4                   11         10            3
            Number of days                                                               34         53                            6                28                   31         34            3
            Cost (percent of per capita income)                                          17         21                            7                 7                   1           5            1
         Dealing with construction permits                                           124 (65)    153 (81)                     28 (15)             6 (3)             179 (95)     22 (12)       2 (1)
         Employing workers2                                                          115 (63)    149 (81)                    61 (33)             52 (28)            140 (77)    103 (56)       1 (1)
         Registering property                                                        108 (57)    117 (62)                     75 (40)            28 (15)             37 (20)     33 (17)     24 (13)
            Number of procedures                                                          9          5                            8                 2                   4           4            4
            Number of days                                                               35         27                          14                  2                  20          57            5
            Cost (percent of property value)                                             4          11                           3                  6                   4           1            3
         Getting credit                                                              104 (55)     71 (38)                    23 (12)             89 (47)            71 (38)      36 (19)      17 (9)
         Protecting investors                                                        154 (81)     43 (23)                      5 (3)             25 (13)            132 (70)    117 (62)       3 (2)
         Paying taxes                                                                127 (67)    160 (85)                    32 (17)             62 (33)            120 (63)    173 (92)       5 (3)
            Number of payments per year                                                  36         65                           13                22                   7          32            5
            Hours per year                                                              193        254                          133               264                  261        872           82
            Total tax rate (percent of proﬁt)                                            43         31                          39                 27                  65          41           18
         Trading across borders                                                      65 (34)      62 (33)                     11 (6)             36 (19)            98 (52)     75 (40)       1 (1)
         Enforcing contracts                                                         124 (66)    172 (91)                    29 (15)             25 (13)            35 (19)      47 (25)      1 (1)
         Resolving insolvency                                                         50 (26)     75 (40)                    36 (19)             45 (24)            53 (28)     104 (55)     19 (10)
       Source: Doing Business 2015 report (World Bank)
       Notes: 1. Rankings and percentil e ranks are given in boldface. Rankings are based on a total sample of 189 economies. Percentil e ranks (1=best, 100=worst) are given
                in parentheses and are computed by WB sta ﬀ.
              2. "Employing workers" data are excluded in the 2015 rankings on the ease of doing business. "Employing workers" data shown here are from the Doing Business
                2010 Report which covers 183 economies.




  4.	     The process for individuals seeking government licenses, permits, or clearances for
  employment purposes is also cumbersome. For instance, workers spend anywhere from a few
  hours to several days traveling and securing police or National Bureau of Investigation
  clearances, registering vehicles and getting driver’s licenses,67 getting a community tax
  certificate, dealing with the Social Security System (SSS) (i.e., loans and retirement
  processing),68 and getting an “exit clearance” from the Philippine Overseas Employment
  Administration (POEA) in the case of overseas Filipino workers. There is little use of the internet




  66
     In April 2015, reforms to reduce the cost of starting a business have been initiated. These reforms are currently
  being validated by the Doing Business team and will be released in the upcoming Doing Business report 2016.
  67
     In recent years, this process has worsened due to significant backlogs in new license plates and drivers’ license
  production. After paying, applicants wait for several months before they can get their renewals.
  68
      In the case of SSS pension, pensioners must report annually to the SSS or their respective banks before pension
  benefits can continue. Failure to report means that pension is discontinued.
  30
                                                   Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



or other modern technology to reduce transaction costs, and efforts to reduce the number of
personal appearances, steps, and requirements for routine transactions are lacking.

     Figure MT1. Firms in the Philippines need to apply        Figure MT2. Firms report the need to pay bribes or
     for licenses more often.                                  give gifts to obtain permits.

      Applied for operating license in the past 2 years           Expected to make informal payment/gift in
     (percent of ﬁrms in operation for more than 2 years)             order to obtain license/connection
                                                                        Construction permit
       Lao PDR
                                                                               Tax inspection
     Philippines
                                                                      Electricity connection

       Mongolia                                                            Water connection

                                                                                 Import permit
        Vietnam
                                                                           Operating license
      Indonesia
                                                                          Phone connection

                        0         20   40     60   80   100                                          0                 20            40       60
                                                                                                                             Percent
                                        Percent                                               Large           Medium             Small

                                                              Source: Enterprise Survey 2009
                                                              Note: In this ﬁgure, ﬁrm sizes are based on deﬁnitions used by the Enterprise
                                                              Survey. Large ﬁrms have 100 or more workers. Medium ﬁrms have 20 to 99
 Source: Enterprise Survey 2009                               workers. Small ﬁrms have 5 to 19 workers.




5.	     Finally, a weak bankruptcy resolution regime makes it particularly difficult for
inefficient or unprofitable firms to exit the market. A new insolvency law was recently passed,
bringing the recovery rate from an average of four cents to a dollar to an average of 21 cents to
a dollar. However, this is still quite low compared to 42 cents in Thailand and more than 80 cents
in Malaysia, causing potential firms to think twice before entering the market.

Paying taxes

6.	     Paying taxes is also cumbersome in the Philippines. According to the Doing Business
2015 report, the Philippines’ rank in paying taxes, which focuses on administrative complexities
of making various tax payments by enterprises, is among the worst in the ASEAN region and
globally ranks at 127 among 189 economies. This weak performance is largely attributed to the
country’s high total tax rate,69 equivalent to about 42.5 percent of profit—the highest among
the three comparator countries—and the number of payments per year at 36, which is around
three times higher than that in Malaysia, around double compared to Thailand, and even five
payments more than that in Myanmar, the lowest overall ranked East Asian country. The




69
   The total tax rate measures the amount of taxes and mandatory contributions borne by the business in the
second year of operation, expressed as a share of commercial profit. The Doing Business 2015 reports the total tax
rate for calendar year 2013. The total amount of taxes borne is the sum of all the different taxes and contributions
payable after accounting for allowable deductions and exemptions. The taxes withheld (such as personal income
tax) or collected by the company and remitted to the tax authorities (such as value added tax, sales tax or goods
and service tax) but not borne by the company are excluded (source: Doing Business 2015).
                                                                                                                                                   31
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  Philippines performed better only in the number of hours to comply with tax requirements70 at
  193 hours, compared to 264 in Thailand and 254 in Indonesia. In Malaysia, compliance takes only
  133 hours. However, these figures do not adequately measure the full compliance costs faced by
  Filipino taxpayers, given alleged systemic corruption in the tax system.

  Accessing finance

  7.	    Another key constraint to firm entry and expansion in the Philippines is limited access
  to finance. This issue weighs heavily on micro, small, and medium-size enterprises (MSMEs),71
  preventing the majority of micro and small rural enterprises from growing. It is also a main
  obstacle to rural development. A large number of these enterprises are involved in adding value
  to primary crops but they are constrained by low-productivity technologies that hardly meet the
  emerging standards for quality and food safety required by the domestic market and foreign
  importers. Only about a fourth of these enterprises have access to reliable sources of credit such
  as rural banks, credit unions, cooperatives, and non-profit microfinance institutions. Because
  they often lack acceptable forms of collateral and transparent accounting practices, small rural
  enterprises are considered risky and are often turned down.

  8.	     A 2007 study by the International Finance Corporation (IFC)72 suggests that the annual
  unmet demand for SME loans ranged from PHP 67 billion to PHP 180 billion. The government
  has tried to address this problem by imposing a minimum amount on bank lending to SMEs.
  However, instead of encouraging SME development, the requirement has led to re-labeling or
  re-categorizing of loans by banks, in order to comply with the requirement without venturing
  into new SME markets or taking new SME clients. This appears to be a common practice among
  banks in the Philippines.73

  9.	     Limitations in bank regulation and supervision framework have also affected credit
  growth for SMEs. Lack of legal protections for bank supervisors and an inadequate bank
  resolution framework result in an overly conservative stance of the regulators in setting
  guidelines for credit operations. Addressing this issue would facilitate the shift toward a more




  70
     The indicator on hours per year for paying taxes “measures the time taken to prepare, file, and pay three major
  types of taxes and contributions: the corporate income tax, value-added or sales tax, and labor taxes, including
  payroll taxes and social contributions” (Source: Doing Business 2015 report).
  71
     Updated Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas figures show that between 2008 and 2013, total nominal lending volume to
  MSMEs rose from PHP 311 billion to PHP 386 billion, accounting for just 12 percent of the net loan portfolio of the
  Philippine banking sector, and representing an average increase of only 4 percent per year. Moreover, according to
  the United Parcel Service, Inc. (UPS) Asia Business Monitor Report (2009), access to funding is the second most
  important factor limiting the competitiveness of Philippine SMEs (as mentioned by 67 percent of respondents),
  next to lack of government support at 74 percent.
  72
     See Vaillancourt (2007) for more discussion.
  73
     Enforcement of mandatory lending targets relies on self-reporting and on the regulator’s capacity to supervise,
  which is usually overstretched. Moreover, lending to microfinance institutions also counts toward meeting the
  mandatory minimum SME target — a common loophole that results in little or no additional SME lending.
  32
                                         Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



risk-based approach to supervision and would lead to the development of a more dynamic
financial sector by enabling a more effective and less costly mechanism for weaker firms to exit.

10.	     Access to credit is also hampered by a relatively high credit repayment risk. SME
access to loans is inversely related to the average time it takes to complete bankruptcy
proceedings and bankruptcy costs, and positively related to the expected creditor recovery rate
on bad loans. It is therefore unsurprising that the share of SMEs with bank loans (less than 10
percent74) is so low, considering that the bankruptcy process is extremely slow (i.e., it takes around
6 years to complete a bankruptcy case), bankruptcy administration costs are high (38 percent of
assets), and expected creditor recoveries are much lower at around four cents to a dollar, as
mentioned earlier. Moreover, bankruptcy procedures are so inefficient that creditors hardly ever
use it.75 These factors make SME financing a very risky exercise in the Philippines.

11.	     The previous lack of accessible information on payment histories added further to
creditor risks. The ability of financial institutions to provide cost-effective services depends
largely on the availability of information necessary to assess the creditworthiness of their
clients. The scope, accessibility, and quality of credit information through public or private
bureaus in the Philippines are very low. Through Republic Act 9510, also known as the “Credit
Information System Act,” a centralized credit bureau, the Credit Information Corporation, was
finally created in 2015 after much delay. However, its effectiveness has yet to be proven, partly
because of its age.

12.	    Moreover, the land registration and titling system is fragmented into different
registries, making debtor searches and financing difficult, and property rights insecure. The
current system for registering land titles is inadequate. The data are not centrally filed and are
not available online. The absence of reliable cadastral surveys until this year leaves large tracts
of land without enforceable titles. Uncertainties surrounding land ownership in rural areas
brought about by delays in the agrarian reform program and restrictions on the transfer of land
further discourage investments in agriculture.

13.	     Finally, significant deficiencies also abound in the registration of moveable collateral
(i.e., chattel). This is often the only type of collateral available to small and medium-size
enterprises. Information in the various Registry of Deeds offices is not centralized, registration
of chattel is often extremely time-consuming and costly, and financial institutions often cannot
verify if a particular chattel is registered.




74
  World Bank Enterprise Survey Data (2011 Survey year).
75
   An up-to-date bankruptcy framework, Republic Act 10142 “Financial Rehabilitation and Insolvency Act,” which
aims for a faster and more orderly rehabilitation or liquidation of financially distressed companies and individuals
was passed in 2010. Implementation, however, was delayed to 2013 when the supreme court through A.M. No.
12-12-11-SC approved and promulgated the Financial Rehabilitation Rules of Procedures (2013) to govern the
proceedings that could be brought under Republic Act No. 10142.
                                                                                                                 33
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  Informality and weak entrepreneurship as consequence

  Large-scale informality

  14.	    Informality is one of the major consequences of costly business regulations. The
  informal services sector has become the dominant source of employment for the majority of
  Filipinos who cannot find work in formal services and manufacturing. While not all of informal
  services are equivalent to bad jobs, its correlation to poverty and vulnerability is high and there
  are strong indications that the majority of informal services workers do not have the opportunity
  to move up the job ladder. Many end up in informal and subsistence micro-enterprises with no
  plans to grow, innovate, and create jobs.

  15.	   The Philippine labor market is characterized by high levels of informality. Around 75
  percent of Filipino workers are informally employed.76 Informal workers are operationally
  defined to include all self-employed workers (not including employers), unpaid family workers,
  and wage workers with no written contract, social insurance, or protection from dismissal using
  the 2008 Informal Sector Survey (ISS)77 of the Philippine Statistics Authority (PSA). The PSA and
  the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) estimate that around 90 percent of Filipinos work
  in micro, small, and medium-size enterprises (MSME)78 or on own-account, and more than 60
  percent are found in the informal sector.79 According to the ISS, around 70 percent of self-
  employed workers are not registered with any government authority. A majority of their
  workers are working under informal arrangements.

  16.	     In the past 15 years, the share of vulnerable workers, which include own-account and
  unpaid family workers — an indicator of informality — have decreased but their magnitude is
  still high. Wage and salaried workers accounted for about 57 percent of total employment in
  2012, 6 percentage points higher than in 1997 (Figure MT3). Three fast-growing industries
  contributed to this growth: BPO, electronics, and tourism. The remaining 43 percent are either
  own-account (32 percent) or unpaid workers in family micro-enterprises (11 percent).




  76
     This estimate is not far from the estimate of the Employers Confederation of the Philippines, which put the
  number of informal workers at 77 percent of total employment (Ortiz-Luis 2008).
  77
     The ISS largely follows the recommendations of the International Labor Organization (ILO) 15th and 17th
  International Conferences of Labor Statisticians (ICLS). They recommend the following criteria for informal
  enterprises: i) non-registration of enterprise, ii) small employment size, and iii) non-registration of employees of
  the enterprise. On the other hand, it recommends two criteria for informal employment: i) workers in informal
  sector enterprises and households and ii) contributing family workers in formal sector enterprises.
  78
     Following government definitions, micro firms are firms with fewer than 10 employees, small firms are firms
  with 10 to 99 employees, medium firms are firms with 100 to 199 employees, and large firms are firms with 200 or
  more employees.
  79
     The informal sector is broadly defined to include enterprises that fall outside the purview of government
  regulations. Operationally, the informal sector includes the agriculture and informal services sectors. The informal
  services sector is operationally defined to include the following subsectors: i) wholesale and retail trade, and ii)
  transportation, communication, and storage (TCS).
  34
                                                        Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



                                      Figure MT3. The composition of employment has
                                      moved toward wage workers but vulnerability
                                      remains high.

                                                       Employment by class of worker
                                             100

                                                  80


                                        Percent   60

                                                  40

                                                  20

                                                   0



                                                        Wage and salary   Own account                             Unpaid

                                     Source: LFS




17.	    Vulnerable workers are susceptible to job or income losses. While non-wage work does
not necessary mean a bad job, it is less desirable in most cases because workers in this category
are less likely to have formal work arrangements, access to benefits and social security, and
protection from income shocks or job losses. In fact, vulnerable employment is widespread in
the agriculture and services sectors (Table MT2), and is highly correlated with poverty incidence
(Figure MT4).

  Table MT2. Agriculture and the informal services                            Figure MT4. Vulnerable employment is highly
  sectors have the highest rates of vulnerability.                            correlated with poverty incidence at the regional
                                                                              level in 2009.

          Composition of employment by sector                                                                    Employment by class of worker
                                                                                                        60
                            Wage
                                    Own
               Industry      and           Unpaid Total
                                   account                                                              50
                            salary                                                                                                      CARAGA
                                                                                                                                                            5
                                                                                                                                                                             ARMM
                                                                                                                                                                    9
                                                                                                                                                   10
          Agriculture         29.1    46.0             24.9   100
                                                                               Poverty incidence rate




                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                        40
                                                                                                                                            7 12
          Industry            81.8    14.6              3.6   100                                                                                           4B
                                                                                                                                             11
            Manufacturing     73.6    20.3              6.1   100                                       30                              6

            Others            92.2      7.4             0.4   100                                                                                  1            CAR
                                                                                                        20
          Services            63.6    30.4              5.9   100                                                                                  2
                                                                                                                                   3
            Formal            90.1      7.9             2.1   100                                                                  4A
                                                                                                        10
            Informal          50.7    41.5              7.8   100                                                          NCR

                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                             0        20          40                   60               80          100
                                                                                                                             Vulnerable employment rate


 Source: LFS 2011                                                            Source: LFS 2009, PSA




18.	   Even among wage workers, many are informal workers. Many wage workers do not
receive adequate protection from the Labor Code. The Labor Code de facto protects only about

                                                                                                                                                                                          35
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  a third of wage workers. The majority of wage earners face a high degree of income insecurity
  and a low degree of social protection (Table MT3). Data from the ISS show that 63 percent of
  workers in 2008 had no written contracts and 62 percent had no social insurances. Such
  attributes significantly increase the probability that workers are subjected to labor abuse. They
  also expose workers to sudden income shocks when they lose their jobs. Protection from and
  compensation for dismissal are also limited. Almost 60 percent of wage workers reported
  that they can be terminated without advance notice, and an even larger share of workers (70
  percent) did not receive termination pay. Agricultural workers exhibit the highest degree of
  informality, with more than 90 percent of workers exposed to low protection and a high level of
  income insecurity. The level of informality is lower in industry and services but employment is
  still mostly informal in these sectors (64 and 52 percent, respectively).

                             Table MT3. Measures of informality for wage workers
                                                                   Written        Verbal         None
               Type of contract                                      36.7          40.1          23.2
                                                                     Yes            No
          Social Insurance
          (Social Security System or
          Government Service Insurance System)                       38.1          61.9
          Protection from dismissal                                  41.4          58.6
          Compensation in case of dismissal                          29.8          70.2
          Leave benefits
                  Paid leave                                         28.0          72.0
                  Sick leave                                         28.9          71.1
                  Maternity/paternity leave                          27.3          72.7
          Source: ISS 2008




  Weak entrepreneurship

  19.	    Apart from large-scale informality of workers, the other major consequence of costly
  business regulation is the slow growth of entrepreneurship, which has resulted in limited job
  creation for the poor. This is evident in a number of indicators such as the small size of firms,
  lack of registration, necessity as main intention for starting a business, low productivity, and
  limited options.

  20.	    A huge majority of Philippine firms are small and remain small over the years. Micro,
  small, and medium-size enterprises (MSMEs) account for 99 percent of all enterprises in the
  Philippines,80 and a majority of workers are found in micro-enterprises.81 The 2009 Enterprise
  Survey (latest available survey),82 which covers registered firms, shows that after three years,



  80
     Source: Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise Development Council (2011)
  81
     Source: WB staff estimates based on DTI, NSO, and WB data
  82
     The 2009 Enterprise Survey covers registered firms in manufacturing and services with 5 or more employees.
  To be consistent with the official definition, the definition for firm size in the Enterprise Survey was adjusted
  accordingly.
  36
                                                   Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



91 percent of small firms remained small and only one percent moved to the medium-size
category. The biggest movement was in the medium-size category, where 17 percent of firms
moved to the large-size category. However, a larger share reverted to the small-size category
(21 percent) (Table MT4). The lack of growth among micro and small firms has contributed to
the “missing middle” phenomenon in the Philippines.

                     Table MT4. Transition between firm size (in percent of total firms)
                   Size category                              Size category (2009)
                       (2006)
                                                   Micro   Small   Medium      Large   Total
                  Micro                             85       15        0         0      100
                  Small                              7       91        1         1      100
                  Medium                             0       21       62         17     100
                  Large                              0       6         3         91     100
                  Source: Enterprise Survey 2009




21.	    The number of registered MSMEs is very low. A comparison between the Global
Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) survey83 and the World Development Indicators (WDI) of the
World Bank on the number of newly registered enterprises suggests that a large number of
Philippine MSMEs are not registered. For instance, in 2014, 18.4 percent of GEM respondents in
the Philippines stated that they were either owners or the owner/manager of a new business,84
higher than in most other countries (Figure MT5). However, according to the data collected by
the WDI, in 2012, the density of newly registered firms is lower than in other countries at only
two registrations per 10,000 adults (Figure MT6).85




83
   GEM is an annual assessment of entrepreneurial activity. It is based on a survey conducted in over 85 countries
and covers around 2,000 adults per country. The GEM survey for the Philippines was last conducted in 2014 (see
http://www.gemconsortium.org/).
84
   In the GEM methodology, this is defined as the percent of the adult population who are either an entrepreneur
or owner-manager of a new business.
85
    These two statistics are not expected to match closely as new attempts to start a business are not always
successful. But for countries with low levels of informality, these 2 statistics are much closer. In Canada, for
example, six percent of respondents state that they are involved in a new business and business registrations are
at 75 per 10,000 adults. In countries with higher levels of informality, such as Indonesia and Thailand, the high
share of entrepreneurs is accompanied by lower new firm registration density.
                                                                                                               37
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




    Figure MT5. The share of Filipinos involved in                                               Figure MT6. But few businesses are formally
    starting a business is one of the highest.                                                   registered.

                 Adults involved in new businesses                                                       Number of new registered companies
                                                                                                                   per 1000 adults
           Thailand                                                                                Singapore
             Mexico                                                                              South Africa
          Colombia                                                                                     Russia
        Philippines                                                                                     Brazil
              Brazil                                                                                 Malaysia
                                                                                                          Italy
          Argentina
                                                                                                    Colombia
         Indonesia
                                                                                                       Turkey
            Canada
                                                                                                      Canada
         Singapore                                                                                     Mexico
             Turkey                                                                                  Thailand
       South Africa                                                                                 Argentina
           Malaysia                                                                                Indonesia
             Russia                                                                               Philippines
                           0             5         10        15         20       25                                    0       2         4          6             8             10
                                                     Percent
   Source: Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM)                                                Source: WDI




  22.	   The share of Filipinos involved in starting a business is one of the highest in the world,
  but new businesses are often started out of necessity, and while many introduce innovations,
  few intend to grow. According to the GEM survey, although 18.4 percent of Filipinos are
  involved in setting up or running a new business, about a third half of them cite necessity as the
  main reason, more often than in other countries (Figure MT7a). Though Filipino entrepreneurs
  are more likely to introduce a product or market innovation than in most other countries
  (Figure MT7b), they also do not expect to create more than five jobs in the next five years
  (Figure MT7c). While this showcases the creativity of Filipinos in spite of challenging market
  conditions and business regulations, these statistics indicate that a vast majority of new
  businesses are subsistence or stagnant in nature, reflecting the lack of jobs in the domestic economy.

    Figure MT7. About a third of new ﬁrms cite necessity as the main reason for starting a business and
    very few introduce innovation or plan to add ﬁve or more jobs over ﬁve years.

                                   a                                                       b                                                       c

     Necessity as the main reason                                        New business with new                                Expect to add 5+ employees
          to start a business                                              product or market                                           in 5 years
            Colombia                                                          Chile                                                   Turkey
                China                                                        Turkey                                                Colombia
               Turkey                                                   Philippines                                               Singapore
          Philippines                                                         China                                                    Chile
             Germany                                                      Colombia                                             United States
               Mexico                                                      Thailand                                                    China
            Indonesia                                                    Singapore                                                  Germany
             Thailand                                                 United States                                                   Mexico
                Chile                                                     Indonesia                                                 Thailand
             Malaysia                                                        Mexico                                                 Malaysia
        United States                                                      Germany                                               Philippines
           Singapore                                                       Malaysia                                                Indonesia
                           0     10     20 30      40   50                            0   20   40 60          80 100                           0   10   20 30         40   50
                                        Percent                                                Percent                                                  Percent
   Source: GEM                                                    Source: GEM                                              Source: GEM




  38
                                                                           Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



23.	    The average productivity of MSMEs in the Philippines is very low. The labor
productivity of MSMEs in the Philippines is one-third that in Malaysia and one-twentieth those
in high-income countries (Figure MT8).86 Also, Philippine MSMEs’ contribution to GDP is small
compared to their share of employment. They account for 60 percent of establishment
employment but contribute only 36 percent of establishments’ gross value-added (Figure MT9).

     Figure MT8. Labor productivity of smaller ﬁrms in                                        Figure MT9. MSME contribution to GDP is small
     Philippines is much lower than in other countries.                                       relative to its employment share.


                         Average MSME labor productivity                                                     Share of value-added of MSMEs
              120                                                                                     Greece
                                                                                                         Italy
              100                                                                                   Portugal
     USD thousand




                                                                                                        Spain
                    80
                                                                                                    Australia
                    60                                                                             Germany
                                                                                                      Mexico
                    40                                                                                Poland
                                                                                                           UK
                    20                                                                                 Japan
                                                                                                South Korea
                     0                                                                            Philippines
                                                                                                                       0                20          40       60                              80
                                                                                                                                              Percent of GDP


 Sources: European Commission, US SME Characteristics and Performance, Singapore
 Department of Statistics, Singapore, SME Corp. Malaysia, Micro, Small, and                  Sources: OECD Structural and Demographic Business Statistics (SDBS) Database, NSO (2008 ), Micro,
 Medium Enterprise Development Council (2011)                                                Small, and Medium Enterprise Development Council (2011)




                                                          Figure MT10. The retail trade sector accounts for
                                                          majority of new job creation.

                                                                   Net job creation by sector as a share
                                                                           to total job creation
                                                              Retail and wholesale trade                                     138%
                                                                          Other services                                     41%
                                                                  Metals and machinery                           8%
                                                                           Construction                         4%
                                                                  Hotels and restaurants                        4%
                                                                                 Textiles                      0%
                                                                               Garments            -1%
                                                                   Auto and components             -2%
                                                          Chemicals and pharmaceuticals           -4%
                                                                        Plastic materials         -4%
                                                                    Other manufacturing           -4%
                                                                                    Food      -18%
                                                                      Wood and furniture     -23%
                                                                              Electronics -38%


                                                        Source: Enterprise Survey 2009




24.	  More than 50 percent of new businesses cluster in retail trade, given few options
elsewhere (Figure MT10). This share is much larger than in other countries. Countries such as
86
  Not all country estimates in Figure MT9 cover micro firms and have the same definition of firm size. For instance,
the USA estimate covers only firms with less than 500 US-based employees.
                                                                                                                                                                                                  39
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  China, Indonesia, and Malaysia have higher rates of business creation in other sectors.
  Consequently, majority of jobs are also created in the retail trade sector in the form of sari-sari
  stores (i.e., informal retailing), street vending, and commission-based jobs, such as selling
  insurance or real estate.


  Reforms to simplify business regulations

  25.	    Simplifying business regulations are needed to encourage the rapid growth of
  businesses of all sizes and encourage movement of small firms to the formal sector, and in
  the process create more and better jobs. The copious amount of red tape and convoluted
  procedures not only hinders investment and entrepreneurship, they also provide fertile ground
  for rent-seeking and corruption, which are detrimental to businesses of all sizes. Priority should
  be given to addressing three concerns in the Doing Business Report that affect micro and small
  enterprises the most: i) starting and maintaining a business, ii) paying taxes, and iii) accessing
  finance. This section discusses general reform directions while the special focus on doing
  business discusses these reforms in detail.

       •	   Simplify and automate key business registration and licensing processes to reduce 	                    	
       	    transaction costs

  26.	    Starting a business can be simplified by harmonizing and streamlining procedures
  through a process re-engineering. The Philippines’ business regulatory system currently
  requires 16 procedures to start a business. As a testament to this tedious process, firms are
  required by law to post in public view up to 18 different permits and licenses. To put the
  Philippines on par with other EAP countries, steps to register would need to be reduced from
  16 to 7. This reform could include i) harmonizing and streamlining procedures among national
  government agencies and LGUs to avoid overlaps and redundancies (e.g., harmonizing the city
  and barangay business permits into one permit), ii) removing steps that can be verified by
  government offices at the back end (the recent policy directive that no longer requires a Social
  Security System (SSS) clearance when renewing business permits is a good example87), and iii)
  reducing requirements whose purposes are not fully justified. The latter includes a) reducing or
  abolishing the paid-in minimum capital requirement, b) making the use of notaries and lawyers
  optional for company startups, c) moving toward a fixed registration fee that covers only
  administrative costs, and d) removing antiquated mandatory practices of having the Bureau of
  Internal Revenue (BIR) stamp the company’s invoice and account books. Some of these
  proposals would require a comprehensive review of all national and local laws, and their
  implementing rules and regulations.




  87
     Under the Joint Memorandum Circular No. 1 series of 2012 (December 2012) of SSS and the Department of
  Interior and Local Government, businesses no longer need to secure SSS clearance before renewing business
  permits. Instead, the SSS will transmit to the LGUs a list of delinquent employers. Businesses on the list will be
  barred from renewing their business permits.
  40
                                         Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



27.	    Automating and completely implementing the Philippine Business Registry (PBR) and
the Business Permit and Licensing System (BPLS) thorough the RS4LGU program (discussed in
special focus 1) are also needed. Automation and complete implementation of the PBR and the
BPLS would not only reduce the cost of doing business but also enhance transparency and
accountability across agencies and authorities involved, and eliminate opportunities for
corruption. Complete implementation of the PBR as the single online portal for processing all
national level registration and licensing requirements for sole proprietors should be given high
priority. This “one-stop shop” system would significantly reduce transaction costs associated
with having to interact with various agencies, like the Business Permits and Licensing Office,
and the BIR. Implementation of the PBR would need to be followed by streamlining
registration, automating the BPLS, and rolling it out to all LGUs. To improve incentives for LGUs
to implement the BPLS, access of LGUs to the Performance Challenge Fund can be linked to
compliance with BPLS monitoring indicators.

28.	    Greater transparency of business regulations can help improve understanding of the
registration, licensing, and taxation processes (especially among incipient firms) and help
reduce transaction costs. This can be done by mandating the prominent display of easy-to-
understand process flowcharts and service standards in all government offices. This would
involve creating a step-by-step guide, with a list of required documents and steps showing
which offices to visit, when to visit and with what documents, and listing the addresses,
working hours, and contact number of each office. A first step in this direction has been taken
with the Anti-Red Tape Act of 2007 (Republic Act 9485), which brought about the Citizen’s
Charter flowcharts now displayed in various government offices. This could be improved further
in terms of completeness, accuracy, and accessibility. Developing a more efficient online or
mobile registration system with no human intervention would be the next step in making
information more accessible and the system more transparent and accountable, saving
valuable time for both businesses and government officials. More importantly, reducing the
need for direct interaction with different officials would minimize the potential for under-the-
table transactions.

29.	   The process for individuals seeking government licenses, permits, and clearances for
employment purposes also needs to be simplified. This includes simplifying procedures and
rationalizing fees in government offices such as the SSS, Land Transportation Office88, National
Bureau of Investigation, Philippine Overseas Employment Administration, and various city and
municipal offices, so that workers can spend less time queuing up to pay for and secure these
documents, and more time on their work. The current effort to have a one-stop shop for some




88
   For instance, renewing a driver’s license requires paying the following fees: PHP 350 for processing fee, PHP 67
for computer fee, PHP 100 for change in address in some cases, PHP 100 for medical checkup, and PHP 50 for
computer fee for medical checkup, for a total of PHP 667. Reforms could include reducing fees for items that are
fully not justified (e.g., computer and change in address fees) and extending the validity of licenses from three to
five years, as is the practice in other countries.
                                                                                                                 41
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  of these government services in malls is welcome. Further improving this initiative, such as
  using online resources, would need to follow.

       •	 Simplify tax regime for micro and small taxpayers

  30.	     Moving toward a simplified tax regime for micro and small businesses is warranted to
  reduce compliance costs and encourage movement of firms to the formal sector. The
  administrative complexity of complying with tax obligations is among the top complaints voiced
  by MSMEs and a frequent excuse for remaining in the informal sector. A simplified system
  could include i) using simplified tax forms, registration requirements, and payment processes,
  ii) mandating fewer requirements for bookkeeping and financial reporting, iii) integrating the
  tax filing and payment systems of the national and local government units so that taxpayers
  need to file and pay only once, and iv) combining the value-added tax (VAT), percentage tax,
  and income tax into a single business tax on turnover for micro and small enterprises.
  Reforming a very entrenched system with large bureaucratic interest will likely be a challenging
  endeavor. Resistance to reform can be mitigated by piloting the reform in a few agencies and
  LGUs, and then expanding it when public support has increased. By reducing compliance
  burden through a simplified tax regime, the government stands to raise more taxes and reduce
  corruption in the tax system, while also promoting entrepreneurship and job creation in the
  formal sector.

       •	 Facilitate greater access to finance, especially for micro and small enterprises

  31.	    The public repository of credit information is now underway. Currently, there is no
  centralized comprehensive credit information system in the Philippines to house information
  on all borrowers of financial institutions. Financial sector groups within the banking industry
  have set up their own private credit bureaus. These credit bureaus are, however, mutually
  independent with limited capacity to share data across different banking groups and data are
  generally only for negative credit performance records. The fragmented nature of the credit
  information industry prevents lenders from obtaining reliable and complete credit history on
  existing and potential borrowers. In 2008, the “Credit Information System Act” (Republic Act
  9510) was passed. The law created the Credit Information Corporation (CIC), whose purpose is
  to establish the comprehensive and centralized credit information system. This centralized
  repository of credit information will enable financial institutions to make more informed
  decisions in lending based on both positive and negative credit information. Development of
  the system is now underway. A pilot of the system is now being developed in a phased
  approach to be launched by June 2016.

  32.	   The mandated system of lending to small and medium enterprises (SMEs) needs to be
  replaced by a system of credit guarantees. Mandatory bank allocations for SME lending may
  have played a role in encouraging growth in the volume of SME lending initially, but they no
  longer suffice to meet the financing needs of Philippine SMEs and have proven to be counter-




  42
                                          Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



productive. A system of guarantees that seeks to encourage financial institutions to lend to
SMEs stands a better chance of succeeding than the current system that seeks to coerce the
banking system into making loans that are perceived to be unprofitable or overly risky.

33.	    Strengthening the Philippine collateral system can improve access to finance. The
cadastral titling of all lands in the country needs to be completed and a central registry for
land titles established. This implies reforming the land administration procedures, which are
overly complex, centralized, and lengthy. There is a need to establish a modern, unified, and
easily accessible registration system. It would need to have searchable registries for all collateral
across registries.

34.	    Increasing lending secured by non-real property or movable assets can further
improve access to finance. This entails i) improving the legal and regulatory framework for
secured transactions, ii) implementing a modern, centralized electronic registry for security
interests in movable assets, and iii) enhancing the capacities of local financial institutions in
lending based on movable assets. With better access to finance, more SMEs would grow and
create jobs.

35.	     The role of cooperatives in accessing finance needs to be enhanced. Cooperatives
provide savings and credit services to over seven million members in the Philippines and can
play a crucial role in improving access of microenterprises and farmers, especially in poor and
remote communities, to financial services. Lack of adequate regulation and standards has often
led to poor financial performance of cooperatives. Credit and multipurpose cooperatives are
recognized as potentially important channels for reaching poor and remote areas with financial
services. Yet lack of adequate supervision, weak governance, poor financial management skills,
and a lack of necessary information and governance systems often contribute to the poor
performance or failure of cooperatives. Participation of cooperatives in providing access to
finance can be enhanced by i) improving the regulatory capacity of the Cooperative
Development Authority (CDA), ii) developing an effective apex structure to enhance financial
viability of cooperatives and widen their reach, and iii) amending the Financial Rehabilitation
and Insolvency Act to include cooperatives. Recent legal reforms provide a basis for improving
regulation of credit cooperatives and introducing clear performance standards. Implementing
adequate standards for governance, accounting, and financial management, and enforcing
these standards effectively are critical to the sustainable development of cooperatives.

     •	 Ensure a coherent strategy for MSME development and measure impact of programs

36.	   International experience shows that effective implementation is the key to ensuring
the success of strategies, plans, and programs for MSME development.89 The Philippines, like

89
   The need to enhance growth in the MSME sector is recognized in the MSME Development Plan 2011-2016. The
plan sets a target for SME value-added contribution to GDP at 40 percent (from about 35 percent in 2008) and
increase in the number of SME jobs by two million. The plan addresses the key constraint areas and comprises four
pillars: i) business environment, ii) access to finance, iii) access to markets, and iv) productivity and efficiency. It
also covers crosscutting dimensions, including regional and local economic development, gender mainstreaming,
migration, and climate change.
                                                                                                                     43
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  most other countries, has a wide range of MSME support programs being implemented by
  various departments and agencies.90 Improving coordination is an important first step in
  enhancing the effectiveness of the overall efforts to support SME development. This can be
  followed by improving the collection of program outcome data to allow the government to
  conduct evidence-based evaluation of programs to deliver maximum impact.


                                               Selected references

  Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise Development Council. 2011. Micro, small, and medium
  enterprise development plan 2011-2016. Makati City: Bureau of Micro, Small, and Medium
  Enterprise Development, Department of Trade and Industry.

  Ortiz-Luis, S. 2008. The practical approach to benefit the majority. Makati: Employers
  Confederation of the Philippines.

  Vaillancourt, L. 2007. IFC Study on SME Financing. s.l.:s.n.

  World Bank. 2013. Philippine Development Report: Creating more and better jobs. Manila and
  Washington, DC: World Bank.

  World Bank. 2015. Doing business in the Philippines. Available at:
  http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/philippines/




  90
     The Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise Development (MSMED) Council coordinates the MSME support programs.
  It is chaired by the Secretary of Trade and Industry and comprises key government departments and agencies as well
  as private sector representatives.
  44
                                        Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



                                           SPECIAL FOCUS 1


                   The real cost of starting and maintaining a business91


Introduction

1.	    Micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs)92 are important contributors and
beneficiaries of economic growth. In 2012,93 MSMEs accounted for 99.6 percent of businesses
in the Philippines, comprised around 90 percent of total employment, and contributed 36
percent of total value-added (DTI 2014). Furthermore, 89 percent of MSME employees work in
micro and small businesses. Given these, creating an environment that helps MSMEs grow is
essential in advancing inclusive growth.

2.	     However, business regulations have long been a cumbersome process in the
Philippines, posing obstacles to the development of MSMEs and hence job creation. While the
Philippines registered notable gains in its overall ranking in the 2015 Doing Business Report
(95th out of 189 countries, slightly below the 50th percentile), its ranking in the starting a
business indicator barely improved (Table 1.1). By comparison, in the East Asia region, Singapore
and Malaysia are among the easiest countries to start a business, with world rankings of 6 and
13, respectively. Similarly, MSMEs in the Philippines also find maintaining a business to be
costly. These have led to i) low registration rate, ii) necessity as a key reason for starting a
business, iii) stagnant business growth, iv) low productivity, and v) large scale informality
affecting over three quarters of the labor force (see the medium-term reform section for more
discussion).

3.	   Of particular concern is the high overall cost imposed on MSMEs in starting and
maintaining a business. They not only have to pay for legitimate fees equivalent to 17 to 36



91
   This special focus section was prepared by Justin Chan (Research Assistant), Joseph Louie Limkin (Research
Analyst), Karl Kendrick Chua (Senior Country Economist), all from the Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management
(MFM) Global Practice (GP), and Roberto Galang (Operations Officer), Beatrice Tanjangco (Research Assistant), and
Teresita Lacerna (Legal Adviser), with inputs from Jonathon Kirby (Consultant) and Marieta Patag (Consultant), all
from the Trade and Competitiveness (T&C) GP. The team thanks Hans Shrader (Senior Operations Officer) and
Marianne Anderson (Results Measurement Specialist), both from T&C, for reviewing the special focus, and to
officials of the Department of Trade and Industry, National Competitiveness Council, and the Quezon City Business
Permit Licensing Office and Communications Coordination Center for their comments.
92
   Republic Act 9501 defines MSMEs as businesses with assets not more than PHP 100 million or employment not
exceeding 199 employees. This is broken down into the following categories: i) micro businesses have assets not
exceeding PHP three million, or employs less than 10 workers, ii) small businesses have assets between PHP three
and 15 million, or employs 10 to 99 workers, and iii) medium businesses have assets between PHP 15 and 100
million, or employs 100 to 199 workers. The employment criteria takes precedence over the asset criteria in case
of double classification.
93
   2012 is the year with latest available data.
                                                                                                               45
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  percent of per capita income (PHP 21,000 to 45,00094), they also spend a considerable amount
  of time moving from one agency to another and waiting in line to process their documents,
  often resulting in significant loss of productive time and income. In some instances, businesses
  report that they need to pay bribes or give gifts to obtain various permits and government
  services. Simplifying and streamlining business registration process in the Philippines would
  therefore not only support job creation, but also improve transparency and accountability in
  the government.

  4.	     To complement the discussion in the medium-term section, this special focus analyzes
  the direct and opportunity costs of starting and maintaining a business, and argues that
  reforms to reduce overall cost would free up substantial resources to make growth more
  inclusive. It begins with an overview of the procedures and direct cost in starting and
  maintaining a business, followed by an analysis of the opportunity costs, and ends with a
  discussion of current and recommended reforms to reduce the cost of business start-ups and
  maintenance.

                                                      Table 1.1. Progress in starting a business indicator
    Philippines                                                                                                      2005       2010             2015
    Starting a business rank                                                                              102 out of 145    162 out of 183   161 out of 189
    Number of procedures                                                                                               17        18               16
    Number of days                                                                                                     49        42               34
    Cost (as a percent of per capita income)95                                                                       24.1       21.6             16.6
    Cost (in current pesos)                                                                                        14,587      18,918           21,156
  Source: World Bank’s Doing Business in the Philippines (http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/philippines)




  Direct costs

  5.	     In the Philippines, the complexity of starting a business reflects the decentralized
  manner of securing various permits and licenses. An entrepreneur needs to visit the local
  government (and its various offices), five other national government agencies, and several
  private offices (e.g., bank, bookstore, print shop, notary) to secure various licenses, permits,
  and forms before his business can commence. To maintain a business, he has to update all
  clearances required during start-up, as well as a zoning permit. There are variations in the
  required steps and corresponding cost depending on the type of business (i.e., corporation or
  sole proprietor) and the local government unit.



  94
     As a point of comparison, PHP 19,000 is the average monthly income of a worker in the 9th income decile and
  monthly minimum wage is in Metro Manila is around PHP 12,000.
  95
     The per capita income used in the respective reference years are: PHP 60,528 for 2005, PHP 87,582 for 2010,
  and PHP 127,438 for 2015.
  46
                                                                               Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



6.	    For a corporation registering in Quezon City,96 it takes 16 steps and 34 days to
complete all government requirements and costs around PHP 19,638. Table 1.2 outlines the
steps and the corresponding direct cost involved.

          Table 1.2. Procedures for starting a corporation with average cost and time consumed
                                                                                    Steps                                                            Days     Cost
                                                                                                                                                             (PHP)
           1.	 Verify and reserve the company name with the Securities and Exchange                                                                   1       40
                   Commission (SEC). 
           2.	 Deposit the paid-in minimum capital at the bank.                                                                                       1        0
           3.	 Notarize articles of incorporation and treasurer’s affidavit at the notary.                                                            1       500
           4.	 Register the company with SEC and receive a pre-registered taxpayer                                                                    2     3,065*
                   identification number (TIN). 
           5.	 Obtain a barangay (village) clearance.                                                                                                 1       500
           6.	 Pay the annual community tax and obtain the community tax certificate                                                                  1       500
                   (CTC) from the City Treasurer’s Office (CTO).97
           7.	 Obtain the mayor’s business permit to operate from the Business Permit                                                                 6     5,353*99
                   Licensing Office (BPLO).                          98


           8.	 Buy special books of account at bookstore.                                                                                             1       400
           9.	 Apply for Certificate of Registration (COR) and TIN at the Bureau of Internal                                                          1       115
                   Revenue (BIR). 
           10.	Pay the registration fee and documentary stamp taxes (DST) at the                                                                      1     5,665*
                   authorized agent bank (AAB).
           11.	Obtain the authority to print receipts and invoices from the BIR.                                                                      1        0
           12.	Print receipts and invoices at the print shop.                                                                                         7      3,500
           13.	Have books of accounts and Printer’s Certificate of Delivery (PCD) stamped                                                             1        0
                   by the BIR.
           14.	Register with the Social Security System (SSS).                                                                                        7        0
           15.	Register with the Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth).                                                                1        0
           16.	Register with Home Development Mutual Fund (Pag-ibig).                                                                                 1        0
                   Total                                                                                                                             34     19,638
     Source: Doing Business 2015
     *See Doing Business 2015 methodology for details, found in http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/philippines/starting-a-business




96
   Quezon City is largest city in terms of population and is consequently used as the benchmark in the Doing
Business Report.
97
   According to the Quezon City Business Permit Licensing Office, this step has ceased to be a separate step since
2012. For the past three years, business registration applicants were not required to present the CTC when they
register their business. The fee of PHP 500 is simply included in the one-time assessment of all fees and charges.
98
   Before a business permit is issued, the applicant must secure several clearances such as engineering, fire safety,
and sanitation. Under the regulatory simplification program (discussed in Box 1.2), the time needed to complete
LGU-managed processes were reduced to one day by moving requirement to post-licensing.
99
   According to the Quezon City Business Permit Licensing Office, the cost depends on the declared capitalization of
the business. The smallest fee is PHP 2,400.
                                                                                                                                                                     47
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  7.	      Sole proprietors follow a slightly different track, which has been simplified in recent
  years.100 The general steps and direct cost for Quezon City are outlined in Table 1.3. In 2010, the
  Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) launched the Philippine Business Registry (PBR) in Quezon
  City.101 The PBR is an online registration platform for sole proprietors that covers registering a
  business name, obtaining a TIN, and registering with SSS, PhilHealth, and Pag-IBIG. By merging
  several steps, step 1 can, in theory, be completed in just one day. In practice, however, system
  delays, can lead to more days. At the local level, step three has become easier with the Business
  One Stop Shop (BOSS) that allows minimally regulated businesses to obtain their local permits
  within the day.

                                                   Table 1.3. Procedures for starting a sole proprietor
                                                 in Quezon City with average cost and time consumed
                                                                Steps                                                          Days               Cost (PHP)
         1.     Register business name with DTI through the                                                                      1       PHP 15 documentary stamp
                Philippine Business Registry (PBR).                                                                                      tax and PHP 200
                                                                                                                                         to 2,000 depending on
                                                                                                                                         scope.
         2.     Obtain a barangay clearance.                                                                                     1       PHP 300 to 1000 depending
                                                                                                                                         on barangay
         3.     Go to the Business One Stop Shop (BOSS) and
                bring i) PBR number (registration with DTI), ii)
                barangay clearance, iii) contract of lease (if
                renting) or title to property (if owner of
                business area), and iv) location plan/site map.
                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                                         *Depends on
                                                                                                                                 (for
           4.	 Pay taxes and fees at the City Treasurer’s                                                                                capitalization, scope,
                                                                                                                                steps
               Office.                                                                                                                   and type of business
                                                                                                                               3 to 5)
           5.	 Present official receipt to the BOSS and the
               BOSS personnel releases the mayor’s permit
               and business license plate.
           6.	 Comply with other necessary requirements102
               within 90 days (not applicable for all).
                    Total                                                                                                        3       PHP 515 to 3,015
   Sources: Quezon City Communication Center, Business Processing and Licensing Office, and Business One Stop Shop Brochure.




  100
      The information in this paragraph is based on interviews with the Communications Center and Business Process
  and Licensing Office of Quezon City.
  101
      The Quezon City Government tested the PBR in 2009 and launched it in 2010, while PBR II was launched in 2012.
  102
      These include i) fire safety and inspection certificate, ii) sanitary permit,iii) certificate of electrical inspection, iv)
  mechanical permit, and v) other clearances or certificates required, depending on the type of business.
  48
                                             Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



8.	     After a business commences, numerous annual regulatory requirements are needed
to maintain the business, which can take several days to fulfill.103 The primary step is the
annual renewal of the mayor’s business permit. Renewal of the mayor’s business permit
necessitates renewing the same permits and clearances required the year before as well as
payment of business taxes based on gross sales. Permits vary depending on business type,
and include the fire safety inspection certificate from the Bureau of Fire Protection, a sanitary
permit from the City Health Department, and a certificate of electrical inspection from the Local
Building Official.104 These are provided by different local government offices and require time
and effort given the bureaucracy. After the business owner complies with the requirements,
documentary proof of gross sales such as audited financial statements and VAT payments must
be presented and assessed. While these requirements may serve important purposes, they
appear to be cumbersome, considering that businesses in the Philippines need to apply for
licenses more often than in neighboring countries (for instance, see Figure MT1 in the medium-
term reform agenda section).

9.	    Moreover, there are tax and contribution payments that have to be paid frequently
within the year. For instance, for a corporation, there are 36 regular tax and contribution
payments needed every year (some required monthly and some quarterly), which takes 193
hours to comply with (Table 1.4). As the online system is not always functional, payments have to
be made in person in some cases.

      Table 1.4. Number of regular tax and contribution payments by a medium-sized company
                                     Steps                              Number of                 Hours
                                                                        Payments
          1.	 Local tax payment.                                             1                       ..
          2.	 Real property tax payment.                                     1                       ..
          3.	 SSS, Pag-ibig, PhilHealth, and other payments.                 25                     38
          4.	 National tax payment (income tax and VAT)                      2                      155
          5.	 Other tax payments                                             7                       ..
                   Total                                                     36                     193
 Source: Doing Business 2015
 Note: .. means no data available.




10.	  These tax and contribution requirements make no concession to business size. Micro
and small firms face very high cost of compliance as the same tax regime is applied to them




103
    The process of business permit renewal varies depending on the LGU. Quezon City was used as a reference to
remain consistent with the Doing Business Report.
104
    For example, a law office would only need a fire inspection certificate, but a carinderia (small eatery) will also
need a sanitary inspection, and a drugstore/clinic would need to present a certificate from the Department of
Health.
                                                                                                                   49
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  without regard to business size or their capacity to comply (e.g., they often do not have the
  resources to employ accountants or to maintain full accounts required by the tax agency). This
  deters many of them from entering or staying in the formal sector. In fact, it may be easier to
  leave the system completely than to comply without sufficient knowledge of the law and be
  subjected to audits and penalties. Moreover, maintaining a formal status can be much more
  expensive than the original cost of business registration.


  Opportunity costs

  11.	   Apart from legally-mandated direct cost, corruption adds to the cost of starting and
  maintaining a business. While the peso value is difficult to determine given the clandestine
  nature of these transactions, the significant number of businesses reporting the need to pay
  bribes or give gifts suggest that the practice may be systemic in some agencies. For instance, in
  the 2009 Enterprise Survey, around 11, 8, and 25 percent of small, medium, and large firms,
  respectively, reported paying bribes or giving gifts to obtain an operating license (see Figure
  MT2 in the medium-term reform section). The results are even worse for securing a
  construction permit and getting an electricity connection. A more recent survey by the Social
  Weather Stations (SWS) in 2015 confirms earlier results. It finds that 25 percent of firms paid
  bribes in order to obtain a local license, while 21 percent paid bribes in order to obtain a
  national license.

  12.	   More importantly, considerable opportunity cost arises from missing productive days
  of work, and thus lost income, in order to comply with government requirements. For most
  micro or small businesses, the owner himself has to personally travel from one government
  agency to another and fall in long lines instead of doing more productive work.105 These lost
  productive days lead to lost income. If an agent or worker is deputized, that typically comes at a
  high cost relative to the business’s capitalization. Estimating the impact of lost productive days
  on income is subject to a number of assumptions and considerations, and thus also not easy to
  measure, but indicative estimates show that this can also be very large.

  13.	   Using parameters from the previous section, total opportunity cost from productive
  days lost can easily reach more than PHP 100 billion annually.106 The following gives the
  breakdown: For businesses, this comes from lost income opportunities (by PHP 11.9 billion). For
  the government, this comes from lost tax and contribution revenues due to lower income (by
  PHP 9.7 billion). Finally, for the economy, it manifests in lower aggregate spending (by PHP
  133.8 billion). Table 1.5 summarizes these opportunity costs while Box 1.1 explains the
  (conservative) methodology used.



  105
      Transacting with a government agency does not usually take eight full hours, but considering the worsening
  traffic condition, time spent travelling from one agency to another can easily take the whole day.
  106
      Understandably, the bulk of the opportunity cost comes from maintaining a business, given the requirement to
  renew and pay annually (or more frequently). However, if all the opportunity costs in starting a business since the
  beginning are added up, this can easily rival the opportunity cost of maintaining a business.
  50
                                        Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



14.	     Moreover, opportunity cost can also arise from discouraged Filipinos who could have
started a business if only the cost was reasonable. While this type of opportunity cost is more
difficult to measure, it nevertheless is not hard to grasp. For instance, households receiving
substantial remittances of at least PHP 200,000 per year and have a working age member who
is not employed (i.e., unemployed or out of the labor force) could better use this money to start
a business,107 yet many don’t. The 2012 Family Income and Expenditure Survey (FIES) estimates
that 117,782 households fit this description, with average annual remittances of PHP 374,000.
However, due to income underreporting, actual remittances received may be closer to PHP
602,140.108 In the central bank’s survey of overseas Filipino worker (OFW) households, in the
past five years, only 6.5 percent of households reported that they use remittances for
investments, while 42 percent use the remittances for savings. The difference of 35.5 percent109
may represent the untapped potential investors, of which around half are assume to be risk-
neutral and thus will invest. Assuming that these households invest the entire remittance
amount,110 this gives rise to forgone investment of around PHP 12.6 billion. At a return of
investment of 15 percent, this translates into forgone annual income of PHP 1.9 billion and
forgone tax revenues of around PHP 1.5 billion. Finally, taking the economy-wide multiplier of
1.8, the impact on the economy is PHP 21.2 billion. And if each business creates two jobs in
addition to the owner, then total job generation would be 62,179, or about five percent of the
number of entrants to the labor force every year. This is a significant number of jobs forgone.

15.	    These indicative estimates suggest that high cost of doing business is clearly a toll on
the country’s inclusive growth agenda. When taking all other Doing Business indicators into
account (e.g., securing construction permit, getting electricity, trading externally), the overall
cost of doing business, both direct cost and opportunity cost, could be several times higher.




107
    This analysis considers only remittance-receiving households as a potential source of new businesses. It uses
remittances from the household surveys, which are lower than the remittances reported by the central bank. This
means that the estimates are conservative estimates, even when risk aversion is considered (i.e., some households
will not start a business because they are simply risk averse).
108
    FIES income components, including remittances, suffer from significant underreporting, thus they need to be
adjusted. A simple way to adjust FIES remittance is to raise it by the ratio of total BOP cash remittances to FIES
remittance. Since BOP cash remittance was around PHP 903.7 billion and FIES remittance was PHP 560.2, the ratio
is around 1.61.
109
    This may represent the ceiling of remittance receiving households who could have invested, as investing
involves risk, and not all households have a high risk appetite.
110
    This assumption is reasonable as these households belong to the top two percent of the income percentile with
a marginal propensity to consume of 0.68, much lower than the national average of 0.83.
                                                                                                               51
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




                                                   Table 1.5. Annual opportunity costs in billions of PHP
                                                                     Forgone         Forgone          Forgone        Forgone       Forgone
                                                                   investment      business net       tax and       aggregate    employment
                                                                                     income        contribution     spending
                                                                                                     revenues
   Loss to corruption                                                                Significant but very difficult to measure
   Starting a business                                                               0.13111       0.11112          1.50113
   Maintaining a business                                                            11.77114      9.57115        132.28116
   Total direct opportunity                                                           11.90         9.68           133.78
   cost
   Indirect opportunity cost                                         12.59117        1.89118       1.54119         21.23120        62,179
   from forgone investment                                         For the first
                                                                    year only
   Grand total                                                        12.59           13.79         11.22          155.01          62,179
   Source: WB staff calculations based on government statistics.




                                           Box 1.1. Methodology for estimating the opportunity cost of lost
                                                 productive days and discouraged potential investors

  To estimate the opportunity cost in starting a business, a proxy for income is multiplied by the number
  of days spent in complying with various government requirements and the number of new businesses
  that enter the market annually. To be conservative, the minimum wage rate of the National Capital
  Region is used as a proxy for net income. The number of new businesses that enter the market annually
  is extrapolated from the Department of Trade and Industry’s annual estimate of MSMEs for 2008 and
  2012. In 2008 and 2012, respectively, DTI estimated around 758,436 and 940,802 MSMEs. These
  numbers represent an average annual entry of 45,592 MSMEs into the market. This is further broken


  111
      This is computed as (34 days x PHP 481 per day x 4,559 new corporations) + (3 days x PHP 481 per day x 41,033
  new sole proprietors). The addends are PHP 74.6 million and PHP 59.2 million.
  112
      This is computed as (PHP 133.8 million x 42.5 percent_ + (PHP 969.34 million x 5.36 percent) [the effective VAT rate
  on sales assuming 50 percent is exempt]. Revenues are computed from profit using the following profit to cost ratio:
  13.8 to 86.2. The addends are PHP 56.87 million and PHP 51.96 million.
  113
      This is computed as PHP 835.57 million x 1.8 (the economy-wide multiplier).
  114
      This is computed as 26 days x PHP 481 per day x 940,802 existing MSMEs. 26 days is derived from 193 hours
  required to pay taxes plus an estimated two days to renew licenses.
  115
      This is computed as (PHP 11.77 billion x 42.5 percent) + (PHP 85.26 billion x 5.36 percent). The addends are PHP
  5 billion and PHP 4.57 billion.
  116
      This is computed as PHP 73.49 billion x 1.8.
  117
      This is computed as 117,782 households x adjusted average remittance of PHP 602,140 x half of the 35.5
  percent OFW households who are risk neutral and could have invested.
  118
      This is computed as PHP 12.59 billion x 15 percent return on investment.
  119
      This is computed as (PHP 1.89 billion x 42.5 percent) + (PHP 13.68 billion x 5.36 percent). The addends are PHP
  0.81 billion and PHP 0.73 billion.
  120
      This is computed as PHP 11.79 billion x 1.8.


  52
                                       Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



down into an estimated 4,559 (10 percent) corporations and 41,033 (90 percent) sole proprietors. To
estimate the opportunity cost for existing businesses, the DTI estimate of MSME stock as of 2012 is used
as the proxy. These parameters are lower bound and thus give a conservative estimate of opportunity
cost.

To estimate the impact on government tax and contribution revenues, lost income is multiplied by the
average tax and contribution rate of 42.5 percent of profit, taken from the Doing Business Report. In
addition, the VAT rate of 12 percent is applied to the derived business sales. To be conservative, it is
assumed that 50 percent of cost is non-VATable. Finally, the profit and cost share of 13.8 and 86.2,
respectively, is based on the economy-wide average from the Census of Philippine Business and
Industry.

To estimate the impact on aggregate spending (and hence GDP), total business cost is multiplied by the
average economy-wide multiplier of 1.8, sourced from the 2006 input-output table.

Finally, there are many ways to estimate forgone investment due to high cost of entry. One method is
to scan the household survey for households receiving substantial remittances and have at least one
member outside the labor force who could start a business using the remittances. Supplemented with
the BSP’s survey on the use of OFW remittances, the number of untapped households can be estimated.
Details are discussed in the main text.




Reforms to reduce the cost of starting and maintaining a business

16.	    Recognizing the adverse impact on the economy of costly business start-up, the
government has begun to address a number of doing business constraints. At the national
level, four landmark memoranda of agreement (MOAs) were signed by nine national
government agencies and a local government unit on April 14, 2015.121 This major collaboration
among several government agencies is a response to the complexity created by the country’s
decentralized manner of starting a business. If implemented fully, the number of days needed
to start a corporate business in Quezon City is expected to fall from 34 to 8 and the number of
steps from 16 to 6. Successful implementation can then be rolled-out in other areas.

17.	   The new process in registering a corporation involves a re-engineering of existing
processes and the creation of an integrated business registration system. Many steps from
the previous regime are either eliminated or merged to reduce the number of steps and days
needed (Figure 1.1). Among the steps retained are the preparation of supporting documents,
securing a barangay clearance, and obtaining the business permit from the Business Permits
and Licensing Office (BPLO). Steps removed or merged are i) bank deposit of paid in capital, ii)




121
   These agencies are: National Competitiveness Council (NCC), Department of Finance (DOF), Department of
Trade and Industry (DTI), Department of the Interior and Local Government (DILG), Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC), Bureau of Internal Revenue (BIR), Social Security System (SSS), Home Development Mutual
Fund (Pag-IBIG), Philippine Health Insurance Corporation (PhilHealth), and the local government of Quezon City.
                                                                                                            53
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  purchase of special books of accounts, and iii) individually registering with a) SSS, b) PhilHealth,
  and c) Pag-Ibig. These former requirements are removed as SEC adopts an integrated business
  registration system similar to PBR, which will create a unified registration system for SEC, SSS,
  PhilHealth, and Pag-IBIG registrations and for obtaining a TIN from BIR. Furthermore, efficiency
  are being introduced at the LGU level by reducing the average processing time for obtaining a
  business permit to operate from six days to around two to three days, including the step to pay
  the annual community tax and payment of necessary fees. BIR is also enhancing its system by
  combining the process of securing a certificate of registration and the registration of book of
  accounts into one. Likewise, acquiring authority to print and printing receipts/invoices are being
  simplified.

                Figure 1.1. Newly simplified approach to corporate business registration.




  54
                                        Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



18.	     If fully implemented, this reform can also result in time and cost savings. For each day
of reduction, at least PHP 2 million in lost income can be saved. Moreover, PHP 68 million in
lost income can be saved if the 2015-2016 goal of the National Competitiveness Council (NCC)
to reduce business start-up to three steps and three days is achieved. While these appear small,
its second round effects on the economy can be substantial. Furthermore, another PHP 9 billion
in lost income can be saved annually if the days spent to pay taxes is reduced to 13 payments
and 36 hours. In addition to these savings, gains to the economy can come from new business
entry (e.g., 24 percent spike in registration rate when procedures were simplified in the key
cities of Manila, Quezon, Marikina, and Mandaluyong) as a result of faster, easier, and more
transparent registration process and business regulations.

19.	    At the local level, 25 cities122 have also taken initiatives to reduce business start-up
costs. In the Philippines, cities, municipalities, and barangays (villages) play a big role in
the business registration process. In fact, about one-third of the registration steps are in the
domain of the local government. To support business entry reform at the city level, the
Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) initiated a program called RS4LGU
(Regulatory Simplification for LGUs) that support cities to reform their business registration
systems (see Box 1.2). Since 2010, 25 cities have passed executive orders (EOs) codifying
reforms to simplify their respective business permit licensing systems. Cities that have passed
EOs reduced registration steps from an average of 45 to 3 and registration days from an
average of 30 to 1. More successes are expected to follow as DILG rolls out the program to
other LGUs.


       Box 1.2. Regulatory simplification program for business permit renewal in the Philippines

Initiated in 2008, the regulatory simplification program targeted and removed system inefficiencies,
and regulatory redundancies to make starting a business easier.123 The regulatory simplification
program aimed to i) help local governments units (LGUs) lower administrative barriers, and ii) reduce
transaction costs for opening a business in terms of time, cost, and procedures. The program used a
bottom-up approach to involve LGUs in the reform. A diagnostic tool developed by the International
Finance Corporation (IFC) was used to help cities methodically analyze and target steps for elimination
in business registration. A legal analysis guidance tool was created to help them determine which
licensing steps can be eliminated or moved. It also helped cities realize that several steps could be
deferred to post-licensing, such as a firm’s enrollment with social security agencies and securing a fire
permit. This made a two-step and one-day business permit process for LGU-controlled procedures
possible.




122
    The cities that have started reforms to reduce business start-up costs are the following: in Luzon: Urdaneta,
Kabugao, San Fernando, Santiago, Cauayan, La Trinidad, Legazpi, Tabuk, Baguio, Laoag, Tanauan, Vigan, Ilagan, and
Kawit; in Visayas: Bogo, Calbayog, Catbalogan, Tacloban, Ormoc, Danao, and Lapu-lapu; and in Mindanao: Surigao,
Tacurong, Samal, and Tagum.
123
    The program was supported by the International Finance Corporation of the World Bank Group.
                                                                                                              55
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  The success of four pilot cities in Metro Manila caught the national government’s attention and
  generated interest for its roll out in other LGUs. The project began in Quezon City, Marikina City,
  Mandaluyong City, and Manila City in 2009. The time to complete business entry in the four cities was
  reduced from an average of 13 days to just 1. In the succeeding years, the project was expanded to
  Tuguegarao City, Puerto Princesa City, and Pasig City. During the final 1.5 years of the project, 15 more
  cities adopted the program as the Department of Interior and Local Government (DILG) formally took
  ownership of the program and hired its own coaches to replicate the earlier successes of the reform. A
  particularly successful LGU is La Trinidad in Benguet Province.

  Business registration requirements in La Trinidad were reduced significantly after the reform. La
  Trinidad officially adopted the regulatory simplification program in March 2014. Before introducing the
  program, registration required eight signatures and 18 steps, and took two to five days for the Business
  Permit Licensing Office (BPLO) to process an application. All in all, it took around 14 days to complete
  the 18 steps. After the program was implemented, registration was reduced to three signatures, three
  steps, and one hour for the office to process. The simplified three steps are i) unified submission of form
  and obtainment of barangay clearance, ii) one-time assessment and payment (previously multiple
  payments that went through various departments), and iii) release of permit. In addition, like other
  LGUs in the program, it adopted a unified form that further simplified the process.

  As a result, the number of new registrants and renewals increased significantly in the first year of
  implementation and businesses benefited through annual cost savings. La Trinidad saw the number of
  new registrants and renewals increase from 5,568 in 2013 to 6,717 in 2014 (a 21 percent increase),
  driven by first time registrants. Moreover, businesses benefited from an estimated PHP 83 million in
  annual cost compliance savings (information derived from focus group discussion).


  20.	   While the above reforms are laudable and should make a significant impact, more can
  be done to unleash the full potential of MSMEs both as contributor and beneficiary of
  economic growth. The thematic recommendations to reduce the cost of doing business are
  discussed in the medium-term section on simplifying regulations. This concluding section
  discuss in detail those recommendations specifically pertaining to business startup and
  operations. The “Go Negosyo Act” discussed in Box 1.3 is an important initiative that addresses
  some of these recommendations.

         •	 Further simplify and automate key business registration steps through process re-
            engineering such as i) harmonizing and streamlining remaining procedures among
            national government agencies and LGUs to avoid overlaps and redundancies, ii)
            removing steps that can be verified by government offices at the back end, and iii)
            reducing requirements whose purposes are not fully justified. Some of these would
            require a comprehensive review of all national and local laws, and their implementing
            rules and regulations.

         •	 Fully implement the Philippine Business Registry (PBR) at the national level and the
            RS4LGU program at the local government level. The simplification of steps due to the
            PBR and the RS4LGU can help reduce transaction costs and enhance transparency and



  56
                                     Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



       accountability across involved agencies. In addition, training personnel on implementing
       these rules effectively is needed to ensure adequate compliance.

   •	 Introduce alternative payment systems such as online and mobile payments. This
      would eliminate the need to visit government offices or local banks to complete the
      processing. This would also reduce the potential for under-the-table payment. Quezon
      City is expected to roll out an online payment system for business taxes by end-2015.
      Other LGUs can move to implement similar programs.


                Box 1.3. NEGOSYO centers: Easing the way for MSMEs to do business

The 2014 “Go Negosyo Act” is an important legislation that supports the state’s policy of fostering
broad-based growth of MSMEs. One provision of the act is the establishment of go negosyo centers by
the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) in several cities and municipalities to facilitate business
start-up and operations by MSMEs. DTI has allocated PHP 92.7 million to set up these centers, which are
mandated to promote ease of doing business by MSMEs through i) business registration assistance, ii)
business advisory services, iii) business information and advocacy, and iv) monitoring and evaluation of
business processes for MSMEs.

Go negosyo centers serve as a support sharing facility and a one-stop shop for MSME services.
Through these centers, MSMEs can start and do business without going to different government
agencies, thereby bypassing lengthy and complex procedures. The centers assist in facilitating business
registration and providing assistance on compliance. Moreover, the centers also offer advisory services
on product development and investment promotion, as well as facilitate market linkages and access to
technology, financing, and management training. MSMEs also receive advice and assistance on how to
comply with these requirements.

To date, 89 go negosyo centers have been established across the country and MSMEs have begun to
use their services. Around 29,615 MSMEs have availed of the centers’ services of which 46 percent
availed registration or renewal service, and 33 percent availed of business advisory services on product
development (4 percent), access to markets (5 percent), access to finance (5 percent), investment
promotion (3 percent), business management training (12 percent), and business information (25
percent).


   •	 Reduce the frequency of renewals of government licenses, permits, and clearances for
      employment purposes. For instance, licenses can be renewed every three years instead
      of yearly, and risk-based audits can be used by the government to check on compliance
      instead of subjecting the whole population to de facto audits every time they renew
      their licenses. Local business tax revenues can be maintained by increasing the tax to
      cover multiple years. At any rate, for the business, this is still reduced total cost given
      the time savings.




                                                                                                     57
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




       •	 Consider adopting a risk-based approach for business permitting purposes. The idea of
          risk based audits can be extended to licensing, permitting, and other regulatory
          requirements. Under this approach, instruments used for regulation and control will be
          based on the level of risk (see Box 1.4 for more discussion).

       •	 Simplify the tax regime for micro and small businesses to reduce compliance costs and
          encourage movement of firms to the formal sector. A simplified system could include i)
          using simplified tax forms, registration requirements, and payment processes, ii)
          mandating fewer requirements for bookkeeping and financial reporting, iii) integrating
          the tax filing and payment systems of the national and local government units so that
          taxpayers need to file and pay only once, and iv) combining the value-added tax (VAT),
          percentage tax, and income tax into a single business tax on turnover for micro and
          small enterprises, say at six percent of gross sales. By reducing compliance burden
          through a simplified tax regime, the government stands to raise more taxes and reduce
          corruption in the tax system, while also promoting entrepreneurship and job creation in
          the formal sector.


                  Box 1.4. Introducing a risk-based approach to regulate business licensing

  Adopting a risk-based approach can simplify key regulatory processes that govern business activities,
  thereby saving and allocating scarce resources. A risk-based approach involves moving from
  inspections, licensing, permitting, and other regulatory requirements that cover all businesses uniformly
  to an approach that tailors the instruments used for regulation and control based on the level of risk.
  The higher the potential risk posed by a specific business activity, the stricter the control and the greater
  the need for licensing or permitting and more frequent inspections. For low-risk activities, a license or
  permit should generally not be required, and inspections should be rare.

  Risk matrices are the primary tool used to conduct risk classification. The format is relatively simple:
  one axis represents severity and the other probability. Regulatory responses (e.g., licensing, permitting)
  are adapted based on the matrix. Only parameters that are easily known about the business are
  included. If risk matrices are too long and complex, they become very difficult to use. A typical risk
  matrix would be less than one page, including at least the following factors (and possibly others that are
  country or regulator-specific):

  •	 Sector of activity
  •	 Type of process (if manufacturing, what products are involved and are hazardous substances
     used or stored?) or type of activity (if non-manufacturing, do people reside permanently and/or
     sleep in the facility?)
  •	 Number of people present in the establishment during normal operation and/or maximum
     number of people that are present
  •	 Location in the case of hazardous industrial facilities (surrounded or not by inhabited area or
     close to sensitive object from an environmental perspective, such as a water source)
  •	 Specific aspects of the building, such as underground parts and/or high-rise (i.e., difficulties in
     evacuation)
  •	 Specific hazardous machinery being used in the building


  58
                                      Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



To sufficiently assess the likelihood of compliance in each establishment, an adequate information
system is needed by regulators. In most cases, the assessment of risks is based on prior records.
Efficiently using them requires a computerized system to make full use of risk matrices.

Aggregate classifications of establishments can mitigate concerns about inadequate information.
Because of inadequate information, some preliminary division of establishments based on their inherent
characteristics (e.g., sector, size, and type of activity) is already a considerable improvement in terms of
risk management compared to treating all establishments as identical. Thus, governments that do not
have such information systems in place can start implementing risk-based approaches to classification
and planning.




                                          Selected references

Department of Trade and Industry. 2015. SME statistics. Available at:
http://www.dti.gov.ph/dti/index.php/resources/sme-resources/sme-statistics

National Competitiveness Council. 2015 Paying taxes. Available at:
http://www.competitive.org.ph/doingbusiness/PayingTaxes.html

Philippine Statistics Authority. 2014. CBPI 2012 published tables. Available at:
https://psa.gov.ph/content/2012-census-philippine-business-and-industry-cpbi-preliminary-
results-economy-wide-total

World Bank. 2013. Philippine Development Report: Creating more and better jobs. Manila and
Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 2013. Introducing a risk-based approach to regulate businesses. Available at:
https://www.wbginvestmentclimate.org/advisory-services/regulatory-simplification/business-
regulation/upload/Nuts-and-Bolts_Risk-Matrix_FINAL_081513.pdf

World Bank. 2015. Doing business in the Philippines. Available at:
http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/philippines/

World Bank. 2011 Philippines: A Tax System for High and Inclusive Growth.




                                                                                                         59
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




                                                SPECIAL FOCUS 2

                             Export transaction costs in the Philippines124


  Introduction

  1.	      Philippine merchandise exports have been steadily increasing, but at a slower pace
  compared with regional peers. The country’s exports have increased by 42 percent since
  2000,125 driven by increasing integration into the global electronic supply chain, increasing
  demand for other local products, such as agricultural produce, and positive effects of trade
  liberalization stemming from the 1993 ASEAN Free Trade Agreement. However, export growth
  of regional peers has been significantly higher. For instance, Indonesia’s exports in the same
  period increased by 180 percent and Thailand’s by more than 200 percent (Figure 2.1).

  2.	     Philippine export performance has been uneven and is concentrated in a few firms,
  which are mostly large enterprises. The performance of Philippine exports relative to the world
  has alternating periods of robust growth in the mid-2000s, loss of market share during 2011-
  2012, and a return to growth afterwards. This volatility is expected but appears to be more
  pronounced compared to its neighbors like Indonesia, Thailand, and Malaysia (Figure 2.3). The
  country’s volatility in export shares has been largely driven by changes in global market trends
  for electronics, which represent around 50 percent of the country’s total exports. Periods of
  strong growth have benefited a small segment of the economy as Philippine exports are
  concentrated in a few firms, estimated at between 1,420 and 3,579 companies, with only a few
  small and medium enterprises (SMEs).126

  3.	   Less robust export growth may have slowed the pace of job creation. Since 2001,
  growth of the total wage bill in the export sector has been slower than that of the economy.



  124
      This special focus section was prepared by Justin Chan (Research Assistant), Joseph Louie Limkin (Research
  Analyst), Karl Kendrick Chua (Senior Country Economist), all from the Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management
  Global Practice (GP), and Roberto Galang (Operations Officer), Marcin Piatkowski (Senior Financial Economist),
  Jean Francois Arvis (Senior Transport Economist), Daria Taglioni (Senior Trade Economist), Gerard McLinden (Lead
  Specialist), Christina Busch (Consultant), Claire Hollweg (Consultant), and Guillermo Arenas (Consultant), all from
  the Trade and Competitiveness GP. This special focus benefited from the Export Development Council’s (EDC) cost
  of exporting survey and interviews with i) EDC, ii) Royal Cargo, iii) current and former officials of the Bureau of
  Customs (BOC), iv) e-Konek Pilipinas, and v) Department of Trade and Industry. The Chamber of Customs Brokers
  was not available for interview despite repeated attempts. The report team is very grateful for their time, and in
  particular, to the EDC for sharing the survey results.
  125
      This is sourced from the World Development Indicators’ value of exports index, which is derived from the
  national income accounts.
  126
      The number of exporters varies across data sources: i) 1,420 exporters according to Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas
  Directory of Philippine Merchandise Exporters 2012, ii) 1,284 PEZA-registered exporters as of January 31, 2014,
  and iii) 2,295 registered exporters in PhilExport (SMEs are likely to be counted in this list). The latter two are largely
  mutually exclusive.
  60
                                              Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



Moreover, between 2001 and 2011, labor value-added of exports (both direct and indirect)
increased slower than total labor value-added (Figure 2.2). In fact, labor value-added of exports
declined from 25 percent of total labor value-added in 1995 to 15 percent in 2011. This
divergence occurred primarily between 2007 and 2011 when total labor value-added grew
significantly but total labor value-added of exports stagnated. The slower growth in the labor
content of exports relative to total production suggests that the export sector is creating less
jobs, both direct and indirect, than the non-export sector, or that the returns per labor unit may
be growing faster in the non-export sector.

      Figure 2.1. Philippine value of exports grew much    Figure 2.2. Labor value-added of exports is also
      slower compared to its neighbors.                    growing much slower than total labor value-added
                                                           of the economy.

               Value of export index (2000=100)                                Overall labor value added and
                                                                                exports labor value added
      350                                                                 90
                     Philippines   Indonesia                                               Total labor value added
      300                                                                 80
                     Thailand      Malaysia                               70               Total labor value added in exports
      250
                                                                          60
                                                           USD billions

      200                                                                 50
      150                                                                 40
                                                                          30
      100
                                                                          20
       50                                                                 10
        0                                                                  0




                                                          Source: WB staﬀ calculations based on the World Bank dataset on
 Source: WDI                                              the labor content of exports (LACEX).




4.	      Several reasons are behind the country’s subpar growth of exports. These include i)
rising global competition, ii) declining growth of its key export products, particularly electronics,
iii) a strong real exchange rate, and iv) high bilateral trade costs, in particular, high export
transaction costs. This special focus discusses high export transaction costs, which affects SMEs
the most. Aside from high domestic export transaction costs, other bilateral trade costs also
affects SMEs and are discussed in Annex 2.1.

5.	     The Philippines has higher export transaction costs relative to its neighbors. In the
2015 Doing Business Report,127 the Philippines’ overall performance in trading across borders is
generally poorer compared to Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, and Vietnam. Even though it ranks
ahead of Indonesia and Vietnam in terms of processing time, it ranks last among neighboring
countries in terms of number of documents required and more so in the cost to export (Table
2.1). To export a 20-foot container, companies operating outside the Philippine Economic Zone




127
   See World Bank Doing Business 2015. This is available at http://www.doingbusiness.org/reports/global-
reports/doing-business-2015.
                                                                                                                                61
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  Authority (PEZA) need to prepare six documents, wait for 15 days (including two days of
  domestic transportation and handling), and pay around USD 755 (PHP 34,000) (including
  domestic logistics costs).

         Figure 2.3. Philippine export growth alternated from strong to weak, thereby aﬀecting its global market share.
         In contrast, neighboring countries experienced lesser volatility.

                                                                                       Philippines                                                                                                                                     Indonesia
    log ﬁrst diﬀerences (delta log), year-on-year




                                                                                                                                                       log ﬁrst diﬀerences (delta log), year-on-year
                                                    60%                                                                                                                                                40%

                                                                                                                                                                                                       30%
                                                    40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                       20%

                                                    20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                       10%


                                                     0%                                                                                                                                                 0%

                                                                                                                                                                                                       -10%
                                                    -20%
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -20%

                                                    -40%
                                                                                                                                                                                                       -30%

                                                    -60%                                                                                                                                               -40%
                                                                               2008                   2010                  2012             2014                                                                         2008                   2010   2012   2014

                                                           Philippines                World Average                                                                                                           Indonesia          World Average




                                                                                          Malaysia                                                                                                                                       Thailand
    log ﬁrst diﬀerences (delta log), year-on-year




                                                                                                                                                       log ﬁrst diﬀerences (delta log), year-on-year




                                                    40%                                                                                                                                                40%

                                                    30%                                                                                                                                                30%

                                                    20%                                                                                                                                                20%

                                                    10%                                                                                                                                                10%


                                                     0%                                                                                                                                                 0%

                                                    -10%                                                                                                                                               -10%

                                                    -20%                                                                                                                                               -20%

                                                    -30%                                                                                                                                               -30%

                                                    -40%                                                                                                                                               -40%
                                                                               2008                   2010                  2012             2014                                                                         2008                   2010   2012   2014

                                                           Malaysia                   World Average                                                                                                           Thailand           World Average




   Note: Percentage point diﬀerence is equal to country growth minus global growth. The shaded areas represent the gain (green) or loss (red) of market share
   in percentage points (i.e., the diﬀerence between country and global growth).
   Source: World Bank measuring export competitiveness database




                                                                                      Table 2.1. Cross-country comparison of exporting procedures
                                                                             Country                           Documents                            Time to export                                                            Cost to export*
                                                                                                             Needed to export                          (days)                                                               (USD per container)
                                                                                                                (number)
                                                                         Singapore                                           3                                                                           6                                       460
                                                                         Malaysia                                            4                                                                          11                                       525
                                                                         Indonesia                                           4                                                                          17                                       572
                                                                         Hong Kong                                           3                                                                           6                                       590
                                                                         Thailand                                            5                                                                          14                                       595
                                                                         Vietnam                                             5                                                                          21                                       610
                                                                         Philippines                                         6                                                                          15                                       755
                                                                         Source: World Bank Doing Business 2015
                                                                         Note: *Cost to export includes inland transportation and handling




  62
                                        Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



6.	     High export transaction costs affect SMEs the most. Not only is de jure cost high, de
facto cost is often higher. In practice, exporters often face longer processing time and have to
pay grease money to stay in schedule.128 Often, high transaction costs can dissuade SMEs from
entering the market altogether. To help get around the tedious process, firms that still find it
profitable to export employ customs brokers and/or freight forwarders. However, availing
these services represents additional costs to exporters and are often beyond the financial
capacity of small exporters. Given this, there is huge scope in simplifying export procedures to
enhance participation of small firms, which would help create more and better jobs and make
growth more inclusive.

7.	     This special focus analyzes Philippine exporting procedures and costs for a typical non-
PEZA small exporter (for goods shipped through sea), and recommends how these procedures
can be further simplified. It begins by giving an overview of the de jure export procedures and
costs. This is followed by an analysis of de facto costs based on survey results, and ends by
suggesting some recommendations to reduce export transaction costs.


Export procedures and de jure cost129

8.	     For a first time non-PEZA exporter, exporting goods involves eight general steps
consisting of both manual and automated processes.130 These are: i) accreditation with the
government or with the exporter confederation, ii) system registration with the Bureau of
Customs (BOC) (the first two steps apply only to first time exporters), iii) submission of export
declaration (ED) form and supporting documents to the BOC, iv) application for export
commodity clearance for regulated products, v) document processing by BOC and issuance of
the authority to load (AL), vi) payment of wharfage and arrastre charges,131 vii) inspection of
regulated cargo by BOC, and viii) application for certificate of origin and/or certificate of
shipment, if needed (see Figure 2.4 for a summary flowchart). While efforts are being made to
automate each step of the export process, several steps still involve a physical or manual
process.

9.	   For a first time exporter, the first step is to secure an exporter accreditation either
from government agencies or the Philippine Exporters Confederation (PhilExport).
Government agencies that grant accreditation include the Board of Investments (BOI), various




128
    Examples of grease money are those paid to hasten processing time, minimize intentional delays, and prevent
physical inspection of cargo.
129
    The sources for the de jure export procedures include the Export Development Council survey on export cost,
the Bureau of Customs, PhilExport, Philippine Ports Authority, and Doing Business 2015.
130
    In contrast, PEZA exporters typically go through a much simplified export procedure. They deal mainly with
PEZA rather than the Bureau of Customs. Once their electronically-filed export declaration is approved, they can
proceed with the shipping.
131
    Wharfage is charged for the use of port facilities while arrastre is charged for cargo handling.
                                                                                                             63
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  investment promotion agencies (IPA),132 and the Export Marketing Bureau (EMB) of the
  Department of Trade and Industry (DTI). Firms that are not registered with a particular
  government agency can get accreditation from PhilExport. Accreditation from government
  agencies is free of charge. However, accreditation from PhilExport costs PHP 4,000 annually for
  member companies and PHP 5,000 for non-member companies. PhilExport offers a PHP 3,000
  discounted price for barangay micro business enterprises.133 This step involves physical
  submission of forms and payment of fees while registration is approved online with a
  subsequent confirmation receipt sent via email.

  10.	    The second step for first time exporters is to register with the client profile
  registration system (CPRS) of the electronic to mobile system (E2M) of the BOC. This is done
  electronically through any of the accredited value-added service providers (VASP).134 This step
  is free of charge. Once an exporter has an accreditation and has registered in CPRS, it does not
  have to redo the first two steps in future transactions, unless filing for an annual renewal of
  PhilExport accreditation.

  11.	    The third step is to file an ED form, which is also done electronically in E2M via a VASP.
  Registered exporters can lodge their EDs into E2M through the VASP they registered with. De
  jure costs include the VASP fee of PHP 45 per ED, documentary stamp tax (DST) of PHP 115, and
  bank charge of PHP 300, for a total of PHP 460.135 De jure processing time is four minutes.
  Payment for lodging an ED is automatically debited from the registered bank account of the
  exporter.

  12.	    The fourth step is to acquire an export commodity clearance (ECC) for regulated
  products. This step only applies to goods which are regulated such as copper concentrates, live
  animals, shells, and plants.136 An exporter of regulated goods needs to acquire an ECC from the
  respective government agency regulating the specific good. These agencies may charge a fee
  for the ECC depending on the type of good. Fees may be charged on a fixed cost per transaction
  or weight basis, or a combination of both. Fees are paid manually at the cashier of the
  concerned regulating agency.




  132
      The IPAs include i) Subic Bay Metropolitan Authority, ii) Clark Development Corporation, iii) Poro Point
  Management Corporation, iv) Cagayan Economic Zone Authority, v) Aurora Pacific Economic Zone and Freeport
  Authority, and vi) Authority of the Freeport Area of Bataan.
  133
      Under RA 9178, barangay micro business enterprises are defined as any business entity or enterprise engaged
  in the production, processing or manufacturing of products or commodities, including agro-processing, trading and
  services, whose total assets including those arising from loans but exclusive of the land on which the particular
  business entity’s office, plant and equipment are situated, shall not be more than PHP 3 Million.
  134
      The three accredited value-added service providers (VASP) are Cargo Data Exchange Center, e-Konek Pilipinas,
  and InterCommerce Network Services. VASPs handle BOC’s client-facing ICT processes, such as inputting export
  declarations into the system.
  135
      Bank charge is necessary since the documentary stamp tax is paid via electronic fund transfer.
  136
        A list of all prohibited and regulated products for export can be found in
  http://www.dti.gov.ph/emb/index.php/exporting-essentials-2/list-of-prohibited-and-regulated-products.
  64
                                        Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



13.	   The fifth step is document processing by the BOC and the issuance of the AL. Once the
ED is approved, the exporter must submit a printed copy of the ED together with supporting
documents to the BOC Export Division for processing and release of AL. This step is free of
charge. De jure processing time usually takes 10 minutes for green lane exports if all
documentary requirements are complete while red lane exports usually take at least a day. The
clearance of the ED and issuance of the AL are usually done manually.

14.	    The sixth step is payment of wharfage and arrastre fees. The fees are set by the
Philippine Ports Authority (PPA). Wharfage fees are paid manually to PPA collecting officers. For
non-containerized cargo, the fee is PHP 20.55 per metric ton or PHP 17.08 per cubic meter,
whichever is higher. For containerized cargo, it is charged per container and is based on the size
of the container: PHP 290.86 for 20 footers, PHP 369.54 for 35 footers, PHP 437.98 for 40
footers, and PHP 513.24 for 45 footers. Arrastre fees are paid manually at the port operator’s
cashier. The charges for a full container load (FCL) are also based on the size of the container:
PHP 3,408.16 for 20 footers, and PHP 7,827.68 for 40 and 45 footers. All charges are inclusive of
the 12 percent value-added tax.

15.	    The seventh step is submission of the ED and AL to concerned BOC divisions and
subsequent cargo inspection. This step is free of charge and takes about a day. If cargo is
containerized, the exporter submits the documents to the Customs Container Control Division
(CCCD), which verifies the lodged ED against the submitted ED and supervises cargo loading. If
cargo is non-containerized, the exporter deals with the Piers and Inspection Division. EDs of
exports tagged as green are automatically approved and cargo does not undergo inspection.
Those tagged as yellow go through document check, while those tagged as red undergo
physical inspection. According to Portcalls, around 70, 20, and 10 percent are tagged as green,
yellow, and red, respectively.137 Currently, as provided by Executive Order 230, only exporters
in the top 1,000 corporations are qualified to take advantage of the green lane.138

16.	    The eighth and final step is securing a certificate of origin and/or certificate of
shipment from BOC.139 This step is only followed if required by the importing country. An
exporter submits a written request and supporting documents and pays a documentary stamp
tax of PHP 115 for each requested document. According to BOC, the application for the
certificate of origin takes five days, two hours, and 25 minutes. The application for the
certificate of shipment takes one day and 14 minutes. As a response to the ASEAN integration,
the BOC has begun to automate the process of filing for a certificate of origin and is currently
under pilot testing.



137
    Source: http://www.portcalls.com/ph-customs-activates-green-lane-for-exports.
138
    Under Executive Order 230, “Authorizing the Establishment and Maintenance of a ‘Super Green Lane Facility’ at
the Bureau of Customs,” only the top 1,000 corporations in the country are qualified for the SGL program.
139
     The certificate of origin is a document that officially states that the exported goods are originating or
manufactured in the said country of origin. This document is usually needed to claim benefits under free trade
agreements. The certificate of shipment contains the nature of the shipment and is usually used to declare
whether a shipment represents a full or partial shipment when it reaches the country of destination.
                                                                                                              65
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  17.	    To minimize transaction cost, exporters often use the services of customs brokers or
  freight forwarders, who usually charge based on the value of the goods. Customs brokers can
  handle most exporting steps. Large exporters usually deal directly with freight forwarders which
  employ their own customs brokers and provide additional logistics support.

                              Figure 2.4. Summary of export procedures




  66
                                     Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



De facto cost of exporting

18.	    In practice, exporters say that they pay more than the de jure cost to speed up the
process. In 2014, the Export Development Council (EDC) conducted a survey on the cost of
exporting (see Box 2.1 for a background of the survey). The survey finds that while corruption is
minimal, exporters have to pay grease money to facilitate faster transactions, especially if the
delay can lead to offloading of cargo or missing a shipment schedule (see Table 2.2 for a
summary of the various costs for exporting a 20-foot container). As prescribed, it takes
anywhere from seven days and 28 minutes to eight days, two hours, and 53 minutes to fulfill all
the export requirements. However, in reality, respondents report that it takes anywhere from
six days, three hours, and 30 minutes to seven days, eight hours, and 24 minutes. However, this
shorter processing time comes at higher cost. De jure costs total PHP 4,389 while total de facto
cost can go as high as PHP 4,833. These findings are corroborated by anecdotal evidence.


         Box 2.1. The Export Development Council’s (EDC) survey of export cost of compliance

In 2014, the EDC conducted a survey on export compliance costs. Its main objective was to determine
whether exporters pay more than the legally-mandated fees and how long it really takes to export. The
findings were intended to help policymakers lower the costs of export (both de jure and de facto), and
standardize export costs and procedures across ports. The survey covered steps three to seven. It asked
respondents on the actual duration and costs incurred (for both official and un-receipted), together with
any comments they may have on each step.

The survey’s 41 respondents had the following attributes: 38 of them were non-PEZA exporters that
went through the manual or E2M route, 28 exported their products through the Manila International
Container Terminal or the Port of Manila, 16 used brokers, while 20 used representatives (including
their own staff).

The following observations are noteworthy:

·	Only two respondents indicated that they went through the export procedure themselves. All
others had representatives or used the services of a customs broker. This may suggest that small
exporters were underrepresented in the survey.

·	Respondents appear to be more concerned about cost rather than time given the higher
response rate for cost (around 50 percent) compared to time (around 25 percent).

·	Even though the survey results show substantial differences between de jure and de facto costs,
only two respondents directly indicated that there were additional un-receipted costs.


19.	    Steps one, two, and three de jure and de facto costs are generally similar, and
registration is usually approved in a week, but actual time spent can be longer than expected.
In step 3, the de facto cost is usually PHP 460 as well, although the survey reported several



                                                                                                      67
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  cases where exporters paid less (between PHP 445 to 485) to avoid paying the documentary
  stamp tax. In contrast, the de jure processing time of four minutes is not typically followed.
  Processing time typically ranges between three and 20 minutes, but one exporter reported that
  it took him one day to complete the step. The common problem cited by respondents is
  difficulty logging into the system, especially during peak hours.140

  20.	   In step 5, although free of charge, informal fees are allegedly paid to speed up
  document processing. Based on the survey, a number of respondents mentioned that they
  pay PHP 70 to PHP 175 per document. Other respondents claim to pay as high as PHP 500.
  However, BOC maintains that there are no such informal fees. Though small in value, these
  could sum up to large amounts over repeated transactions. Per the survey, the actual time
  needed to complete this process ranges from five minutes to two hours.

  21.	    In step 6, port officials allegedly allow exporters to pay lower fees if an official receipt
  is not issued. Some respondents pay a reduced wharfage fee of PHP 150 per FCL for 20 footers
  and PHP 200 for 40 footers if an official receipt is not issued. Although the difference between
  formal and informal fees is relatively small at around PHP 100 to 200, this still represents a
  substantial loss in government revenues if the practice is widespread.141 Furthermore, some
  exporters claim that port personnel ask for grease money to processing. The average time
  needed to complete this step ranges from 30 minutes to three hours.

  22.	   In step 7, additional un-receipted costs are also observed in cargo inspection. This
  step does not involve de jure fees. However, survey respondents say that total informal fees
  paid range from PHP 300 to 425 per container. The de facto time needed to complete this step
  ranges from 13 minutes to two hours and 45 minutes. 	




  140
       This is also supported by several anecdotal evidences. For instance, Mindanao exporters find the new E2M
  automated export declaration system expensive and time consuming. They often find themselves repeating the
  filing processing two to three times for each export transaction because export declarations use estimates of
  volume and weight, and final verification only occurs immediately prior to shipment. Discrepancies between actual
  and estimated volume and weight require a new declaration and the whole filing process needs to be repeated.
  Each filing would cost an exporter PHP 500 to 600 for document processing plus a PHP 45 IT fee.
  141
      For instance, if 20 percent of all exporters choose to pay the informal fees for each container, then this will cost
  the government at least PHP 80 million annually. This assumes container traffic of 1.5 million TEU.

  68
                                                                                Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



                                         Table 2.2 Indicative de jure and de facto costs of exporting a
                                          20-foot container using one transaction (for regular steps)
                                                                  Cost (in PHP)                                                             Time
                   Procedure                                     De jure     De                                                   De jure              De facto
                                                                            facto
  3. Submission of export                                            460                  445 to                             4 minutes             3 minutes to 1 day
  declaration                                                                              485
  5. Document processing                                                0                  70 to                   10 minutes to 1 day                 5 minutes
  and issuance of authority                                                                 500                                                        to 2 hours
  to load
  6. Payment of wharfage                                         3,699142                 3,193                                     ..         30 minutes to 3 hours
  and arrastre
  7. Inspection of cargo                                                0                 300 to                                  1 day        13 minutes to 2 hours
                                                                                           425                                                    and 45 minutes
  8a. Application for                                                115                    115                   Initial application:              Same as de jure
  certificate of origin                                                                                         5 days, 2 hours, and 8
                                                                                                                        minutes
                                                                                                               Processing: 17 minutes
  8b. Application for                                                115                    115                  1 day and 14 minutes               Same as de jure
  certificate of shipment
  Total                                                            4,389                  4,238                    7 days and                  6 days, 3 hours, and 30
                                                                                            to                54 minutes to 8 days, 2           minutes to 7 days, 8
                                                                                          4,833               hours, and 53 minutes            hours, and 24 minutes
Sources: Export Development Council survey, Bureau of Customs, PhilExport, Philippine Ports Authority, and Doing Business 2015.
Note: .. means no data available.




Recommendations

23.	   The potential of Philippine exports can be harnessed by reducing the export
transaction costs. With a dynamic private sector, exporters, in particular, small exporters can
contribute and benefit more from higher growth. Realizing this requires a number of reforms to
reduce export transaction costs. Some of these recommendations are already in progress, and
would complement reforms in reducing non-tariff barriers, enhancing logistics support, and
improving productivity of key export products.




142
   This is computed by adding the prescribed wharfage and arrastre fees for 20 footers, which are PHP 290.86 and
3,408.16, respectively.
                                                                                                                                                                        69
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  24.	    First, the government needs to enhance and implement the National Single Window
  (NSW) automated system. In 2007, the Philippine government started using the NSW, an
  internet-based system that helps traders access information and submit documents through a
  single entry point to fulfil all import, export, and transit-related regulatory requirements.
  However, implementation is lacking, especially for small exporters. In addition, further
  enhancement of the NSW should facilitate multiple clearances by concerned government
  agencies (which number around 30) via a single gateway/website, as well as the full integration
  of the system with the BOC’s declaration processing system. The government can also explore
  extending the risk management functionality in the BOC IT system to other agencies.143

  25.	    Second, information on all export procedures, processes, fees, rules, and regulations
  as well as agreed performance standards needs to be clear, monitored, and published in a
  single website. As of publication, the BOC website does not appear to have detailed
  information on export procedures.144 Without these information, monitoring the actual cost of
  exporting will be difficult. Addressing this requires online publication of detailed procedures
  and the corresponding cost and time standards, as well as regular monitoring of actual
  performance. Moreover, creating a simple, user-friendly trade portal similar to what has been
  set-up in Laos, and now being rolled out in Cambodia and Myanmar, would benefit exporters.

  26.	    Finally, redundant steps need to be eliminated. For instance, exporters file an ED
  online but have to submit a printed copy of the ED to various BOC divisions. Instead of having
  the exporter submit these documents, the BOC’s system needs to be enhanced so that any BOC
  division will have access to the EDs once they are filed online. This will help reduce transaction
  costs as well as opportunities for corrupt practices.




  143
      As the NSW is not yet fully functional, some functionalities that would normally be expected to be managed by
  the NSW are currently handled by VASPs. However, in a single window environment, information should be able
  to reach all parties without the need for a private intermediary. When this happens, VASPs can adapt and provide
  complementary functions such as providing value added services to the private sector or IT support to individual
  industries.
  144
          The DTI’s Export Marketing Bureau has a general “Guide to Philippine exporting procedures”
  (http://www.dti.gov.ph/emb/index.php/exporting-essentials-2/export-procedures). However, like the BOC
  website, this guide does not contain any cost or time standards.
  70
                                  Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



                                     Selected references

Department of Trade and Industry. 2015. Guide to Philippine export procedures. Available at:
http://www.dti.gov.ph/emb/index.php/exporting-essentials-2/export-procedures

World Bank. 2015. Doing business in the Philippines, Trading across borders. Available at:
http://www.doingbusiness.org/data/exploreeconomies/philippines#trading-across-borders

World Bank. 2015. World development indicators. Available at:
http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/world-development-indicators




                                                                                               71
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




                                               Annex 2.1. Lowering bilateral trade costs to raise exports


  1.	     Bilateral trade costs are important factors that determine a country’s
  competitiveness. This Annex benchmarks the Philippines in terms of bilateral trade costs,
  including logistics and connectivity, and discusses reforms the government has undertaken to
  reduce them.

  2.	    The Philippines has high bilateral trade costs.145 As an archipelago with no immediate
  neighbors, slightly higher trade costs are to be expected when compared to countries with land
  borders. Yet trade costs between the Philippines and its immediate maritime neighbors (i.e.,
  Vietnam, Malaysia, and Indonesia) are generally higher compared to trade costs between these
  countries (Annex Table 2.1). For instance, the Philippines’ trade costs with Indonesia are almost
  twice the trade costs between Indonesia and Malaysia. Trade costs between Vietnam and
  Malaysia are the lowest among the six pairings.

  3.	    In particular, trade costs with China are high. China is the country’s third largest export
  market with 14 percent share in total exports in 2014. Compared with its closest ASEAN
  neighbors, only Indonesia (which is farther from China) has trade costs with China that are
  comparable to the Philippines, while costs for other countries are 20 to 40 percent lower. In
  general, the Philippines is a more costly partner. Using Australia as a baseline, the Philippines is
  the most costly (i.e., Philippine value of 136 compared to 107 for Indonesia, 97 for Vietnam,
  and 75 for Malaysia).


                             Annex Table 2.1. Bilateral trade costs in the region: Total trade in 2010
                                Philippines           Indonesia    Malaysia    Vietnam     Thailand    China     Australia
   Philippines                                           130          86          90          84        103        136
   Indonesia                            130                           68          97          89        104        107
   Malaysia                              86               68                      62          47            62      75
   Vietnam                               90               97          62                      72            72      97
   Thailand                              84               89          47          72                        81      74
   China                                103              104          62          72          82                    91
   Australia                            136              107          75          97          74            91       
   Source: World Bank trade costs database
   Note: Trade costs are percentage ad valorem




  145
     Bilateral trade costs capture the added costs that producers face when selling their products internationally and
  is driven by the distance between the partners, logistics facilities, existence of regular maritime and air transport
  services, customs and other procedures, tariffs, quotas, standards, and other non-tariff restrictions. Higher
  bilateral trade costs result in smaller bilateral trade flows.
  72
                                                 Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



4.	    The logistics performance index (LPI)146 also implies high trade costs for the
Philippines. While caution must be exercised in interpreting small differences in LPI scores,
data from 2014 suggest that the Philippines fares the worst on overall logistics performance
compared to the major economies in the region (Annex Figure 2.1). More detailed dimensions
of the LPI reveal that the country is weak on trade and transport-related infrastructure, which
exacerbates the country’s connectivity challenges.

5.	    The Philippines is also affected by low connectivity. Data from the liner shipping
connectivity index (LSCI)147 shows that the Philippines’ score of 20.3 is less than half of Vietnam
or Thailand, one fifth of Malaysia, and only one ninth of China (Annex Figure 2.2). The poor
performance is largely explained by lack of diversity of connections and low volume. For
example, in 2014, deadweight tonnage (dwt) handled in Malaysia was 16.8 million, 15.5 million
in Indonesia, 6.8 million in Thailand, but only 3 million in the Philippines.148

      Annex Figure 2.1. Among major economies in the           Annex Figure 2.2. ...exacerbating the country’s poor
      region, the Philippines has the lowest performance       connectivity
      in logistics…

               Logistics Performance Index (2014)                            Liner Shipping Connectivity Index
                                                                   180
                 Malaysia                                                      2013    2014
                                                                   160
                    China
                                                                   140
                 Thailand
                                                                   120
                 Vietnam                                           100
                                                               Score




                Indonesia                                              80

               Philippines                                             60
                                                                       40
      East Asia and Paciﬁc
                                                                       20
  Lower middle income
                                                                        0
                             1   2      3         4     5                   Philippines Indonesia   Thailand   Vietnam   Malaysia   China

                                     LPI Score




 Source: World Bank                                           Source: World Bank




6.	     The government recognizes the issue of high trade costs and has taken steps to lower
them. In 2014, the Maritime Industry Authority (MARINA) lowered entry barriers and
streamlined the licensing processes for vessels, allowing shipping companies to get their
licenses in nine days compared to 52 days previously, leading to savings of up to PHP 30 million
for large vessels. In July 2015, congress passed the “Foreign Co-loading Act” that allowed
foreign vessels to transship imported and exported goods across multiple ports in the
Philippines. In addition, the Philippine Ports Authority (PPA) initiated a public-private
partnership (PPP) project to modernize the Davao Sasa Port. Four more ports will follow: Iloilo,
146
    The logistics performance index (LPI), developed by the World Bank, is based on a survey of logistics professionals
and scores countries on several dimensions, including trade and transport related infrastructure, logistics services,
and customs procedures.
147
    The LSCI aggregates information such as volumes of containers for the economy relative to its size, number of
shipping lines, and maximum boat size serving the country.
148
    See UNCTAD, Review of Maritime Transport (2014).
                                                                                                                                            73
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




  Zamboanga, General Santos, and Cagayan de Oro. In aviation, the Mactan-Cebu International
  Airport PPP project was awarded in June 2015. Further PPPs are planned for other regional
  airports such as Davao, Laguindingan, Iloilo, and Bacolod. Finally, since 2013, the Department of
  Agriculture has implemented a risk management program for quarantine clearances to
  facilitate the movement of low risk agricultural products. Efficient and timely implementation
  of these projects will be key to lowering trade costs and thereby raising exports.




  74
                                                                              Making Growth Work Better for Small Businesses



                                                                                     DATA APPENDIX
                                                   Table A.1. Key economic indicators (2013 to 2017)

                                                                                                      2013                     2014      2015           2016          2017
                                                                                                                 Actual                              Projections
Growth and inﬂation                                                                                                 (in percent of GDP, unless otherwise indicated)
 Gross domes tic product (percent change)                                                               7.1                6.1             5.8           6.4          6.2
 Inﬂation (period average)                                                                              3.0                4.1             2.0           3.0          3.5
Savings and investment
 Gross national savings                                                                                24.7                    24.6       25.2          26.1          26.6
 Gross domes tic investment                                                                            20.5                    20.8       21.7          23.0          23.7
Public sector
  National government balance (GFS basis)1/                                                            -1.5                    -0.7       -1.2          -2.1          -2.1
  National government balance (gov't deﬁnition)                                                        -1.4                    -0.6       -1.1          -2.0          -2.0
   Total revenue (government deﬁnition)                                                                14.9                    15.1       15.3          15.5          15.8
     Tax revenue                                                                                       13.3                    13.6       13.8          14.0          14.4
   Total spending (government deﬁnition)                                                               16.3                    15.7       16.4          17.5          17.8
  National government debt                                                                             49.2                    45.4       43.6          41.7          39.8
Balance of payments
 Merchandise exports (percent change)                                                                  -3.6                     7.3       2.0            6.5          8.5
 Merchandise imports (percent change)                                                                  -3.1                     2.2       2.5            7.5          8.0
 Remittances (percent change of USD remittance)                                                         7.4                     5.9       5.5            5.5          5.4
 Current account balance                                                                                4.2                     3.8       3.5            3.1          2.9
 Foreign direct investment (billions of dollars)                                                        3.9                     6.2       3.0            3.5          4.0
 Portfolio Investment (billions of dollars)                                                             0.4                    -0.3       0.5            1.0          2.0
International reserves
  Gross oﬃcial reserves 2/ (billions of dollars)                                                       83.2                    79.5       81.5          82.7          84.0
                                                                             3/
  Gross oﬃcial reserves (months of imports)                                                            11.5                    10.2       10.0           9.5          8.9

External debt 4/                                                                                       28.0                    27.5       26.8          26.0          25.5
Sources: Government of the Philippines for historical and World Bank for projec ti ons.
1/ Excludes priva ti za ti on receipts and includes CB-BOL restructuring revenues and expenditures (in accordance with GFSM)
2/ Includes gold
3/ Deﬁ ned as the total of goods and merchandise exports
4/ World Bank deﬁ ni ti on




                                                                                                                                                                             75
PHILIPPINE Economic update - OCTOBER 2015




            Table A.2. National government cash accounts (GFS basis) (2013 to 2015)

                                                                                                                     2013                2014         2015
                                                                                                                                Actual                Budget

         Revenue and grant                                                                                                     14.9         15.1          16.5
          Tax revenue                                                                                                          13.3         13.6          15.5
            Net income and proﬁts                                                                                               6.2          6.2           7.3
            Excise tax                                                                                                          1.0          1.1           1.1
            Sales taxes and licenses                                                                                            2.7          2.7           3.2
            Others                                                                                                              0.7          0.6           1.0
            Collection from Customs                                                                                             2.6          2.9           2.9
           Nontax revenue1/                                                                                                     1.6             1.5          1.0
           Grant                                                                                                                0.0             0.0          0.0

         Total expenditure                                                                                                     16.3         15.7          18.5
          Current expenditures                                                                                                 13.3         12.8          13.9
           Personnel services                                                                                                   5.0          4.8           5.4
           MOOE                                                                                                                 2.5          2.4           3.1
           Allotment to LGUs 2/                                                                                                 2.1             2.2          2.2
           Subsidies                                                                                                            0.6             0.6          0.4
           Tax expenditures                                                                                                     0.2             0.2          0.2
           Interest payment                                                                                                     2.9             2.5          2.6
          Capital outlays                                                                                                       2.9             2.8          4.4
          Net lending                                                                                                           0.1             0.1          0.2

         Balance (GFS deﬁnition)                                                                                               -1.5         -0.7          -2.1
         Balance (GOP deﬁnition)                                                                                               -1.4         -0.6          -2.0
         Primary Balance (GFS)                                                                                                  1.4          1.9           0.5

         Memorandum items
          Privatization receipts (PHP billions)                                                                                 2.9          1.9           2.0
          Nominal GDP (PHP trillion)                                                                                           11.5         12.6          13.9
         Sources: Department of Finance, Bureau of Treasury, and Department of Budget and Management
         1/ Excludes priva ti za ti on receipts (these are treated as ﬁ nancing items in accordance with GFSM).
         2/ Alloca ti on to local government units (LGUs) excludes capital transfers, which are included in capital outlays.




  76
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20043 USA
Website: www.worldbank.org

World Bank Office Manila
26th Floor, One Global Place
5th Avenue cor 25th Street
Bonifacio Global City, Taguig City
Telephone: (632) 465-2500
Website: www.worldbank.org/ph

International Finance Corporation
23rd Floor, One Global Place
5th Avenue cor 25th Street
Bonifacio Global City, Taguig City
Telephone: (632) 465-2700
Website: www.ifc.org
