Public Disclosure Authorized

                                                                                                                          99654


                                                        INTERNATIONALIZING

                                                     SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA’S
Public Disclosure Authorized




                                       EDUCATION AND HEALTH SERVICES

                                                              Nora Dihel and Arti Grover Goswami
                                                                             World Bank
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               This paper summarizes the nature and determinants of trade in education and health services in a selected
                               group of countries in Eastern and Southern Africa, using a combination of quantitative and qualitative
                               methods. The paper presents results from new, innovative data collection methods, such as
                               crowdsourcing, to shed some light on the magnitude, determinants, and restrictions on intra-African trade
                               in education and health services. Assessments of trade and regulatory barriers, based on results from
                               regulatory surveys conducted in selected East African countries, and case studies of success stories and
                               less favorable experiences are then used to develop policy recommendations for using trade and regional
                               integration more strategically to improve outcomes in education and health. The analysis shows that to
                               turn these sectors around, policy action is required in the areas of education, domestic regulation, trade
                               policy, labor mobility, and information and communications technologies at the national and international
                               levels. To retain some of the scarce health workers in the region and enhance the region’s competitiveness
                               in providing education and health services, African countries should allow for freer mobility of teachers
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               and health care professionals.

                               Keywords: trade, services, health, mobile survey, regulations, labor mobility, regional integration
                               JEL Classification: F1, F68, L84, I1, I18


                               Acknowledgments:
                               The authors would like to thank Richard Gicho, Borislava Marcheva and Carmine Soprano for useful
                               contributions and suggestions. We would also like to thank Andreas Blom, Michael Engman, Miriam
                               Schneidman, Karima Saleh, Thomas Farole, and Shawn Cole for helpful comments on earlier drafts. The
                               authors are grateful to the donors of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF) for their generous support to
                               this work. TextToChange conducted the mobile phone surveys.
Introduction
Sub-Saharan Africa is witnessing high international mobility of students and health professionals. The
latest United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) data suggest that in
2012, the outbound mobility ratio of students from the region reached 4.5 percent1—more than two times
higher than the world average of 1.8 percent. In health services, the outflow of middle- and high-skilled
professionals is significant in all African countries. The World Health Organization (2012) estimates that
across 10 Sub-Saharan African countries, almost one-quarter (23 percent) of the locally trained doctors
emigrated to various Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries.
Views regarding the mobility impacts of African students and academic staff are mixed—ranging from
reports that point out the benefits from “brain circulation” to views that emphasize “brain drain.” There is,
nonetheless, a general agreement that the massive outflows of health professionals exacerbate Africa’s
health workforce crisis.

The mobility of African students and health professionals recently has been complemented by the
mobility of educational and medical programs and institutions. Innovative cross-border institutional
arrangements create new commercial opportunities, such as franchising and twinning of academic
programs and health services. There are also new forms of private sector involvement and increased
foreign participation in the provision of medical services. Technological progress is facilitating various
forms of distance education and health services supply such as telemedicine. These relatively new forms
of trade are beginning to gain in importance in Sub-Saharan Africa and have high potential for further
expansion, but data on such flows remain scarce on the African continent.

Trade in education and health services2 also features high on the agenda of policy makers and regional
organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa. For example, all five East African Community (EAC) countries
have committed themselves to remove most explicit barriers to trade in education and health services as
part of the 2010 EAC Common Market Protocol and other developments. Furthermore, the Southern
Africa Development Community (SADC) countries included student and staff mobility in the 1997
SADC Protocol on Education and Training.

Yet, despite the increased international mobility of students, many technological developments with
transformative impact, emergence of private education and medical institutions, and liberalization and
regional integration agreements, the continent continues to face substantive skills and competencies
shortages in both sectors. And several African countries remain excluded from international linkages in
education and health.

Acute shortages of skills in the education and health sectors represent a major impediment to the
attainment of the Millennium Development Goals in Sub-Saharan Africa. For instance, in 2012 in higher
education institutions in Sub-Saharan Africa, the gross rate of tertiary education enrollment still stood at
only 6.9 percent against a world average of 27.7 percent. Similarly, Africa bears one-quarter of the burden
of disease around the world, but has only 3 percent of health workers. While greater investment is needed
1
  http://www.uis.unesco.org/Education/Pages/international-student-flow-viz.aspx.
2
  Education services include (i) primary education services; (ii) secondary education services; (iii) higher education
services; (iv) adult education, which comprises education of adults outside the regular education system; and (v)
other education services, which comprises education services at the first and second levels in specific subject maters
not elsewhere classified (see the services sector classification list GATS W/120 in WTO (1991). Health services
include (i) hospital services—including services delivered under the direction of medical doctors chiefly to
inpatients aimed at curing, reactivating, and/or maintaining health status; (ii) other human health services —
including ambulance services and residential health facility services other than hospital services; (iii) social
services—including welfare services, child day care, and guidance and counselling; and (iv) other (see the services
sector classification list GATS W/120 in WTO (1991).
to strengthen education and create incentives for education and health workers to remain in their
countries, trade and regional integration can play a role in addressing the weaknesses in education and
health. Indeed, recent continent-wide initiatives, such as the 2015 African Higher Education Summit,3
have called for the articulation of clear and comprehensive policies on internationalization at the national,
intracontinental, and intercontinental levels to revitalize Africa’s educational systems and meet Africa’s
health worker crisis.

This paper summarizes the nature and determinants of trade in education and health services in a selected
group of countries in Eastern and Southern Africa, using a combination of quantitative and qualitative
methods. We present results from new, innovative data collection methods, such as a crowdsourcing, to
shed light on the magnitude, determinants, and restrictions on intra-African trade in education and health
services. Assessments of trade and regulatory barriers, based on results from regulatory surveys
conducted in selected East African countries, and case studies of success stories and less favorable
experiences are then used to develop policy recommendations for using trade and regional integration
more strategically to improve outcomes in education and health.

A.       Education and Health Services in Sub-Saharan Africa: How Can
         Regional Integration Help?
Given the personalized nature of education and health provision, the delivery of these services often
requires proximity between consumers and providers.4 Consumption of services abroad (Mode 2 in the
General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) terminology) and the presence of services providers
abroad to supply services (Mode 4 in GATS terminology) seem to be the predominant modes of
supplying education and health services across borders. The movement of students to consume
educational services abroad (Mode 2) and the movement of professionals to provide services abroad
(Mode 4) are now being complemented by new channels for trade in such services. Thanks to recent
advances in technological progress, it is now feasible to deliver lectures through distance learning
programs and provide medical advice through video conferencing (Mode 1). In addition, educational
institutions and hospitals are respectively establishing campuses and medical facilities in foreign countries
to provide their services (Mode 3) right at the doorsteps of foreign consumers.

Combining qualitative and quantitative methods, this section attempts to shed some light on the nature
and the determinants of trade in education and health services in Eastern and Southern Africa. We used
crowdsourcing5 to survey more than 2,000 health professionals, hospital representatives, and patients, as

3
  http://summit.trustafrica.org/.
4
  Trade in services occurs via four modes of supply:
      Mode 1. Cross-border supply. Services supplied from the territory of one country to the territory of another
           country via the use of information and communications technology (for example, distance learning or
           telemedicine).
      Mode 2. Consumption abroad. Services supplied in the territory of one country to the consumers of another
           country (for example, students and patients traveling abroad to buy education and health services).
      Mode 3. Commercial presence. Services supplied through any type of business or professional
           establishment of one country in the territory of another (for example, foreign universities or foreign
           hospitals established in a country).
      Mode 4. Temporary presence of natural persons. Services supplied by nationals of one country in the
           territory of another (for example, educators and medical professionals traveling abroad to provide services).
           Mode 4 includes independent service suppliers and employees of the services supplier of another country.
5
  Crowdsourcing is the process of obtaining information, work, or funding, usually online, from a crowd of people.
Crowdsourced data come from the collective voices of consumers and can provide insights and opinions quicker and
cheaper than more traditional data collection techniques. Given that social networking and applications of mobile
well as 1,967 providers and consumers of education services in nine Sub-Saharan African countries,
namely, Cameroon, Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia. The
surveys collected information on trade patterns, determinants of trade, quality of and satisfaction with
various services, and barriers to trade in education and health services. The quantitative surveys and
qualitative interviews placed a particular focus on regional linkages and the role of regional integration in
filling unmet demands for skills and services in Africa’s health and educ ation sectors. The organizing
framework described in annex A is used to gather information on and discuss the determinants of trade in
education and health services by mode of supply.
        B.1 Distance Learning and Telemedicine on the Rise
Distance learning and telemedicine are daring and disruptive technologies that are expected to make an
important impact in Africa over the next 15–20 years. Anecdotal evidence confirms that the use of
information and communications technologies (ICT) tools to improve access to services, including cross-
border trade in services, is beginning to emerge on the continent, with several homegrown initiatives and
apps taking off in recent years in Africa.

The African Virtual University (AVU) was established with the objective of building capacity in
education and health in Africa. Eighteen African countries have signed the Charter establishing the AVU,
which has trained more than 43,000 students since its inception in 1997. As the leading institution in the
Pan-African e-Network Project, the AVU has acquired the largest e-learning network in Anglophone,
Francophone, and Lusophone Africa, with more than 53 partner institutions in 27 countries.6 Since its
inception, AVU has been linked to a global network of leading universities, mainly based in North
America and Europe, which have allowed imports of education services in 31 sites in 17 African
countries.7 Other examples of e-learning include the Virtual University of Uganda (box 1) and the
University of South Africa (UNISA), Africa's leading distance-learning open institution, which offers
internationally accredited qualifications to students from 130 countries. In 2012, 8.2 percent of all
registered UNISA students came from African countries (other than South Africa).8




technology are dominant features of African mobile life, we used mobile phone surveys to gather information from
providers and consumers of education and health services.
6
  For more details, visit http://www.avu.org/. The project is also equipped to support e-governance, e-commerce,
infotainment, resource mapping, and meteorological and other services in African countries. See
http://www.panafricanenetwork.com/.
7

http://web.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/AFRICAEXT/0,,contentMDK:20267251~menuPK:
538760~pagePK:146736~piPK:226340~theSitePK:258644,00.html.
8
  See http://www.unisa.ac.za/default.html.
                                   Box 1. Virtual University of Uganda

The Virtual University of Uganda (VUU) is the first online university in Uganda to be licensed by the
Uganda National Council for Higher Education. The university uses multiple integrated forms of digital
multimedia to deliver online education. These include video and audio clips, chat rooms, and discussion
forums, as well as mandatory weekly audio conferencing. The university also provides access to an e-
library that contains more than 50 million open-access items, including learning materials and video and
audio resources from internationally renowned universities such as the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology and John Hopkins University (among others). The online education is delivered through the
university’s Virtual Learning Environment (VLE) on a Moodle Platform that is hosted by Stoas Learning
in the Netherlands. In 2014, VUU had about 600 students enrolled in its distance learning program.
Foreign students from the Burundi, Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda, Somalia, and South Sudan
account for 25 percent of total students. The university recruits local and international staff members, who
also contribute through the VLE. Students submit their assignments online, and tutors review, grade, and
give feedback on the assignments online. The assignments are screened through antiplagiarism software
integrated into the VLE.

Source: World Bank 2014 and https://moodle.org/.

Telemedicine is also gaining traction in Africa. The Pan-African e-Network Project is one of the biggest
projects for telemedicine in Africa and is based on the growing partnership between India and Africa (box
2). Several Indian universities and educational institutions are providing online education to about 10,000
students in Africa over a five-year period in various disciplines, including medicine. In addition, Indian
medical specialists are offering online medical consultations to medical practitioners and patients residing
in Africa.

                     Box 2. India’s Partnership with Africa on e-Health and More
India is contributing to Africa’s development by funding several projects , such as the ambitious Pan-
African e-Network Project, for promoting online education and telemedicine programs across the
continent. The project’s objective is to link major universities and centers of excellence in Africa and
India and thereby extend higher education to some 10,000 students in Africa over a five-year period. The
project also aims to link major African hospitals to 12 super-specialty hospitals in India to improve
medical training, online medical consultations, and other facilities. Under this project, India would
connect 53 learning centers, 53 remote hospitals, five regional universities, and five regional hospitals in
Africa to seven leading universities in India and 12 super-specialty hospitals via seamless and integrated
satellite, fiber-optic, and wireless networks. This is by far the biggest project of distance learning and
telemedicine ever undertaken in Africa. A total of 47 African countries have already joined the project,
which is now in its second phase.

Source: http://www.panafricanenetwork.com/.

Other examples of telemedicine include the dissemination of information to doctors in Southern Africa
through a medical library in Zambia, which partnered with a library at the University of Florida in the
United States; the Africa tele-dermatology project, which provides dermatology support to local
physicians, dermatologists, and health care workers in hospitals and clinics throughout Africa; and the
participation of several African countries in the iPath-Network, a collaboration platform used in
telemedicine to share information on consultations, teaching, and research among a group of medical
specialists worldwide (Wamala and Augustine 2013).
The mobile phone surveys carried out by the World Bank in 2014/15 confirm that many hospitals in
Kenya, Malawi, Nigeria, Tanzania, and Uganda use telemedicine on a regular basis (figure 1), with
hospitals in Kenya, Malawi, and Tanzania appearing to be the most frequent users of telemedicine (figure
2). PwC and GSMA (2012) estimate that by 2017, Africa’s mobile health revenue will reach US$1.2
billion (or 5 percent of the projected global mobile health market earnings of US$23 billion).

     Figure 1. Use of Telemedicine in Selected                      Figure 2. Frequency of Use of Telemedicine in
    Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa, April–July                      Selected Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa,
                     2014 (%)                                                    April–July 2014 (%)




Source: Calculations based on the results of the mobile phone surveys described in World Bank 2015.
Note: Data were compiled from hospital officials or medical professionals responding to choices in the World
Bank mobile phone survey.


Although distance learning programs and online education are catching up in Africa, poorly developed
Internet and telecommunications infrastructure still constrains the use of Mode 1 in exporting health and
education services.
           B.2 Students and Patients without Borders: Revitalizing Education and Health Systems
           in Sub-Saharan Africa
Although information on students studying abroad and patients receiving treatment abroad is partially
captured by International Monetary Fund balance of payments statistics under expenditure on travel
services, these data are patchy, especially for African countries. The limited available data suggest that
despite the continent’s weak educational systems, several African countries are exporting education and
health services (annex B, table B.1, and annex C, table C.1). However, most African countries remain
importers of education and health services (annex B, table B.2, and annex C, table C.2).

UNESCO provides additional information on students studying abroad. Angola, Mauritius, South Africa,
and Uganda are successfully exporting education services, primarily to the region. Burkina Faso, Burundi,
Cameroon, and Ghana are also starting to participate in exports of education services.9 Most African
countries are importing education services, either regionally or from other developed countries.

Recent data show that France, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States represent the top
destinations for African students who travel abroad for studies (figure 3).

9
    UNESCO online database on international student mobility in tertiary education: http://data.uis.unesco.org/.
   Figure 3. Top Four Destinations for African Students Who Travel Abroad to Study, Selected
                                     African Countries, 2011



                                                      East Africa
                                                        France, 1,620,
                                                             4%
                                                                    South Africa,
                                                                     4,766, 13%

                                         Others, 18,055,                        United Kingdom,
                                              49%                                 4,482, 12%




                                                                         United States,
                                                                          8,302, 22%




                                              Southern Africa
                                                       France, 1,757,
                                                            8%


                                                                    South
                                               Others,             Africa,
                                             10,559, 45%         4,244, 18%



                                                                                United
                                                                               Kingdom,
                                     United States,                           3,953, 17%
                                      2,767, 12%



                                               Western Africa

                                                              France,
                                                              15,980,
                                                                18%            South Africa,
                                                Others,
                                                                                4,330, 5%
                                              37,588, 42%
                                                                 United
                                                                Kingdom,
                                                                 19,845,
                                                                   22%
                                          United
                                          States,
                                        12,072, 13%


Source: Data from UNESCO’s UIS.Stat (http://data.uis.unesco.org).
The World Bank mobile phone surveys are congruous with the UNESCO data. For Francophone
countries, France and Morocco appear to be the most important destinations, while Canada, South Africa,
the United Kingdom, and the United States seem to be the dominant destinations for Anglophone
countries (figure 4). However, the World Bank mobile phone surveys also show that many African
countries are importing education services from within the region. The data confirm statistical and
anecdotal evidence about the increasing importance of regional trade flows in education services in
Africa.

     Figure 4. Top Three Source Countries of Foreign Students in Selected Countries in Sub-Saharan
                                       Africa, April–July 2014




Source: World Bank 2015.
Note: Data were compiled from students responding to choices in the World Bank mobile phone survey. DRC
stands for Congo, Democratic Republic and USA stands for United States of America
Indeed, in recent years, Africa has started to diversify its import destinations in education services. For
example, in 2000, African students represented only 8 percent of all international students in Malaysia
(UNESCO online data, 201110). During the last decade, however, the enrollment of African students
increased dramatically to 23 percent of total foreign students in Malaysia in 2011. Of this, Nigerian
students accounted for about 30 percent, followed by Botswana, Sudan, and Libya, each representing over
10 percent of African students in Malaysia in 2011.

Until 2004, Sub-Saharan Africa hosted a negligible number of foreign students in comparison with all
other regions of the world. In addition, this small number of foreign students was declining over time
(Bashir 2007). South Africa was an exception; the number of foreign students in South African
universities grew from about 13,000 in 1994 to nearly 54,000 in 2006, and increased further to more than
70,000 by 2011. Notably, in most years, the share of international students from Southern Africa has been
on the rise, reaching 72 percent of South Africa’s total foreign student enrollment in 2011. Since 2003,

10
     http://data.uis.unesco.org
more than two-thirds of foreign students in South Africa have been from SADC countries. Between 13
and 17 percent of international students have been from the rest of Africa, and 14 percent from the rest of
the world (figure 5).11

           Figure 5. Foreign Student Enrollment in South African Universities, 1994–2011 (%)




                                                    100
                                                                                           17       17       13       14         13     12
                                                    90
                   Foreign student enrollment (%)




                                                    80    38        35                                                                  16
                                                                             44            13                15       18         17
                                                                                                    16
                                                    70
                                                    60              14
                                                          12
                                                    50                        9
                                                    40
                                                                                           70       67       72       69         70     72
                                                    30
                                                          49        52       47
                                                    20
                                                    10
                                                     0
                                                          1994     1997     2000           2003    2006     2008     2009        2010   2011

                                                                  Southern Africa          Other Africa      Rest of the world

 Sources: South Africa Department of Higher Education and Training for 1994 and 1997 data
 (http://www.doe.gov.za); UNESCO’s UIS.Stat (http://data.uis.unesco.org) for 2000 onward.


According to the most recent data from UNESCO’s UIS.Stat, Angola, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Madagascar, Morocco, Niger, South Africa, and Uganda are among the education
services exporters on the continent, with regional flows dominating these exchanges (table 1).


                                      Table 1. Top Education Service–Exporting Countries in Africa, 2010–12
                                                                             Of which               % of
                                                             Inter-           from                 within-
                                                            national          within               Africa
 Host country                                 Year          students          Africa              students                 Main source countries
                                                                                                                  Botswana, Democratic Republic of
                                                                                                                  Congo, Lesotho, Namibia, Nigeria,
 South Africa                                   2011           70,428          61,764               87.7
                                                                                                                  Swaziland, and Zimbabwe (about
                                                                                                                  25,000)
 Uganda                                         2011           15,035               n.a.             n.a.         Details n.a. at source
                                                                                                                  Congo (300), Côte d’Ivoire (400+),
 Ghana                                          2012             9,132            8,636             94.6
                                                                                                                  Gabon (400+), and Nigeria (6,000+)


11
  Zimbabwe is the top source country, accounting for 38 percent of total foreign African students in South Africa in 2011. Other
important source countries include Botswana, Democratic Republic of Congo, Lesotho, Namibia, and Swaziland.
                                                                           Mauritania, Guinea, Mali, Niger, and
 Morocco            2010          8,694          6,988          80.4
                                                                           Senegal
                                                                           Democratic Republic of Congo
 Angola             2010          6,530          6,530         100.0       (1,300), Cape Verde, and São Tomé
                                                                           and Príncipe (2,000 each)
 Burkina Faso       2011          2,187           n.a.           n.a       Details n.a. at source
                                                                           Chad (1,300), Congo, and Gabon
 Cameroon           2010          1,854          1,848          99.7
                                                                           (100+ each)
 Côte d’Ivoire      2010          1,818          1,699          93.5       Benin, Burkina Faso, and Togo
 Burundi            2010          1,813          1,813         100.0       Congo (1,000) and Rwanda (700)
 Madagascar         2011          1,432          1,384          96.6       Comoros (1,200+)
 Niger               2010          1,125          1,121          99.6      Mali (300) and Nigeria (200+)
Source: UNESCO’s UIS.Stat (http://data.uis.unesco.org).
Note: Data are for the latest available year (2010 or 2011). Data for Ghana are from 2012. n.a. = not available.

In East Africa, Kenya and Uganda are hosting many African students. Major policy developments in
Uganda, such as the Universal Secondary Education initiative and the liberalization reforms of the late
1990s, facilitated active private sector participation in the education sector. The National Council for
Higher Education (NCHE) estimates that exports of education services yielded US$36 million in 2010. 12
Othieno and Nampewo (2012) note that foreign student entries in Uganda have been growing at an
average rate of about 7 percent annually.13 International students are mostly found in private universities,
with many public universities lacking the capacity to take on international students. For many private
universities, the international students market represents a new segment, of growing interest.14 Most of the
foreign students come from neighboring countries, including the Democratic Republic of Congo, Kenya,
Rwanda, Sudan, and Tanzania. The EAC and the Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa
regions are, thus, Uganda’s major education services export markets.15 Angola and Ghana are also hosting
international students. Intraregional student flows are the main source for these exports; African students
in both countries represent 100 and 95 percent, respectively, of all international students. The latest
UNESCO data suggest that in Ghana, Nigerian students represent 71 percent of all international African
students, while in Angola, students from Cape Verde and São Tomé and Príncipe represent 60 percent of
total international student enrollments.

In health services, most African countries remain importers, as patients travel abroad for treatment.
Nonetheless, some African countries are exporting health services by treating foreign patients in their

12
   Uganda is exporting education services via online distance learning institutions (Mode 1) as well. Recently,
NCHE, the statutory regulator for higher education in Uganda, licensed and chartered two virtual universities,
namely; The Virtual University of Uganda and the Uganda Technology and Management University (UNCTAD
2013).
13
   http://www.studyinuganda.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=121.
14
   Kampala International University leads with 6,715 students, followed by Makerere University (2,444), Bugema
University (862), the Islamic University in Uganda (767), the Makerere University Business School —MUBS (671),
and the Busoga University (575).
15
   Kenya is the most important source of international students in Uganda, contributing over 60 percent of foreign
student enrollment at the secondary level and 71 percent of international student enrollment at the university level.
Tanzania follows next with 16 and 12 percent, respectively. Other source countries include Burundi, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Republic of Congo, Rwanda, and Sudan. See Maseruka (2010) and Uganda Bureau of Statistics
(UBOS),                     Statistics                  Abstract,                    2010,                    p.113.
http://www.ubos.org/onlinefiles/uploads/ubos/pdf%20documents/abstracts/Statistical%20Abstract%202010.pdf.
home countries. The World Bank mobile phone survey reveals that most responding hospitals in the
selected countries do treat foreign patients, with several hospitals in Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda
reporting that foreign patients represent more than 50 percent of their total patients (figure 6). Top source
countries of foreign patients in order of importance are India, Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Sudan, Rwanda,
China, Somalia, United States, Nigeria, and Togo.


         Figure 6. Proportion of Foreign Patients Treated by Hospitals in Selected Countries
                                in Sub-Saharan Africa, April–July 2014 (%)




Source: World Bank 2015.
Note: Data were compiled from hospitals responding to choices in the World Bank mobile phone survey.

As with trade in education services, the regional dimension is becoming increasingly important in health
services in Africa. For instance, the number of medical tourists to South Africa grew from about 300,000
to more than 500,000 between 2006 and 2009, contributing about US$9 billion in revenue (SAMP 2011).
Interestingly, 88 percent of medical visitors over the period 2006–10 originated from the African
continent itself, with Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Swaziland, and Zimbabwe being the top five
source countries.16 Anecdotal evidence suggests that medical tourists in Rwanda and Uganda are mainly
from the Burundi, Central Africa, and the Democratic Republic of Congo. Some Kenyans are seeking
treatment in Rwanda, given the availability of certain specialists, such as ophthalmologists employed by
Dr. Agarwal’s Eye Hospital. In Kenya, most foreign patients are from other EAC member states, with

16
  Regional patients mainly seek specialist consultations, such as scans, tests, health screenings, cardiac surgeries,
orthopedics, cancer treatment, fertility treatments, and oncology.
some patients coming from Central Africa and the Democratic Republic of Congo (World Bank 2014
qualitative interviews). Box 3 presents some of the strategies for attracting medical travelers within
Africa.

                           Box 3. Encouraging Medical Tourism within Africa
International Medical Group
The International Medical Group (IMG) is a group of health services companies based in Uganda. IMG
integrates different health care services segments and drives quality in health care service delivery
through international certification standards, including International Organization for Standardization
(ISO) certification. IMG has developed strategic partnerships with reputable health services providers
such as Lancet Laboratories and Resolution Insurance, with presence in Eastern, Central, and Southern
Africa. IMG member companies include International Hospital Kampala (IHK), which mainly treats
Ugandan nationals and foreigners residing in Uganda. However, IHK also sees cases of medical tourism
from neighboring countries, including Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Rwanda, and South
Sudan. Part of IMG’s success arises from making full use of the insurance companies and having a
business model that encompasses the local and the international market.

Netcare
Netcare, a hospital investment firm based in South Africa, has developed a network of agents to promote
medical tourism through its South African hospitals. The firm makes arrangements for accommodation
and recuperative care for medical tourists from African countries. Established centers in Johannesburg
assist foreign patients and their families with transport, visas, accommodation, and medical treatment.
Netcare employs interpreters that speak English, French, and Portuguese, and clearly targets African
patients (Cattaneo 2010).

Source: World Bank 2014.



        B.3 Borderless Hospitals and Campuses: Expanding Access to Foreign Medical and
        Education Services
Given the large scale of investments involved in setting up an educational institution abroad, not many
African countries are establishing branch campuses in other countries. But several regional tertiary
institutions have established satellite campuses in neighboring countries in response to the high demand
for services from African students. For example, Mount Kenya University operates from several countries
in East Africa (box 4), Cavendish University Uganda has Zambian origins, and the Jomo Kenyatta
University of Agriculture and Technology has a presence in Rwanda. Kenyan tertiary institutions have
been aggressive in their regional expansion. Most affiliates have located in Rwanda due to the ease of
doing business and establishing a foreign-based institution in the country.
                      Box 4. Intra-African Linkages: Mount Kenya University
Mount Kenya University, established in 2008, was fully chartered in 2011 with operations in Kenya,
Uganda, Rwanda, Tanzania, Burundi and Somaliland. The university offers a wide-range of academic and
professional courses, through various flexible modes that include virtual learning, evening classes, and
weekend classes. It is widening access to higher education in East Africa through a well-structured
network of campuses in Nairobi, Nakuru, Eldoret, Kitale, Kakamega, Kisii, Kabarnet, Lodwar, Mombasa,
Nkubu, Kigali and Hargeisa.

Source: World Bank 2014.


Evidence of services trade in East Africa is seen in the presence of international higher education
institutions with satellite campuses; international high schools teaching foreign curricula; international
language schools, usually affiliated with an embassy; and international research institutions in Kenya,
Rwanda, and Uganda.

Secondary institutions providing internationally certified programs, such as the Cambridge International
General Certificate of Secondary Education (IGSCE), have had great success in the region. Such schools
offer international curricula. Initially they targeted members of the international community temporarily
working and living in the region, but more recently they have catered to a growing number of local
students demanding an international education. The schools offer a variety of curricula depending on the
school’s orientation, such as an American curriculum, the French system, the Cambridge IGSCE, and so
on. Growth in student enrollment is driven mainly by referrals and recommendations of other parents and
students. Several internationally-based institutions have expanded in the region, such as the Aga Khan
Schools in Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda; the Light Academy with Turkish origin in Kenya and Uganda;
and GEMS Cambridge International Schools with Indian and United Arab Emirate ownership in Kenya,
Tanzania, and Uganda.

In tertiary education, there are further examples of African countries importing education services via
Mode 3. For instance, several foreign universities’ campuses—such as Monash University from Australia
and Stenden Hogeschool from the Netherlands—have established a presence in South Africa. Other
examples include the Lancaster University campus in Ghana, and the campus established by the
Limokokwing University from Malaysia in Botswana. The Government of Rwanda has also been
pursuing innovative partnerships with international institutions that are leaders in technology programs
and research. Carnegie Mellon University is the first U.S. Ivy League institution to have a campus in
Africa (box 5). The Rwandan government has allocated the university space in the newly planned
technology hub in Kigali to establish a full campus.
                  Box 5. Global Linkages: Carnegie Mellon University in Rwanda
Carnegie Mellon University, in partnership with the Government of Rwanda, established Carnegie Mellon
University in Rwanda in 2012. This is the first U.S.-based research university conferring degrees with an
in-country presence in Africa. Carnegie Mellon University has other campuses worldwide, including in
Australia, Greece, Japan, Portugal, and Qatar, among others. Carnegie Mellon University in Rwanda is
open to applicants from all over the world (not only Rwandan students). Currently, the university employs
15 full-time faculty staff and has 44 students. The majority of the students are Rwandan; however, there
are some students from neighboring countries such as Kenya and Uganda.

Carnegie Mellon in Rwanda charges the same tuition as in the United States, approximately US$20,000,
and retains the same high entry criteria as its other campuses worldwide. The Rwandan government
supports a scholarship program that provides 50 percent of the tuition fees for Rwandans and East African
Community (EAC) residents. Rwandan students, unlike their other EAC counterparts, can access
additional government loan programs through the Rwanda Education Board to cover 50 percent of the
remaining tuition fees. The stringent admission and qualification criteria and expensive tuition put the
university program out of range for the majority of East Africans.

Source: World Bank 2014.


Health services in Africa appear to offer many commercial opportunities. At this stage, however, trade in
medical services via commercial presence in developing countries is limited. Generally, health-directed
foreign direct investment (FDI) is controlled by governments and is a politically sensitive issue. The
African Development Bank notes that “Investments in health services reportedly account for 0.2 percent
of FDI stock entering developed countries and 0.1 percent entering countries of the South” (AfDB 2013).
Nevertheless, there are a few examples of foreign hospitals, including from other developing countries,
supplying health services in Africa (box 6).

               Box 6. South-South Linkages: Dr. Agarwal’s Eye Hospital in Rwanda
Rwandans and residents from other African countries have historically been dependent on seeking eye
treatment in South Africa, Europe, and other countries such as India. The cost of treatment is high and
involves additional costs of travel and accommodations for the patient and accompanying persons. The
Government of Rwanda facilitated the partnership between Dr. Agarwal’ s Eye Hospital and the Rwanda
International Institute of Ophthalmology by providing favorable conditions for obtaining the necessary
licenses, business registrations, visas, and work permits.

Dr. Agarwal’s Eye Hospital has its headquarters in Chennai State, Southern India. It was established in
1957 and now has a network of 60 hospitals worldwide (including in India, Madagascar, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Nigeria, the Seychelles, and the United Kingdom), with more than 350 consultant
ophthalmologists. Dr. Agarwal’s Eye Hospital in Rwanda was established in 2011 and began operations
in 2012. The cost of specialized treatment at the hospital is between US$2,000 and US$3,000, compared
with US$10,000 in India or South Africa (including the cost of travel and accommodations). Currently the
hospital serves foreign patients from Burundi, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Uganda. The
hospital receives about three patients from Burundi and the Democratic Republic of Congo daily, about
one Ugandan patient weekly, and two to three patients from Kenya every quarter. Most foreign patients
come for highly specialized surgeries, such as retinal surgery or cornea transplants.

Source: World Bank 2014.
Other examples of medical institutions that have a footprint in several EAC countries include the Aga
Khan Hospital University (with presence in Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda); health insurance companies
such as UAP, Resolution Health, Jubilee Insurance, and Britam insurance that are present in most EAC
countries; and laboratory services providers such as Lancet South Africa with presence in Kenya and
Uganda.

        B.4 Brain Drain or Circulation: Do Educators and Medical Professionals on the Move
        Exacerbate Africa’s Skills Shortages?
Africa also exports education services via the movement of its educators. Examples include Zimbabwean
educators who teach in South Africa or Tanzanian Swahili teachers who provide education services in the
Democratic Republic of Congo or Uganda. Systematic information on teachers and educators traveling
abroad to provide services is largely absent, which prevents analyses of education services exports via
Mode 4. Because of the lack of reliable data in Africa, recent studies use the receiving countries’ tea cher
registration data to provide an indication of the extent of teacher migration from selected African
countries (Bhorat, Meyer, and Mlatsheni 2005; Kok et al. 2006; Morgan, Sives, and Appleton 2005). The
latter study suggests that in 2003, 1,492 South Africans held teaching permits in the United Kingdom, or
close to 30 percent of teaching permit holders in the country.

South Africa seems to be an equally important importer of education services via the temporary
movement of providers, mainly from the region. According to the South African Council of Educators,
the intake of foreign teachers in South Africa has increased dramatically, from 1.2 percent of total
educator registrations in 2006–07 to 28 percent in 2009–10 (SACE 2011). South Africa attracts teachers
primarily from Lesotho and Zimbabwe (Wentzel and Tlabela 2006). In Botswana, nearly 5 percent of all
teachers are foreigners (Manik, Maharaj, and Sookrajh 2006). The World Bank interviews conducted as
part of this study also reveal that many Kenyan and Ugandan teachers are providing education services in
Tanzania, often informally.

In health services, the movement of health providers to supply medical services in the country of the
patient (Mode 4) seems to be as important as the consumption abroad by domestic patients (Mode 2). The
migration of health professionals from Africa to other parts of the world has received particular attention,
as it is considered an important contributor to Africa’s shortage of health workers. For instance, Ratha et
al. (2011, chapter 3) show that in 2004 there were about 25,000 African-trained physicians in OECD
countries, almost one-fourth the total number of physicians in Africa that year (based on information from
Bhargava and Docquier 2008). The migration of African physicians, estimated at between 10 and 15
percent, is much higher than for other African professionals and tertiary educated workers (Docquier and
Marfouk 2006). Furthermore, the number of African-trained doctors working in OECD countries also
rose by 91 percent between 1991 and 2005. By contrast, the increase in the number of African-trained
physicians working in Africa during the same timeframe was comparatively low, at 61 percent.

Many African countries are witnessing the migration of physicians, nurses, and other medical
professionals primarily to Canada, South Africa, the United Kingdom, and the United States.17 For
example, 43 percent of Liberia’s and 30 percent of Ghana’s trained physicians are providing health
services in Canada and the United States (Cattaneo 2010). This figure exceeds 50 percent in Malawi,
Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe (SAMP 2008). Earlier evidence suggests that approximately 200
doctors left Zimbabwe for Botswana and South Africa in 1992 (SAMP 2002). Similarly, a study of 115
emigrant Zimbabwean doctors in 2008 revealed that 36.5 percent of them were based in South Africa,
while 3.5 percent were based in other African countries (SAMP 2011). Although the migration of African

17
  Whether these movements are temporary or permanent is not studied in any detail, so we are not able to comment on the exact
volume of exports of health services via Mode 4.
doctors to OECD countries has historically been perceived as brain drain (see, for example, Chen and
Boufford 2005), a recent study by Ozden and Phillips (2015) adds a new dimension to this debate.

Ozden and Phillips (2015) show that of a total of nearly 20,000 “African” doctors in the United States,
about 48 percent were not only born in Africa, but also trained in Africa, while 44 percent were born in
Africa but trained abroad. The migration of African-born and trained doctors varies widely across the
continent. For instance, 307 of 374 Sudan-born doctors in the United States were educated in Sudan, but
only 52 of 378 Ugandan doctors in the United States were born and trained in Uganda. The authors
suggest the extent of loss of human capital investment in medical education from African countries may
have been overstated. In addition, the demand for health workers in Africa largely surpasses the number
of African health professionals working in OECD countries. For instance, in 2000 all African-born nurses
and doctors working in OECD countries represented about 12 percent of the total shortages for the region
(OECD 2010). This shows that while international migration may exacerbate shortages in Africa’s
medical sector, it is not the main cause of the continent’s health human resource crisis. Nevertheless,
international and regional cooperation between countries or regional health institutions can help manage
migration and enhance integration in Africa’s health workforce.

The regional migration of health professionals has been explored by several studies. For instance, it was
found that although half the Cameroonian health professionals intend to migrate, only 4 percent of them
think of migrating to other African countries such as Senegal or Côte d’Ivoire. Similarly, in Senegal, only
2.6 percent of health care practitioners intend to migrate to other African countries. By contrast, in
Uganda and Zimbabwe, about 20 percent of health care workers intend to migrate to other African
countries (WHO 2004).

Anecdotal evidence suggests that foreign medical professionals have been temporarily working in Kenya,
Rwanda, and Uganda on a regular basis. Frequent temporary medical professional trade within these three
countries is mostly in areas with acute shortages of medical specialists, such as surgery (including
neurological and cardiac surgery), specialist reviews, and second opinion consultations. Movement of
medical professionals is also seen in medical camps, short-term research, and teaching assignments.

Given the shortage of health professionals in Africa18 and their tendency to migrate to high-income
countries, developing incentives for retaining such professionals in the continent is a high-priority issue
for most governments.

B.          Determinants of Trade in Education and Health Services
Typical determinants of trade include differences in endowments, as well as differences in the cost and
quality of services and institutions providing the services.

           C.1 Cost over Quality: What Matters More?
Many studies show that cost is an important determinant of education and health services trade. For
instance, South African institutions of higher learning charge lower fees than high-income nations and
have a lower cost of living.19 MacGregor (2007) argues that the South African government subsidizes
SADC students at par with local students (as per the SADC agreement). This might explain the higher
proportion of SADC students in South African universities. Similarly, in the case of Uganda, Othieno and

18
  For instance, only South Africa and Tunisia have more than 75 physicians per 100,000 people. At the other extreme, Tanzania
and Malawi have 1 and 2 physicians per 100,000 people, respectively.
19
     http://www.studysa.
Nampewo (2012) find that on average, Ugandan universities charge less for tuition than comparable
universities in the region.20 In health services, the five most important drivers of medical tourism are
advanced technology, better quality of care, quicker access to care, lower cost of vital procedures, and
lower cost for discretionary procedures (McKinsey Global Institute 2008). Quality seems to be more
important than cost when it comes to the determinants of travel abroad to consume medical services
(figure 7).


Figure 7. Motivations for Medical Travel Abroad from the United States
                    Lower-cost care for                                         Lower-cost care for
                    medically necessary                                           discretionary
                       procedures                                                  procedures
                            9%                                                         4%

             Quicker access for                                                        Most advanced
             medically necessary                                                        technology
                procedures                                                                 40%
                    15%




                  Better quality care
                    for necessary
                      procedures
                         32%

Source: McKinsey Global Institute 2008.


The 2014 World Bank mobile phone survey confirms that universities in several African countries have
managed to attract foreign students despite higher costs (figure 8).




20
  The tuition per year for a Bachelor of Commerce is about US$1,464—well below fees for a similar program in major
universities in other EAC partner states. Similarly, Makerere University charges the lowest tuition for surgery and medicine
courses (US$1,977 per year) and agriculture and food science (US$1,971 per year). In comparison, the National University of
Rwanda charges US$2,208 per year, and the University of Nairobi for Surgery and Medicine charges US$5,042 per year.
                   Figure 8. Cost of University Tuition in Sub-Saharan Africa, 2014 (US$)
a. By university type                                               b. By domestic and foreign students




Source: World Bank 2015.

These data suggest that quality matters when it comes to education services exports. In general, foreign
students base the choice of a destination on the quality of education offered. For instance, South African
education services exports are based on the quality and size of its higher education sector, which is easily
accessible and offers internationally recognized qualifications (Hahn 2005). South African universities
dominate in the top 10 rankings of universities in the region (table 2).21 In addition, South Africa’s 2013–
14 Global Competitiveness Index on the quality of education and training is 3.9, only slightly below the
United Kingdom’s index of 5.5.22

                                Table 2. Top 10 Ranked Universities in Africa, 2009
                                                                         African                 World
     University                                 Country                  ranking                ranking
     University of Cape Town                   South Africa                 1                     398
     University of Stellenbosch                South Africa                 2                     566
     University of Pretoria                    South Africa                 3                     718
     University of Witwatersrand               South Africa                 4                     720
     Rhodes University                         South Africa                 5                     738
     University of South Africa                South Africa                 6                    1,449
     University of Western Cape                South Africa                 7                    1,553
                                               Egypt, Arab
     America University of Cairo                  Rep.                        8                   1,826
     North West University                     South Africa                   9                   1,857
     University of KwaZulu Natal               South Africa                  10                   2,214
 Source: Marko 2009.


21
   In addition, South Africa has set up the South African Qualifications Authority board, which helps in attaining internationally
recognized qualifications. In South Africa, staff at most universities are offered attractive research incentives for promoting
better-quality teaching and education (Kwaramba 2009).
22
   The Global Competitiveness Index indicator is derived from the following indicators: (i) secondary enrollment, (ii) tertiary
enrollment, (iii) quality of the educational system, (iv) quality of math and science education, (v) quality of management schools,
(vi) Internet access in schools, (vii) local availability of research and training services, and (viii) extent of staff training. The
2013–14 report is available at http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GlobalCompetitivenessReport_2013-14.pdf.
Similarly, lower tuition and good university rankings make Uganda much more competitive than other
regional partner states (Othieno and Nampewo 2012).

In health services, the findings of the 2014 World Bank mobile phone survey show that in several cases
domestic patients from the surveyed countries pay more for treatment received abroad than do foreign
patients undergoing treatment in the selected countries (figures 9 and 10). Again, this may suggest that the
cost of medical services is not the decisive factor for trade in health services.

 Figure 9. Cost of Treatment Received by Foreigners in Selected Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa,
                                     April–July 2014 (USD)




Source: World Bank 2015.
Note: Data were compiled from foreign patients responding to the World Bank mobile phone survey.

 Figure 10. Cost of Treatment Received by Patients Abroad in Selected Countries in Sub-Saharan
                                 Africa, April–July 2014 (USD)




Source: World Bank 2015.
Note: Data were compiled from patients responding to the World Bank mobile phone survey.
Although differences in the quality of services may explain this outcome, the nonavailability of certain
specialized cures (within the broader treatment category) could be an additional explanatory factor (figure
11).

     Figure 11. Reasons Domestic Patients Seek Treatment Abroad in Selected Countries in Sub-
                              Saharan Africa, April–July 2014 (%)




Source: World Bank 2015.
Note: Data were compiled from patients responding to choices in the World Bank mobile phone survey.


Differences in government expenditure in the health sector, size of the health services infrastructure, and
diversity of services determine the extent of intra-African trade in health services. Other drivers include
the cost and quality of services, availability of state-of-the-art equipment, and availability of specialists.
Specifically, drivers of medical tourism in the region include the recognition of transnational disease
patterns, growing patient mobility (facilitated by low-cost airlines and advances in information
technology), and growing development of the industry. Other drivers of medical tourism in the region
include lack of local specialist health services (such as facilities and specialist consultants) and cheaper
regional travel and accommodation compared with travel to Asia, Europe, or the Americas. The costs of
specialist procedures in Africa are comparable with costs in India; however, the cost of travel and
accommodation is higher.23
        C.2 Geography, Language, and Cultural Proximity: Can They Support the Regional
        Advantage?
Geographical proximity and language similarity play an important role in attracting foreign students and
patients. For example, Lesotho, Namibia, and Zimbabwe are the largest source countries for South

23
  For example, the cost of eye surgery in India and Rwanda is about US$2,500 per treatment; but including the cost of travel and
accommodation, a patient who sought treatment in India would spend close to US$10,000.
Africa’s education services exports because of their geographical proximity, or their shared colonial
relationship and history. The country’s universities use English as the primary language of instruction,
which helps attract students from several Anglophone African countries.

Similarly, in East Africa, most foreign students come from the subregion. During the colonial era, most
universities were established to serve the region; for example, Makerere University (formerly known as
the University of East Africa) was established to train students from Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda. After
independence, the remnants of the colonial education system were still prevalent and several universities
were renowned for excellence in various fields. For instance, many leading legal sector professionals in
the region attended the University of Dar es Salaam; the University of Nairobi was known for the quality
of its courses in economics and engineering; and Makerere University had a leading role in producing
medical professionals.

The proximity of providers is equally important in health services. For instance, the contribution of
Algeria and Libya to Tunisian exports of health services amounts to 70 percent of the country’s total
health services exports (AfDB 2013). Eighty-seven percent of medical tourists in Jordan are from
neighboring countries, and in Thailand, 89 percent of the foreign patients treated in 2002 were local
expatriates or Asian nationals (Lautier 2008). In the same decade, the volume of foreign patients arriving
from neighboring countries was similar for Germany (88 percent), Singapore (84 percent), and the United
Kingdom (61 percent) (Lautier 2005; Mortensen 2008; Obermaier 2009).

       C.3 What Explains Mobility in Education and Health Services?
The push and pull factors that drive the migration of African education and health professional broadly
mirror those that apply to highly skilled workers in general. Such factors include inadequate remuneration
in the home country, the desire to work in better educational or managed health systems and to continue
education and training, and family reasons. These factors encourage African teachers and health care
professionals to seek employment abroad, leading to trade through temporary presence (Mode 4) or to
permanent migration. The 2014 World Bank mobile phone survey reveals that family reasons are equally
if not more important than other factors for the mobility of African health professionals (figure 12).
Additional pull factors, such as shortages of doctors and nurses in the host countries, further encourage
the outflow of African health professionals.
Figure 12. Reasons for Working Abroad for Medical Professionals from Selected Countries in Sub-
Saharan Africa, April–July 2014




Source: World Bank 2015.
Note: Data were compiled from medical professionals responding to choices in the World Bank mobile phone
survey.

Two key points emerge from this overview. First, available data, including the results from the World
Bank mobile phone survey on trade in education and health services, as well as anecdotal evidence
highlight the importance of regional trade flows. Furthermore, the data suggest that the cost is not
decisive; rather, the availability and quality of services seem to be more important for trade in health and
education services than other types of services.

C.      Regulatory Hurdles and Explicit Trade Barriers Affecting Trade in
        Education and Health Services
The information on the determinants of trade presented in the previous section is complemented in this
section with a more systematic discussion of domestic regulations and explicit trade barriers that affect
trade in education and health services. Concrete examples and policy recommendations based on
regulatory surveys carried out in four East African countries round up this regulatory analysis.

        D.1 Domestic Regulations
Education and health services have traditionally been subject to a high degree of regulation aimed at
addressing information asymmetries between patients and doctors, negative externalities generated by
skills shortages and skills mismatches, and concerns related to access to medical services. The typical
regulatory measures in the health sector are put in place to (i) ensure the quality of services, (ii) minimize
brain drain, and (iii) pursue equity.

Ensuring quality. A major concern in the education and the health sectors is the need to ensure that
services meet a minimum standard of quality to protect the interests of the consumers (the students or the
patients) and the integrity of the providers (the education system or the medical institutions). In general,
quality assurance and accreditation mechanisms are put in place to achieve such objectives. In addition,
the mutual recognition of qualifications plays an important role in addressing quality issues related to
trade in education and health services. Regional accreditation bodies can perform a critical role in setting
standards and maintaining quality.

Trade in education and health services can help ensure that demand is better satisfied and financial
resources become available to improve the quality of the institutions providing such services. However,
increased trade, particularly through Modes 1 and 3, can also accentuate the potential quality risks in both
sectors. For example, in education services, existing national frameworks for quality assurance or
accreditation in higher education often focus exclusively on services provided by domestic institutions.
Such frameworks are inadequately prepared to address new challenges from trade and private provision of
services. Furthermore, many African countries would have difficulty developing and implementing
appropriate quality standards or accreditation and recognition mechanisms that (i) ensure that patients and
students remain protected from fraudulent or poor quality providers, and (ii) reassure international
providers that the standards and accreditation are based on objective criteria and adequate verification
procedures. Finally, given that health- and education-related quality criteria differ across countries, the
resulting diversity in quality assurance and accreditation systems across the continent further complicates
the matter.

Minimizing brain drain. The benefits from trade in education and health services can be offset by the
permanent emigration of students or health professionals. This represents a significant loss of investment
in African sending countries. Governments have used various policies to encourage students or health
professionals to return to their home countries, with varying degrees of success. Some countries have
tried restrictive policies, such as compulsory national service, to render migration more difficult. These
policies have not proven very effective, since they represent only temporary deterrents to migration.
Another dimension is the development of policies and incentives for the return of highly qualified
migrants, including international students and health professionals. This approach requires a combination
of better economic conditions at home along with improved university and health facilities.

Several developing countries have attempted to incentivize the return of qualified migrants through the
use of policies, such as tax rules on remittances, which foster inward investment and research and
development. Other measures include setting up knowledge networks among skilled expatriates linked to
their country of origin, with the aim of mobilizing their knowledge and expertise for the development of
their country without physically relocating. Such initiatives implemented at the national and/or the
regional levels can create new incentives for retaining the scarce skilled professionals on the continent.

Pursuing equity. Trade in education and health services can intensify the existing inequity of education
and health systems in Africa, given that foreign services tend to be more expensive than domestic ones.
Therefore, the regulatory analysis will examine existing mechanisms to guarantee the necessary support
to low-income or disadvantaged (for racial, religious, or gender-related reasons) patients and students
unable to meet the cost of education or health services. Funding arrangements for poor students; the
relationship between the cost of medical treatment and individuals’ contribution, including rules and
practices governing the reimbursement of patients under various insurance schemes that affect insurance
portability; and the ability of patients to purchase medical services need to be examined in conjunction
with the trade policy measures applied in the medical and education sectors.

        D.2 Explicit Trade Barriers
Typical barriers on Mode 1 are restrictions on the electronic transmission of educational materials or
medical services/telediagnosis, restrictions on the types of courses or treatments that may be offered,
quotas or economic needs tests in place that restrict the number of suppliers of education and health
services, restrictions on payments and transfer of funds abroad, and local accreditation and recognition
requirements. Trade in education and health services via Mode 2 is usually constrained by barriers
imposed by both home and host countries on the mobility of students and patients, and restrictions on the
portability of scholarships or medical insurance schemes. For example, many home countries require exit
visas or impose foreign currency controls in the home country. In addition, there might be limitations
concerning the coverage by public medical insurance schemes of services provided abroad. And foreign
degrees obtained abroad might not be recognized in the students’ home country.

In terms of Mode 3, there are limitations on the numbers of permitted suppliers of education and health
services and their legal form (including joint venture requirements), foreign equity capital limits, and
discriminatory tax/fiscal measures. Burdensome immigration requirements, quotas on numbers of service
suppliers, nationality or residence requirements, and labor market tests (horizontal measures or specific
restrictions that apply to education and health professionals traveling across national borders to provide
services) often impede trade in health services via Mode 4.

         D.3 Addressing Regulatory Hurdles and Trade Barriers: A Case Study of East Africa24
To maintain a certain level of quality in education and medical services, all the examined East African
countries impose qualification and academic degree requirements for practitioners in these fields. For
example, Kenya, Rwanda, and Uganda require that all doctors possess a university degree to be able to
practice. Doctors are also required to have completed one year of internship before becoming a full
member of the medical profession. Nurses do not need a degree, but require a certificate or a diploma
with mandatory practical training and a minimum set of subjects to practice as a nurse. Similarly, in
education services, teaching at higher education institutions in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda
requires at a minimum a master’s degree from an accredited university and some working experience. For
teachers at the secondary and primary levels, a degree is not required to practice.

The training program curricula for teachers, professors, nurses, and doctors are determined by the relevant
government education bodies. Professional associations assist in the development of programs by
articulating the current skills needed by employers and making recommendations to the relevant
government bodies.

The ministries of education are responsible for the overall delivery of each country’s national
development mandate with regard to education. Within each ministry, statutory bodies are responsible for
the implementation of government strategies and policies in education. They ensure that standards and
quality are met and maintained. Kenya and Uganda have different government bodies covering primary
and secondary education levels and the higher education level. Rwanda does not have stand-alone
institutions responsible for service delivery in education like Kenya and Uganda. Instead, the Rwanda
Education Board oversees overall sector regulation and the implementation of education sector policies.
Professional qualifications obtained outside the respective jurisdictions are recognized in the examined
countries. At the higher education level, the university or college is responsible for vetting the
qualifications of foreign-trained professors and lecturers and ensuring they meet the country’s
equivalency standards.

In medical services, the curriculum for continuous professional education (CPE) in all three countries is
solely determined by the medical boards and nursing councils. The nurses’ councils in each country are
responsible for developing and administering continuous professional education for nurses. For doctors to
be licensed and registered, CPE is mandatory in all the examined countries.

24
 Regulatory surveys were carried out in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda between May and September 2014 (World Bank
2014).
Furthermore, doctors and nurses in the examined countries must be licensed with the mandated medical
board before being permitted to practice. The same also applies to medical service institutions. The
licenses are conferred by the respective medical and dental practitioners’ boards/councils and the nursing
councils. These institutions are mandated by government to register practitioners, set standards,
administer and monitor CPE, and enforce compliance and discipline. In education services, the licensing
of teachers is handled by teachers’ service commissions in Kenya and Uganda. In Rwanda, teacher
licensing and regulation are the responsibility of the Department of Teacher Education, Management, and
Professionalization under the Rwanda Education Board. In Kenya, teachers in the public sector are
required to undergo a nine-month practical training course before being licensed.

When it comes to domestic regulation affecting the operations of educational and medical institutions and
professionals, we find that education services seem to be subject to fewer restrictions related to price
controls, advertisement prohibitions, or stringent standards than medical services.

Certain countries seem to impose more severe restrictions in both sectors. For instance, while most
countries do not regulate the prices and fees for educational or medical professionals, the Tanzanian
government imposes binding minimum prices for all health services based on cost sharing and binding
maximum prices for all services provided by private practitioners. Similarly, the Government of Tanzania
established a unit cost for higher education to guide fee setting. The government is also working on unit
costs for secondary education. Currently, school fees are set by schools, confirmed by school
boards/committees, and approved by Regional Education Officers. Tanzania also regulates the advertising
by medical professionals and hospitals through regulatory bodies (such as the Private Health Facilities
Advisory Board), by imposing restrictions on the nature of advertisements as well as the content and
location of billboards. Uganda has similar restrictions on advertisements by medical professionals and
hospitals. Lastly, all the countries impose stringent standards to ensure high quality of medical services.

When it comes to explicit trade barriers, education services, across most modes, are less restricted than
medical services. For instance, in most cases, the qualifications obtained by students via distance learning
(Mode 1) or through study abroad (Mode 2) are recognized by all the surveyed countries. In Tanzania,
however, the certificates need to be approved by the Tanzania Commission for Universities (TCU) (table
3).

Table 3. Regulations Affecting Distance Learning (Mode 1)

Regulation                                                 Kenya      Rwanda        Tanzania      Uganda
Need to demonstrate the lack of domestic                     Yes         No            No            No
availability?
Qualifications obtained through distance learning            Yes         Yes           No           Yes
recognized?
Restrictions on the content and/or duration of               No          No            n.a.          No
permitted programs?
Local accreditation and recognition requirements?            Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes
Source: World Bank regulatory surveys, 2014.
Note: n.a. = not available.

By contrast, in health services, there seem to be stringent restrictions on telemedicine (Mode 1) or
medical tourism (Mode 2) in all the examined countries. Although a domestic resident hospital/individual
can obtain medical services directly from a foreign professional/hospital located outside their country, the
insurance policy limits coverage if diagnosis and medical services are provided on a cross-border basis.
All the surveyed countries have special restrictions on importing medical services via Mode 1 or 2. For
example, in Kenya the insurance needs to have a regional footprint, and special provisions also apply on
the type of ailment that restrict the services and level of coverage. Similarly, in Tanzania there are
restrictions on referral cases facilitated by the government (table 4).

Table 4. Regulations Affecting Telemedicine (Mode 1)
Regulation                                                      Kenya       Rwanda       Tanzania      Uganda
Allowed to obtain services from a foreign                         Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
professional/hospital?
Need to demonstrate lack of domestic availability?                No           No           No*          No
Limits on insurance policy coverage?                              Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Restrictions on the range of services?                            Yes          Yes          Yes          Yes
Source: World Bank regulatory surveys, 2014.
*Some restrictions apply.

Trade in education services via branch campuses of foreign universities (Mode 3) seems relatively open
in East Africa. Not only are foreign universities allowed to set up branch campuses, but also there are no
limits on ownership shares, or on the legal form of higher education institutions. In none of the surveyed
countries is the management or the board of directors of a foreign university required to include locals or
residents of the host country. Unlike medical services, foreign professors and lecturers who are not locally
licensed or practicing under a limited license are permitted, although not required, to engage in
commercial association with fully licensed professors (lecturers to undertake education work). Moreover,
there are no restrictions on repatriation of earnings by foreign educational institutions or on franchise and
twinning arrangements, in which the education program is offered through a local partner without
requiring a "bricks and mortar" investment by the foreign institution. Finally, there are no limits on
financial assistance or loans for students at foreign educational institutions or on the student population
that can be enrolled in such institutions. In most cases, except in Tanzania where the certificates need to
be approved by TCU, there are no restrictions in recognizing the diplomas/degrees provided by foreign
educational institutions (table 5).
Table 5. Regulations Affecting the Establishment of Universities from Abroad (Mode 3)

Regulation                                                     Kenya     Rwanda       Tanzania      Uganda
Foreign commercial presence of universities allowed?            Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
Limits on numbers suppliers, legal form, and equity              No         No           No           No
capital?
Restrictions on legal form of higher education                  n.a.        No           No           No
institutions?
All types of legal entities allowed as for domestic             Yes         Yes          Yes          Yes
institutions?
Nationality requirements on staff, number of students?           No         No           No           No
Restrictions on branch campuses/different regulatory             No         No           No           No
frameworks?
Limits on ownership/control for non-licensed                     No         No           n.a.         No
professionals?
Non-locally-licensed allowed to engage in commercial            Yes*       Yes*          n.a.        Yes*
association with fully licensed professors and lecturers
to undertake education work?
Requirements regarding composition of the board of               No         No           n.a.         No
directors?
Requirements regarding management?                               No         No           n.a.         No
Restricted from providing services to a few groups?              No         No           n.a.         No
Restrictions on repatriation of earnings?                        No         No           No           No
Restrictions on franchise?                                       No         No           No           No
Limits on financial loans for students at foreign                No         No           No           No
educational institutions?
Restrictions on the student population that can be               No         No           No           No
enrolled?
Restrictions on recognizing diplomas/degrees                     No         No           No           No
provided?
Source: World Bank regulatory surveys, 2014.
Note: n.a. = not available.
*Permitted, but not required.

There are significant restrictions on imports of medical services via the establishment of foreign hospitals
(Mode 3). Although a foreign medical services provider can enter and establish a commercial presence in
an East African country, several restrictions hinder the complete integration of such services. For
example, there are restrictions on the legal forms of entry of hospitals in countries such as Tanzania and
Uganda. In Tanzania only limited liability partnerships and corporations (private limited liability
companies) are allowed for foreign hospitals, while in Uganda domestic and foreign hospitals are allowed
only as sole proprietorships or corporations (private limited liability companies). Furthermore, Tanzania
and Uganda issue only a temporary license for foreign hospitals. Tanzania has additional restrictions with
respect to the management of foreign hospitals, whereby only fully registered local doctors can take over
the position of a medical officer in charge. The country also limits the number of beds a hospital can
have, depending on the type of health facility. In none of the surveyed countries are foreign doctors with
foreign degrees permitted to engage in commercial associations with fully licensed health professionals to
undertake medical work (table 6).

Table 6. Regulations Affecting the Establishment of Hospitals from Abroad (Mode 3)

Regulation                                                Kenya        Rwanda       Tanzania       Uganda
Foreign commercial presence of hospitals                    Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
allowed?
Limits on numbers of suppliers, legal form, and             No            No           Yes*         Yes*
equity capital?
All types of legal entities allowed as for domestic         Yes           Yes          No*          Yes*
hospitals?
Nationality requirements on staff or number of              No            No           Yes*         Yes*
patients?
Limits on ownership/control for non-licensed                No            No           Yes*          No
professionals?
Non-locally-licensed allowed to engage in                   No            No            No           No
commercial association with fully licensed
professors and lecturers to undertake medical
work?
Requirements regarding composition of the                   No            No            No           No
board of directors?
Requirements regarding management?                          No            No           Yes*          No
Restrictions on repatriation of earnings?                   No            No            No           No
Limits on number of beds?                                   No            No           Yes*          No
Restrictions on range of services?                          No            No            No           No
Source: World Bank regulatory surveys, 2014.
*Some restrictions apply.

For repatriation of earnings, the policies vary across the examined countries. In Kenya, repatriation of
capital and profits is allowed after payment of the relevant taxes. In Uganda, the institution is required to
attain approval from the Bank of Uganda to repatriate profits and dividends. In Rwanda, institutions that
fulfill the requirements on investment promotion are eligible for tax-free repatriation of profits. There do
not seem to be any restrictions on the range of services that a foreign hospital can provide or the use of
public medical insurance in foreign hospitals. In general, there are no limits on ownership or control in a
foreign medical institution by medical professionals (individuals) who are not even licensed to practice in
the host country.

Trade in education and medical services via the temporary movement of people (Mode 4) seems to be
more restricted than other modes of supply. In general, a medical professional needs to fulfill stringent
academic and professional qualifications to be eligible to practice in her or his own country, but these
requirements multiply many fold in a foreign country because of the large number of regulations. First,
access to the medical profession is strongly regulated through compulsory licenses issued at the national
or subnational level. For instance, in Tanzania, a foreign medical professional who is licensed to practice
in a foreign country cannot enter the country temporarily to provide medical services. A local license
needs to be obtained before beginning even to apply for a work permit and visa. The duration of the
license is one calendar year for the examined countries. However, there are efforts to change the license
duration for foreign doctors from one year to the intended duration of stay in the country. For instance, if
a doctor is in the country for a five-day medical camp, then the doctor is granted a license for five days,
not one year (table 7).

Table 7. Regulations Affecting the Temporary Movement of Health Professionals (Mode 4)

Regulation                                                         Kenya          Rwanda         Tanzania         Uganda
Requirements other than academic                                    Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes
qualifications?
Practical training requirements (months)?                        Yes (12)         Yes (12)        Yes (12)        Yes (12)
Foreign licensed professionals allowed to                        Yes; with          Yes             No               Yes;
practice temporarily?                                            visa and                                        temporary
                                                                   work                                            license
                                                                  permit
Is there a minimum wage/salary or wage parity                     NoNo                               No              No
requirement?
Burdensome immigration requirements (initial         3            12                                  24              3
limit, months)
Burdensome labor market tests?                      Yes           No                                 No              No
Quotas or limits on number of candidates?           No            No                                 No              No
Foreign academic qualifications/licenses           Yes*          Yes*                               Yes*             No
recognized?
*Preferential recognition to EAC member states and unilateral recognition
Source: World Bank regulatory surveys, 2014.
*Preferential recognition to EAC member states and unilateral recognition.

The cost of a host country’s license is often higher for a foreigner than for nationals. In Tanzania and
Uganda, foreign doctors are issued only a temporary license, while nationals can be issued a license of
three years for nurses and midwives and one year for doctors.25 Although licenses from other jurisdictions
are recognized unilaterally in Kenya and Uganda and preferentially in Rwanda for the EAC member
states, language is a big constraint. English and the national language are most often requirements to
obtain a full license. In Tanzania, restrictions are most stringent, as foreign licenses are not recognized
and local licenses are not easily attainable. Permanent residency or citizenship is required for obtaining a
Tanzanian license for nurses, midwives, and doctors.

Movement of educators across borders in East Africa is slightly more liberal as far as licensing
regulations are concerned, especially compared with regulations for medical professionals. Unlike the
health services sector, access to the education profession is not regulated through compulsory licenses or
registration issued at the national or subnational level. There are no nationality, language, or residency
requirements for obtaining an educator’s license in any of the surveyed countries in East Africa.
However, Tanzania does not recognize licenses obtained in any foreign jurisdictions, while Kenya,
Rwanda, and Uganda recognize licenses preferentially for EAC member states (table 8).




25
 Plans are underway to have licenses issued in accordance with the requirement—for example, a five-day license for a five-day
medical camp.
Table 8. Regulations Affecting the Temporary Movement of Education Professionals (Mode 4)

Regulation                                                   Kenya           Rwanda     Tanzania        Uganda
Foreign licensed professional allowed to practice              Yes             Yes         Yes            Yes
temporarily?
Minimum wage/salary or wage parity                             No              No           No            No
requirement?
Burdensome immigration requirements (initial                    3              12           24             3
limit, in months)
Quotas or limits on number of candidates?                      No              No           No            No
Burdensome nationality or residence                            No              No           No            No
requirements?
Burdensome labor market tests?                                 No              No           No              No
Burdensome horizontal restrictions specific to                 No              No           No             Yes,
educators?                                                                                             experience
                                                                                                      requirements
                                                                                                        (2 yrs. for
                                                                                                       lecturer; 10
                                                                                                        for prof.)
Foreign academic qualifications/licenses                      Yes*           Yes* but    Unilateral       Yes*
recognized?                                                                    test     recognition
                                                                             required
Source: World Bank regulatory surveys, 2014.
*Preferential recognition to EAC member states and unilateral recognition.

Most visa and immigration procedures are similar across the two examined sectors. Burdensome
immigration requirements, visa regulations, and restrictions on work permits are typical barriers that
hamper the movement of educational and medical professionals within Africa. Countries such as Kenya
and Uganda issue visas and work permits for a period of 90 days. The cost of a visa in East Africa varies
significantly across countries. Rwanda issues a one-year work visa with no additional requirements to
obtain a work permit at US$83, while Tanzania issues a two-year work visa at US$550. Educational and
medical professionals also need to obtain a work permit to practice in Kenya and Uganda, which imposes
an additional cost. These work permits cost US$114 in Kenya and US$75 in Uganda. Kenya and Uganda
issue a work permit for a three-month period only. Although visas and work permits for educators and
medical professionals are renewable, they impose large, recurring fixed costs (table 9).
Table 9. Regulations Regarding Visas and Immigration Requirements Affecting Education and
Health Professionals

Regulation                                                     Kenya       Rwanda   Tanzania   Uganda
Cost of obtaining visa (US$)                                      50         83       550        130
                                                               (single);                       (multiple)
                                                                  100
                                                              (multiple)
Initial length of validity of work permit (months)                 3         12        24          3
Average processing time for visa application                      30          2       7-21        3-5
(days)
Renewal of visa permitted?                                          Yes     Yes       Yes         Yes
Renewal of work permit permitted?                                   Yes     Yes       Yes         Yes
Allowed to switch employers?                                        No      No        Yesa        No
Explicit work permit application fees (US$)                         114      0        550         75
Average processing time for a work permit (days)                    n.a.     x        7-21        30
Source: World Bank regulatory surveys, 2014.
Note: n.a. = not available; x = no separate work permit required.
a. With notification to the Commissioner of Immigration.

Kenya and Tanzania impose labor market and economic needs tests before hiring educators from abroad.
Given the short duration for visas and work permits and the high cost of getting an entry visa (and
renewal), these restrictions may critically limit trade in education services. Further, academic and
professional qualifications are not automatically recognized; but there is preferential recognition of
degrees obtained from other EAC member states only. In Tanzania, by contrast, academic and
professional qualifications are recognized only unilaterally according to a codified process based on
substantive criteria.

On the positive side, none of the surveyed countries, except Kenya, requires a labor market test or an
economic needs test prior to hiring a medical professional. There seem to be no quotas or limits on the
number of candidates that can be admitted at professional examinations. The practical training and
internship requirements are the same for foreign and domestic medical professionals, although many more
procedures are involved to have professional qualifications recognized in any given African host country
(table 10).
Table 10. Regulations Affecting Education and Health Professionals
Regulation                             Kenya          Rwanda            Tanzania         Uganda
Competition law applicable?              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Redress options when business
practices perceived to restrict
their activity?
  Health                                 Yes              Yes              Yes              n.a.
  Education                              Yes              Yes              n.a.             Yes
Treated at par with domestic             Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
professionals regarding taxes or
eligibility for subsidies?
Quota/limit defining the                 No               No               No               No
maximum number?
Fees regulated in any way?               No               No              Yesa              No
Regulations on prices and fees
apply equally?
  Health                                 Yes              n.a.             Yes              Yes
  Education                              Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
Advertising and marketing
prohibited or regulated?
  Health                                 n.a.             No               Yes              No
  Education                              No               No               No               No
Regulations on advertising apply
equally?
  Health                                n.a.              Yes              Yes              Yes
  Education                             Yes               Yes              Yes              Yes
Allowed to use the name used in         Yes1              Yes              Yes              Yes
their home country?
Regulations on location and              No               No               No               No
diversification?
Regulations on location apply            Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
equally?
Special instruments to assess and
monitor quality?
  Health                                 Yes              Yes              Yes              Yes
  Education                              No               Yes              Yes              Yes
Compulsory licenses?
  Health                             Yes; 3 years     Yes; 3 years     Yes; 3 years     Yes; 3 years
                                    for nurses & 1   for nurses & 1   for nurses & 2   for nurses & 1
                                        year for         year for         year for         year for
                                        doctors          doctors          doctors          doctors
 Education                                No               Yes              No               No
Nationality requirement?
 Health                                  No               No            Yes; temp      No (nurses);
                                                                         license       Yes (doctors;
                                                                                              temp license)

  Education                                     No             No                No                No
Language requirement?
  Health                                       Yes             Yes               Yes               Yes
  Education                                    No              No                No                No
Residency requirement?
  Health                                        No             No                Yes               No
  Education
Licensing criteria apply equally
to foreign professionals?
  Health                                       Yes             No                Yes               No
  Education                                    No              No                No                No
Compulsory membership in                       No              No                No                No
professional association
automatically granted with
required qualifications?
Limited licensing system for                    No             No                No                No
foreign providers?
Recognition of licenses obtained
in other jurisdictions?
  Health                                      Yes             Yes*               Yes              Yes
                                           (unilateral)                                        (unilateral)
  Education                                   Yes*            Yes*               No               Yes*
Source: World Bank regulatory surveys, 2014.
Note: n.a. = not available.
a. With notification to the Commissioner of Immigration.
*Preferential recognition to EAC member states.




D.      Policy Action
This paper shows that although most countries in Sub-Saharan Africa import education and health
services to address skills shortages and improve access to services, exports in these sectors are beginning
to emerge on the continent. But despite increasing trade flows, including at the regional level, Sub-
Saharan Africa continues to faces serious shortages of education and health professionals and access to
education and medical services often remains a problem. To turn these sectors around, policy action is
required in the areas of domestic regulation in education and health, trade policy, and labor mobility at the
national and the international levels.
Given the large education and medical skills shortages in Africa, investment in educational institutes for
medical training, and continuous updating of research in the field are quintessential for developing
successful education and health care sectors. Weaknesses in African education systems mean that students
are ill-equipped to acquire market-relevant skills, so enhancing the quality of educational institutions
should be a key item on the policy agenda. Most countries in Africa are far from the required level of
medical training infrastructure to serve their own population. For instance, in all of Sub-Saharan Africa
there are a total of 168 medical schools, and 24 of the 47 countries have only one medical school; 11 have
no medical school at all (Mullan et al. 2011). Thus, investment in training, whether publicly funded or
through foreign investment, would be key not only for improving access to better health services within
the country, but also for exporting such services.


Domestic regulatory reforms need to focus on incremental, qualitative improvements that increase access
to education and medical services for all, ensure the quality of these services, and address skills shortages.
Concrete examples for domestic regulatory reforms could include:
     -   Eliminating disproportionate restrictions that limit competition. For example, price regulations
         are supported and introduced by education and medical associations or the government, who
         claim that the regulations are useful tools to ensure affordable services and access to all income
         groups. But regulated prices prevent markets from efficiently allocating resources, increase
         shortages, and cause deteriorating quality, while stifling innovation and diverting education and
         medical care to informal markets. The countries that impose such regulations need to adopt less
         restrictive mechanisms, such as better access to information on services and service providers,
         which can accomplish the same goals at lower economic cost.

     -   Strengthening incentive systems for education and health care professionals to remain in the
         home country. While restrictive policies, such as compulsory national service to render migration
         more difficult, have not proven effective, since they represent only temporary deterrents for
         migration, countries could focus on developing incentives such as work autonomy, flexible hours
         and scheduling, recognition of work, coaching and mentoring structures, and support for career
         development to retain education and health professionals. Addressing inefficient management
         structures and highly centralized decision making on human resources for health could also help
         alleviate skills shortages. Other measures could include the setting up of knowledge networks
         among skilled expatriates linked to their country of origin, with the aim of mobilizing their
         knowledge and expertise to the development of their country without physically relocating.

     -   Putting in place a regulatory framework that supports trade. In general, rules and regulations
         related to qualifications and licensing requirements for education and health professionals and
         institutions, rules related to insurance schemes, as well as rules regarding the provision of
         services to economically disadvantaged groups are among the most relevant regulations for trade.
         Countries need to ensure that such regulations are not too cumbersome while pursuing legitimate
         regulatory objectives that deal with information asymmetries, negative externalities, and equity
         issues.26 Public-private partnerships27 to deliver education and health services could be also
         considered.

26
   A comprehensive regulatory guide for health care is provided by the World Bank Group’s Investment Climate
Private Health Policy Toolkit: https://www.wbginvestmentclimate.org/toolkits/public-policy-toolkit/.
27
   For example, the Government of Lesotho entered into a long-term public-private partnership with a private sector
consortium comprised of a mix of national and regional actors to establish and operate a national referral hospital
and mini health care network of filter clinics in the greater Maseru area. The consortium assumed responsibility for
providing the following services: (i) clinical services; (ii) clinical support services, including biomechanical
Trade policy reforms ideally would include the removal of trade barriers on a most favored nation or
nonpreferential basis, since such an approach would generate the largest welfare gains. Steps need to be
taken to relax the explicit trade barriers applied by EAC countries; this would facilitate the movement of
consumers (students and patients) and providers (teachers, professors, nurses, and doctors), the cross-
border supply of education and health services, and the commercial presence of education and health
institutions. Examples of possible trade reforms are:

    -   Eliminating restrictions on the portability of insurance. Often private and public insurers are
        prohibited to finance consumption of health care abroad. Therefore, medical tourism is mainly
        financed by out-of-pocket payments, making its cost disproportionally high and inaccessible for
        poorer segments of the population. Removing such restrictions on portability and permitting
        insurance companies to sell a policy that covers treatment in the foreign country would lower the
        costs of health services for all.

    -   Minimizing restrictions on the forms of establishment allowed. Underinvestment is a primary
        cause of poor education and health services in Africa. To improve the availability and quality of
        human and physical resources in this sector, expenditures on health care need to be increased and
        allocated efficiently, in line with local needs and priorities. In this regard, easing the inflow of
        foreign investment in the education and health care sectors has several benefits. One, it can
        generate additional resources for investment in and upgrading of infrastructure and technologies.
        Two, foreign investment can generate employment of teachers and health personnel. Three, it
        would easily provide expensive and specialized education and medical services. Four, the
        availability of private capital could reduce the total burden on government resources, helping to
        reallocate government expenditure toward the public education and health care sectors. In this
        regard, partnering with reputed education and health service institutions in other developed
        countries or countries known for their exports can also help to improve service facilities and
        introduce superior management techniques and information systems (Chanda 2002). Taxes
        collected from foreign-owned commercial hospitals, for example, could be reinvested in the
        public health system as well as in the training of health care professionals. Thus, the strategy of
        welcoming foreign investment in the short run is likely to pave way for exports of health care
        services over time.

    -   Developing a transparent and consistent framework for accepting education and health
        professionals with foreign qualifications. The main regulatory challenge for exporting health
        services via Mode 4 is related to cumbersome entry requests and procedural requirements for
        recognizing, or requiring specific forms of, qualification and professional licensing (Smith et al.
        2009). African countries should allow freer mobility of education and health care professionals to
        enhance the region’s competitiveness by articulating the economic and social motivation for
        economic needs tests and working through the mutual recognition and harmonization of
        qualifications and expedition of visa applications.



The removal of explicit trade barriers needs to be complemented by reforms of immigration laws and
rules on the hiring of foreign education and medical professionals. Visa and travel formalities inhibit trade
in education and medical services. Such entry requirements and visa costs translate into government-


engineering, laboratory, and pharmacy; and (iii) non-clinical services, including administration, facilities
management, and ICT.
imposed barriers to trade, which can be overcome by international and regional cooperation. Many
successful exporters of medical services have eliminated such visa requirements. Other countries have
adopted a more gradual approach and changed their visa requirements to encourage medical tourism and
better integrate health care services with tourist facilities. For example, in India, the new medical tourist
visas, “M-visas” are valid for a year and are also issued to the patients’ companions. Similarly, hospitals
such as Bangkok’s Bumrungard have an “in-house visa extension center” for facilitating visa extensions
for patients (Bookman and Bookman 2007). In some cases, medical tourists receive government
assistance to expedite visa procedures. There also needs to be a transparent and clear framework for
allocating work permits to medical professionals.

The SADC Protocol on Education and Training (signed in 1997) could provide a useful example to be
refined and followed by other subregions for immigration formalities and rules on hiring education
professionals. Although the implementation of the protocol is far from perfect,28 it has done much to relax
immigration formalities and facilitate freer movement of students and staff within the SADC region. For
instance, the SADC protocol has facilitated access to affordable student visa permits and allowed foreign
students to be engaged in formal-sector employment in their institutions of learning to improve their
livelihoods (Kwaramba 2009). By treating SADC students like home students in terms of fees and
accommodations, countries such as South Africa have encouraged foreign student enrollments from
neighboring countries. The removal of immigration barriers and the development of enabling policies for
the mobility of students, patients, and education and health professionals throughout the continent are
crucial for the improvement of Africa’s educational and medical systems.

E.5. Regional Regulatory Cooperation

Deeper regional integration, through regulatory cooperation with neighboring partners who have similar
regulatory preferences, can usefully complement nonpreferential trade liberalization. Admission
requirements and policies on the transfer of academic credits and recognition of academic and
professional qualifications for education and health professionals are equally important for the mobility
of consumers and providers of education and health services. At least two regional organizations are
actively involved in quality assurance in Africa: the African and Malagasy Council for Higher Education
(French acronym: CAMES), and the Inter-University Council for East Africa (IUCEA). The World Bank
Group is currently supporting CAMES in the design and implementation of a mechanism for regional
accreditation of higher institutions in its 19 member states as part of the Regional Institutional
Accreditation Initiative. In East Africa, IUCEA plays an important role in the following:

        Facilitating networking among universities within and outside the region
        Developing adequate education standards so as to promote the region's competitiveness in higher
         education
        Enhancing curriculum development strategies and university leadership skills and competencies
        Mainstreaming ICT into institutional core functions and general support operations
        Strengthening higher education quality assurance processes in university institutions and
         eventually establishing an East African system of quality assurance
        Establishing an East African qualification framework to facilitate harmonization of education and
         training systems, student mobility across the region, and harmonization of skills, competencies,
         and qualifications, so as to simplify mutual recognition of the latter among others.

28
  To understand how the protocol fails in some instances, we consider the example of study permits for Zimbabweans. A study
permit is issued by the Department of Home Affairs as a basic requirement for international students. The Immigration Act
warrants that study permits be applied for in the student’s home country. In practice, this unreasonable requirement is often
waived for migrants already in the country, but not for Zimbabweans (SAMP 2011). This requirement hinders the flow of
Zimbabweans into South Africa for higher education.
The medical boards/councils in the EAC have started to collaborate and share registers to recognize
licenses from other EAC member countries. In addition, nurses and midwives, pharmacists, medical
doctors, and veterinaries are currently developing a roadmap for the preparation of Mutual Recognition
Agreements (MRAs) of Professional Qualifications to deepen regional integration in the sector and create
new incentives for retaining the scarce skilled professionals on the continent. Such MRAs would need to
be effectively implemented in the EAC and could be negotiated and implemented by other subregions in
Africa. Opening up regional boundaries and establishing MRAs would facilitate integration in education
and health services. For example, some of the health professionals interested in providing their services
across borders may choose to stay in the region rather than traveling to further OECD destinations.

When implementing MRAs, countries need to learn from the previous experience with such agreements
in professional services. For example, EAC stakeholders as well as the EAC Council of Ministers have
recognized some broader issues that have prevented existing MRAs in accounting, architectural, and
engineering services from being truly effective. Reflections are underway on how commitments on free
movement of skilled professional workers, which are essential to the success of the MRAs, can be de-
linked from the wider issue of free movement of workers. But limited progress on this issue hampers the
free movement of service providers as well as further negotiations on services liberalization and reform.
Because of the rapid expansion of private universities and colleges driven by the growing demand for
education services, regional interventions that promote the emergence of quality educational institutions
are a high priority on the continent’s education agenda. There are concerns that the burgeoning increase in
the number of universities may lead to the proliferation of unregulated courses (box 7).
           Box 7. Expansion of Private Education Institutes: Are They Diluting Quality?
One of the greatest challenges facing the higher education sector is a scarcity of qualified PhD holders
in the East African Community (EAC). Demand from the expanding higher education sector far
outstrips the number of qualified academics.

Kampala International University (KIU) began offering unaccredited PhDs in Humanities in 2007, two
years before it was awarded the right to confer such degrees. Furthermore, a total of 132 doctorates
awarded by KIU between 2011 and 2013 were declared invalid by the Uganda National Council for
Higher Education (NCHE). Of the 42 graduates scheduled for graduation in 2012, 30 were Kenyans. In
2013 the regulator for higher education in Kenya, the Commission for University Education (CUE),a
announced that it will not recognize qualifications from KIU until a thorough review had been
conducted.

Red flags were raised when KIU graduated as many PhDs as Uganda’s largest University, Makerere
University. The Uganda NCHE set up a taskforce to investigate whether KIU had the capacity to offer
the programs. The findings of the taskforce revealed that of the 66 PhDs awarded in 2013, “all were
substandard: eight needed minor corrections, 36 needed major revisions, and 22 were beyond revision”
(Spaull 2015). Since the thorough review of the taskforce, 22 PhDs have been approved by the NCHE.
Other findings by the taskforce showed that several supervisors held PhDs from universities not
recognized by the regulator, and still other supervisors did not have PhDs.

The Inter-University Council for East Africa (IUCEA) largely plays an oversight role in the region but
does not have the power to accredit all institutions and programs in the region. Local regulators, such
as CUE and NCHE in Uganda or NCHE in Rwanda, accredit institutions and programs in their
respective jurisdictions. Unfortunately, the rate of growth of private institutions in the EAC outstrips
the capacity of local regulators, in terms of facilities, finances, and human resources, to effectively and
adequately cover all institutions in terms of academic management and quality assurance.
Sources: Spaull 2015; Ssembatya 2012; Waruru 2014.
a. CUE replaces the Commission for Higher Education. CUE advises the government on university education
policy, undertakes accreditation inspections, monitors and evaluates the state of university education, and ensures
compliance with set standards.

Weaknesses in African education systems mean that students are ill-equipped to acquire market-relevant
skills. Therefore, enhancing the quality of educational institutions should be a key item on the policy
agenda. Trade liberalization needs to be coordinated with regulatory reform and cooperation at the
regional level. While the IUCEA already provides a forum to start addressing regional quality issues, a
continental quality assurance agency—built for example on the work of the African Quality Assurance
Network or the African Quality Rating Mechanism—could support the activities of regional bodies.

In addition to quality assurance, reforms would need to focus on developing new and expanded means of
financing higher education, such as student loan schemes, and developing well-articulated, diversified,
and differentiated higher education systems that contain vocational and technical colleges as well as
research universities. Cooperation among countries in terms of sharing information and experiences to
increase the recovery rate of student loans while increasing students’ access to higher education could
improve the impact of educational loan schemes in East Africa. In general, the fragmentation of the
regional market for education by differences in regulation can prevent the emergence of regional hubs for
higher education. Thus, smoothing these regulatory differences can lead to a greater variety of higher
education services becoming available at lower costs for students in Africa. The Centers of Excellence 29
approach implemented by the World Bank in Africa may provide a useful model to spearhead such
regulatory cooperation.

Similarly, in health services, the East Africa Public Health Laboratory Networking approach focuses on
establishing a network of efficient, high quality, accessible public health laboratories for the diagnosis and
surveillance of tuberculosis and other communicable diseases in Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and
Uganda. This approach can provide guidance to create a platform for knowledge sharing, training, and
regulatory cooperation.

In addition to traditional student, patient, and health and education staff exchanges, African countries
need to facilitate the emergence of innovative forms of cross-border exchanges. Technological
innovations can facilitate the expansion of distance learning and provide health care solutions such as
combating malaria. Such innovations can provide free essential health care information that is updated
daily, or diagnose and monitor symptoms of diseases in rural areas. Distance learning requires extensive
ICT infrastructure, complemented by extensive policies to support such innovative cross-border
exchanges.

Finally, Africa’s diaspora needs to be mobilized to play a role in the internationalization of education and
health services in Africa. For example, recent initiatives in education services have been undertaken as
part of the “Mobilize the Diaspora” project. The project aims to engage 10,000 diaspora scholars in
African higher education and encourage collaboration with local professionals across a number of
disciplines, such as research, curriculum development, graduate student teaching, and mentoring.

E.       Conclusions
This paper used quantitative and qualitative surveys to assess the importance of regional integration in
promoting education and health services in Africa. Mobile-based data collection methodology was
deployed to examine the magnitude, determinants, and restrictions on intra-African trade in education and
health services. Survey results suggest the following conclusions:

        The regional dimension is prominent in education and health services.
        Although differences in the quality of services may explain educational exchanges and medical
         tourism within Africa, the nonavailability of certain specialized cures could be an additional
         explanatory factor for trade in health services.

29
   The World Bank Group’s Africa Higher Education Centers of Excellence Project is currently supporting 19
tertiary education institutions in seven West African countries to promote regional specialization in S.T.E.M.
(Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics), agriculture, and health. The key project objectives are to (i)
enhance quality research-based education in high-demand areas, and make it available to national and regional
students; (ii) promote partnerships between the newly-established African Centers of Excellence (ACEs) and
companies and governmental and nongovernmental organizations, through internships, training, etc.; and (iii)
improve teaching and research conditions and strengthen the capacity of the beneficiary institutions. In addition, the
project will support a range of regional activities to (i) enhance coordination among ACEs, for example, through
joint lessons; (ii) undertake regional monitoring and evaluation activities of the selected institutions, for example
through tracer studies, technical audits, collection of academic data, etc.; (iii) assist regional bodies, including the
Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and the West African Economic and Monetary Union
(WAEMU), in regional policy making on regional higher education; and (iv) support the provision of higher
education      services     (for    example,       training,   scholarship,      faculty      visiting,   etc.).    (See
http://www.worldbank.org/projects/P126974/strengthening-tertiary-education-africa-through-africa-centers-
excellence?lang=en.)
       Medical professionals are motivated to seek employment abroad (Mode 4) mainly because of
        inadequate remuneration, poorly managed health systems in the home country, and the need to
        continue education and training in their field.
       Trade in education and health services is hampered by the high cost of travel and visas and
        limited availability of insurance; movement of education and health professionals is limited by
        lengthy and costly processes of recognition of degrees obtained abroad.

A systematic, qualitative analysis, including results from regulatory surveys conducted in selected Eastern
and Southern African countries, complements the quantitative surveys to derive policy recommendations
aimed at addressing the key constraints affecting trade in education and health services in Africa. The
analysis shows that to turn this sector around, policy action is required in the areas of domestic regulation,
trade policy, and labor mobility at the national and international levels. A key challenge faced by many
African countries is the emigration of their scarce health professionals. To retain some of these health
workers in the region, it is important to ease the procedural requirements for recognizing their
qualifications and professional licensing. Several regional trade arrangements between source and
destination countries work through the mutual recognition and harmonization of qualifications and
expedition of visa applications. These include the Caribbean Community and Common Market
(CARICOM), the Caribbean Free Trade Association (CARIFTA), the North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA), and the European Union in Europe. African countries should also allow for freer
mobility of health care professionals to enhance the region’s competitiveness in providing health care
facilities.
AfDB (African Development Bank). 2013. “The Growth of International Trade in Health Services:
      Export Prospects in North Africa.” Economic Brief. AfDB, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
Bashir, S. 2007. “Trends in International Trade in Higher Education: Implications and Options for
        Developing Countries.” World Bank, Washington, DC.
Bhargava, A., and F. Docquier. 2008. “HIV Pandemic, Medical Brain Drain, and Economic Development
in Sub-Saharan Africa.” The World Bank Economic Review 22 (2): 345–66.

Bhorat, H., J. B. Meyer, and C. Mlatsheni. 2005. “Skilled Labour Migration from Develo ping Countries:
        Study on South and Southern Africa.” International Migration Papers 52: 1–40.
Bookman, M., and K. Bookman. 2007. Medical Tourism in Developing Countries. Basingstoke: Palgrave
      Macmillan.
Cattaneo, O. 2010. “Health without Borders: International Trade for Better Health Systems and Services.”
       In International Trade in Services. New Opportunities for Developing Countries, edited by O.
       Cattaneo, M. Engman, S. Saez, and R.M. Stern. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Chanda, R. 2002. “Trade in Health Services.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization 80 (2): 158–63.
Chen, L. C., and J. I. Boufford. 2005. “Fatal Flows—Doctors on the Move.” New England Journal of
       Medicine 353 (17): 1850–52.
Docquier, F., and A. Marfouk. 2006. “International Migration by Educational Attainment 1990-2000.” In
       International Migration, Remittances and Development, Edited by C. Özden and M. Schiff. New
       York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hahn, K. 2005. “Towards a SADC Area of Higher Education.” NEPRU Research Report No. 30.
      Namibia Economic Policy Research Unit (NEPRU), Windhoek, Namibia.
Kok, P., D. Gelderblom, J. Oucho, and J. Van Zyl, eds. 2006. Migration in South and Southern Africa:
        Dynamics and Determinants. Cape Town: HSRC Press.
Kwaramba, M. 2009. “Internationalization of Higher Education in Southern Africa with South Africa as
      the Major Exporter.” Research Paper submitted to University of Mauritius, Moka, Mauritius.
Lautier, M. 2005. “Les exportations de services de santé des pays en développement: Une analyse à partir
        du cas de la Tunisie.” Notes et Documents n 25. Paris: AFD.
———. 2008. “Export of Health Services from Developing Countries: The Case of Tunisia.” Social
    Science and Medicine 67 (1): 101–10.
MacGregor, K. 2007. “South Africa: Huge Growth in Foreign Students.” University World News, Issue
      No: 9. http://www.universityworldnews.com/article.php?story=20071206163532421.
Manik, S., B. Maharaj, and R. Sookrajh. 2006. “Globalisation and Transnational Teachers: South African
       Teacher Migration to the United Kingdom.” Migracijske i etničke teme 22 (1-2): 15–33.
Marko, K. 2009. Internationalization of Higher Education in Southern Africa with South Africa as the
       Major Exporter. Services Sector Development and Impact on Poverty Thematic Working Group.
       http://www.tips.org.za/files/11.Internationalization_-_SSD.pdf.
Maseruka, J. 2010. “Uganda: Govt to Earn $60 Million From Foreign Students Annually.” allAfrica,
       September 27. http://allafrica.com/stories/201009280119.html.
McKinsey Global Institute. 2008. Accounting for the Cost of US Health Care: A New Look at Why
      Americans                                        Spend                                 More.
      http://healthcare.mckinsey.com/sites/default/files/MGI_Accounting_for_cost_of_US_health_care
      _full_report.pdf.
Morgan, W. J., A. Sives, and S. Appleton. 2005. “Managing the International Recruitment of Health
      Workers and Teachers: Do the Commonwealth Agreements Provide an Answer?” The Round
      Table 94 (379): 225–38.
Mortensen J. 2008. “International Trade in Health Services. Assessing the Trade and Trade and the Trade-
       offs.” DIIS Working Paper No. 2008/11. Danish Institute for International Studies (DIIS),
       Copenhagen, Denmark.
Mullan, F., S. Frehywot, and F. Omaswa. 2011. “Medical Schools in Sub-Saharan Africa.” The Lancet
       377 (9771): 1113–21.
Obermaier, A. J. 2009. “Cross-Border Purchases of Health Services: A Case Study on Austria and
      Hungary.” Policy Working Paper No. 4825. World Bank, Washington, DC.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2010 “Medical Tourism:
     Treatments, Markets and Health System Implications: A scoping review.” Directorate for
     Employment, Labour and Social Affairs, OECD Publishing, Paris.
Othieno, L., and D. Nampewo. 2012. “Opportunities, Challenges and Way Forward for Uganda’s Trade
       in Education Services within the East African Community.” Economic Policy Research Centre
       (EPRC), Kampala, Uganda.
Ozden, C., and D. Phillips. 2015. “What Really Is Brain Drain? Location of Birth, Education and
       Migration Dynamics of African Doctors.” Global Knowledge Partnership on Migration and
       Development (KNOMAD) Working Paper #4. KNOMAD, Washington, DC.
PwC and GSMA. 2012. “Touching Lives through Mobile Health: Assessment of the Global Market
      Opportunity.”
Ratha, D. Sanket Mohapatra, Caglar Ozden, Sonia Plaza, William Shaw, and Abede Shimeles. 2011.
       “Leveraging Migration for Africa: Remittances, Skills, and Investments. ” World Bank,
       Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTDECPROSPECTS/Resources/476882-
       1157133580628/AfricaStudyEntireBook.pdf.
SAMP (Southern African Migration Project). 2002. “Thinking about the Brain Drain in Southern Africa.”
      Migration Policy Brief No. 8. SAMP, Kingston, Canada and Cape Town, South Africa.
———. 2008. “The Haemorrhage of Health Professionals from South Africa.” Medical Opinion,
    Migration Policy Series No.47. SAMP, Kingston, Canada and Cape Town, South Africa.
———. 2011. “The Engagement of Zimbabwean Medical Diaspora.” Migration Policy Series No.55.
    SAMP, Kingston, Canada and Cape Town, South Africa.
SACE (South African Council of Educators). 2011. “Teacher Migration in South Africa: Advice to the
      Ministries of Basic and Higher Training.” Report prepared for the Ministries of Basic an d Higher
      Training, South Africa
Smith, Richard, Rupa Chanda, and Viroj Tangcharoensathien. 2009. “Trade and Health 4: Trade in
       Health-Related Services.” The Lancet 373: 593–601.
Spaull, J. 2015. “PhD Crisis in Uganda’s Private Universities.” Africa’s PhD Renaissance series,
        SciDevNet Global Edition. . http://www.scidev.net/sub-saharan-africa/education/feature/phd-
        crisis-uganda-private-universities-1.html#sthash.esexodZk.dpuf.
Ssembatya, V. 2012. “The Careers and Productivity of Doctorate Holders (CDH) Survey: Uganda Report
       2012.” Uganda National Council for Science and Technology, Kampala, Uganda.
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2013. “Services Policy Review:
     Uganda.” UNCTAD, Geneva.
Wamala, D.S., and K. Augustine. 2013. A Meta-Analysis of Telemedicine Success in Africa. Journal of
      Pathology Informatics 4: 6.
Waruru, M. 2014, “Unhappiness over Lack of Qualifications' Recognition.” University World News,
       January 17, Issue No: 124.
Wentzel, M., and K. Tlabela. 2006. “Historical Background to South African Migration.” In Migration in
       South and Southern Africa: Dynamics and Determinants, edited by P. Kok, D. Gelderblom, J.
       Oucho, and J. Van Zyl, 71–96. Cape Town: HSRC Press.
World Bank. 2014. “Regulatory Surveys and Interviews Covering Education and Health Services in
      Eastern Africa.” Internal report submitted by Richard Gicho. World Bank, Washington, DC.
———. 2015. “Indicators to Monitor Deeper Regional Trade Integration in Africa .” Mobile Phone
    Surveys. .Report No: AUS7670, World Bank, Washington, DC.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2004. “Migration of Health Professionals in Six Countries: A
     Synthesis Report.” WHO, Regional Office for Africa.
———.       2012. “Global Health Indicators.” Published             by    World    Health    Statistics.
       http://www.who.int/healthinfo/EN_WHS2012_Part3.pdf.
WTO (World Trade Organization). (1991). Services Sectoral Classification List. MTN.GNS/W/120.
     www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/serv_e/mtn_gns_w_120_e.doc.
———. 1998. Council for Trade in Services. Education Services, Background Note by the Secretariat.
    S/C/W/49. www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/serv_e/w49.doc.
———. 2010. Council for Trade in Services. Education Services, Background Note by the Secretariat.
    S/C/W/313. www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/serv_e/w313.doc.
                    Annex A. Trade in Education and Health Services:
                                  Modes of Supply and Examples
         Mode of supply               Education—                     Health—                  Main features
                                     examples/forms               examples/forms
    (a) Cross-border supply     Distance education           Telemedicine and            Program (service)
        (Mode 1)                                             telediagnosis               mobility
                                Online education
                                                             Laboratory or claims
                                Commercial
                                                             processing
                                franchising/twinning of a
                                course                       Hospital management
                                                             functions
                                                             Back-up advisory
                                                             services
                                                             Contracting of clinical
                                                             and nonclinical services
                                                             such as medical
                                                             evacuations, cancer
                                                             treatment, specialized
                                                             surgeries
    (b) Consumption abroad      Students abroad              Patients abroad for         People (student/patient)
        (Mode 2)                                             specialized or surgical     mobility
                                                             care
                                                             Cosmetic surgery health
                                                             and wellness
    (c) Commercial              Establishment of an          Health insurance            Institution mobility
        presence (Mode 3)       educational institution or   companies
                                satellite campuses
                                                             Medical/physician
                                Branch campus, including     practices
                                joint ventures with local
                                                             Diagnostics facilities
                                institutions
    (d) Presence of natural     Professors. lecturers,       Health personnel            People (education or
        persons (Mode 4)        teachers, and researchers    providing health services   health professionals)
                                providing services abroad    or health consulting        mobility
                                                             assignments abroad


Sources: Adapted from WTO 2010, 1998.
              Annex B. Volume of Education Services Trade Recorded
                            in IMF Balance of Payments Statistics

Table B.1. Volume of Education Services Exports, USD and %


                                Education services          Share in total travel     Share in personal travel
 Country                         exports (USD)                 services (%)                services (%)
 Botswana                            4,334,233                      3.9                         4.0
 Burundi                              108,890                       7.6                         7.6
 Malawi                              2,011,543                      6.0                         14.3
 Mozambique                          2,466,154                      1.2                         1.3
 Namibia                             2,493,240                      0.6                         0.7
 Swaziland                          18,757,132                      37.1                        85.8
 Uganda                             30,187,828                      2.6                         4.3
Source: UNSTATS (http://unstats.un.org/).
Note: The sample of countries is based on data availability in UNSTATS in recent years, after 2010. The latest year
available for Mozambique and Swaziland is 2010; for Burundi and Malawi, 2012; and for Botswana, Namibia, and
Uganda, 2013.




Table B.2. Volume of Education Services Imports, USD and %


                                Education services          Share in total travel     Share in personal travel
 Country                         imports (USD)                 services (%)                services (%)
 Botswana                          18,358,836                       39.0                        42.1
 Burundi                           12,136,509                       49.0                        93.6
 Lesotho                           14,615,975                       70.4                        100.0
 Malawi                            17,554,292                       25.2                        63.9
 Mozambique                        14,473,751                       5.8                          8.8
 Namibia                            2,389,355                       1.9                          2.0
 Nigeria                          2,566,589,952                     41.5                        47.9
 Seychelles                         8,634,920                       23.1                        25.9
 Swaziland                          9,867,440                       16.1                        20.1
 Uganda                             2,102,048                       0.5                          1.1
Source: UNSTATS (http://unstats.un.org/).
Note: The sample of countries is based on data availability in UNSTATS in recent years, after 2010. The latest year
available for Mozambique, Seychelles, and Swaziland is 2010; for Burundi, Lesotho, Malawi, and Nigeria, 2012;
and for Botswana, Namibia, and Uganda, 2013.
                 Annex C. Volume of Health Services Trade Recorded
                            in IMF Balance of Payments Statistics


Table C.1. Volume of Health Services Exports


                              Health services exports       Share in total travel     Share in personal travel
 Country                              (USD)                    services (%)                services (%)
 Botswana                            1,207,478                      1.10                        1.11
 Burundi                               18,206                       1.27                        1.27
 Malawi                                99,477                       0.29                        0.71
 Mozambique                           735,355                       0.37                        0.37
 Namibia                              207,770                       0.05                        0.06
 Swaziland                           3,097,611                      6.13                        14.17
 Uganda                             11,952,399                      1.01                        1.71
Source: UNSTATS (http://unstats.un.org/).
Note: The sample of countries is based on data availability in UNSTATS in recent years, after 2010. The latest year
available for Mozambique and Swaziland is 2010; for Burundi and Malawi, 2012; and for Botswana, Namibia, and
Uganda, 2013.




Table C.2. Volume of Health Services Imports

                              Health services imports       Share in total travel                                 Share in personal
 Country                              (USD)                    services (%)                                            services (%
 Botswana                           4,407,360                       9.4                                                    10.1
 Burundi                             836,451                        3.4                                                    6.4
 Malawi                             2,476,478                       3.6                                                    9.0
 Mozambique                        13,738,397                       5.5                                                    8.3
 Namibia                            1,558,275                       1.2                                                    1.3
 Nigeria                          1,042,369,984                     16.8                                                   19.4
 Seychelles                         8,506,110                       22.7                                                   25.5
 Swaziland                          5,696,519                       9.3                                                    11.6
 Uganda                              627,235                        0.1                                                    0.3
Source: UNSTATS (http://unstats.un.org/).
Note: The sample of countries is based on data availability in UNSTATS in recent years, after 2010. The latest
year available for Mozambique, Seychelles, and Swaziland is 2010; for Burundi, Malawi, and Nigeria, 2012;
and for Botswana, Namibia, and Uganda, 2013.
