                  99657



South Asia Development Matters




                           OVERVIEW


   Leveraging Urbanization
             in South Asia
         Managing Spatial Transformation
             for Prosperity and Livability
    MANAGING SPATIAL TRANSFORMATION FOR
    PROSPERITY AND LIVABILITY

    South Asia’s urban population is poised to grow by almost 250 million people by 2030. If recent
    history is any guide, this increase could propel the region toward greater economic growth and
    prosperity. Between 2000 and 2011 the region’s urban population expanded by 130 million—
    more than the entire population of Japan. The growth benefits associated with urbanization also
    increased. South Asia made good strides in achieving greater prosperity, with the increase in
    productivity linked to the growing number of people living in the region’s towns and cities. Average
    GDP per capita in the region grew by almost 56 percent during 2000–2012, from $2,560 to
    $4,000, for average annual growth of more than 3.8 percent.1 At the same time, absolute poverty
    declined from one in two people living on less than $1.25 a day in 1999 to less than one in three
    in 2010. Urbanization thus presents South Asian countries with an opportunity to transform their
    economies and join the ranks of richer countries in both prosperity and livability.

    South Asia can gain from urbanization by fostering productivity through the agglomeration of both
    people and enterprises in its towns and cities. One shortcoming, however, has been the inadequate
    provision of ­infrastructure and basic urban services. Two others are insufficient housing and a
    failure to deal with pollution. A key characteristic of urbanization is that agglomeration economies,
    which are the unintended benefits that firms and workers experience from one another as they
    cluster together,2 improve productivity and spur job creation, specifically in manufacturing and
    services. In South Asia, this process is clearly visible in the structural transformation of the
    region’s economy, with manufacturing and services now accounting for more than 80 percent
    of GDP.

    In the long term, successful urbanization is accompanied by the convergence of living standards
    between urban and rural areas as economic and social benefits spill beyond urban boundaries.
    But these positive trends can be undermined by the pressures of urban population growth on
    infrastructure, basic services, land, housing, and the environment. Estimates suggest that at least
    130 million of South Asia’s urban residents live in slums and are disproportionately deprived of
    basic infrastructure and access to basic services.


2
                                                            Decline in
                                                            absolute
                                                            poverty
                                56%
                                Growth in
                                regional
                                GDP per
                                                             1 IN 2 PEOPLE
                                capita                               1999




of South Asia’s
GDP is associated
                                $2560 $4000                  1 IN 3 PEOPLE
with Manufacturing                2000       2012                    2010
and Services
CURRENT AND PREDICTED SOUTH ASIA’S URBAN POPULATION INCREASE




CURRENT GROWTH: 130 MILLION (2000–2011)




PROJECTED GROWTH: 250 MILLION (2015–2030)


                                            LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 3
    South Asia is not fully realizing the potential of its cities for prosperity and livability. One
    significant reason is that its urbanization has been messy and hidden. Messy urbanization is
    reflected in the widespread existence of slums and sprawl. Sprawl, in turn, helps give rise to
    hidden urbanization, particularly on the peripheries of major cities, which is not captured by
    official statistics. Messy and hidden urbanization is symptomatic of the failure to adequately
    address congestion constraints that arise from the pressure of urban population. For South
    Asian cities and for the region, these congestion constraints are undermining both livability
    and the agglomeration economies that can produce greater prosperity.

    Policy makers and urban practitioners in South Asia face common challenges for effective
    urban management. The traditional reservations of South Asia’s politicians and policy
    makers about the benefits of urbanization have been replaced by more optimistic discourse
    on leveraging the benefits of urbanization for growth and prosperity. The changing attitudes
    of governments are visible as national and local policy makers ask: What do cities need to
    do to meet the demands of their growing populations and to manage transformation? How
    can we create an effective and functioning system of cities? National and local policy makers
    are starting to recognize the need to address these challenges in a timely and systematic
    manner if they are to alleviate congestion pressures for better performance of cities and,
    in so doing, create an environment conducive to the stronger leveraging of agglomeration
    economies. Improvements in urban governance and finance—in empowerment, in resources,
    and in accountability systems—hold the keys to both challenges.




4
LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 5
URBAN PROSPERITY AND
LIVABILITY BELOW POTENTIAL
Despite strong growth since the beginning of the century, South Asia’s share of the global economy
remains strikingly low relative to its share of the world’s urban population. In 2011, the East Asia
and the Pacific region generated 29 percent of the world’s GDP with a share of the global urban
population of 32 percent (a ratio of 0.91); South Asia produced 8 percent of global GDP with a
share of the global urban population of 14 percent (a ratio of 0.57). This comparison suggests that
South Asia has been much less successful than East Asia in leveraging its urbanization for gains in
productivity and prosperity. Indeed, South Asia looks more like Sub-Saharan Africa, where the ratio
of the region’s share of global GDP (3 percent) to its share of the global urban population (9 percent)
was 0.34 in 2011.


                   32%
                                     PRODUCTIVITY AND PROSPERITY
     29%
                                          % OF GLOBAL GDP
                                          % OF GLOBAL URBAN POPULATION




                                                        14%


                                                                                              9%
                                          8%


                                                                               3%




    EAST ASIA & PACIFIC                     SOUTH ASIA                      SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA




    0.91 0.57 0.34
           RATIO                                RATIO                                RATIO


6
LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 7
Although progress since 2000 has been impressive, the majority of South Asia’s cities remain
characterized by high levels of poverty, bad housing conditions, and generally poor livability for
many of their inhabitants. According to the most recent estimates, extreme urban poverty has been
        eradicated in both Sri Lanka and Bhutan. However, for the five most populous ­
largely ­                                                                             countries in
the region—India, Pakistan, Bangladesh, Afghanistan, and Nepal, in that order—the number of urban
dwellers below the national poverty line ranges from about one in eight in Pakistan to more than
one in four in Afghanistan.3



URBAN POVERTY COMPARISON FOR MOST POPULOUS SOUTH ASIAN COUNTRIES


                          AFGHANISTAN (2011)



                          27.6%                                              1 IN 4 PEOPLE LIVE
                                                              BELOW THE NATIONAL POVERTY LINE


                          BANGLADESH (2010)



                          21.3%                                                      1 IN 5



                           NEPAL (2010)



                         15.5%                                                            1 IN 6



                           INDIA (2011)



                         13.7%                                                                 1 IN 7




                           PAKISTAN (2005)



                          13.1%                                                                      1 IN 8



8
In absolute numbers, at least 130 million South Asians—equivalent to more than the entire population
of Mexico—live in informal settlements characterized by poor construction, insecure tenure, and
underserviced housing plots. The lack of decent, affordable housing not only impairs the welfare
of millions of South Asians, it also has potentially adverse implications for health outcomes and for
female labor force participation. The prevalence of urban slums in South Asian cities reflects a failure
to adequately manage the congestion forces—in this case, in land and housing markets—associated
with urban population growth. Meanwhile, for the very poorest in Bangladesh, India, Nepal, and
Pakistan, under-five mortality is higher in urban than in rural settings. South Asia’s cities are also
notable for their polluted air. In Delhi, recorded air pollution is almost three times higher than in
Beijing, giving it the dubious distinction of being the “world’s most polluted city.”4




                                             130 million South Asians
                                                (more than the entire
                                            population of Mexico) live
                                              in informal settlements
                           AIR POLLUTION IN DELHI
                           (PM2.5 CONCENTRATION) IS ALMOST
                           THREE TIMES HIGHER THAN IN BEIJING




The failure of South Asia’s urban areas to adequately cope with the pressure of rising populations
is also reflected in the poor performance of its largest cities—those with the most well-developed
infrastructure networks, best access to basic urban services, and the highest standards of living in
                                                         ­ivability. One of the most respected rankings
the region—in international rankings of cities for their l
is the livability index published by the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU), which assesses cities
on their performance across five dimensions of a “livable city”—stability, health care, culture and
the environment, education, and infrastructure. According to the EIU’s 2015 rankings, the highest
ranking of the six South Asian cities in the index is New Delhi, which, out of 140 cities globally,
ranks 110, ahead of Mumbai (115), Kathmandu (125), Colombo (127), and Karachi (135). Dhaka,
meanwhile, comes in at 139, better only than Damascus, Syria.5 More generally, the average ranking
of the six South Asian countries in the index falls below the averages for both all non–South Asian
developing-country cities in the index and all developing-country cities in the East Asia and Pacific
region.



                                                         LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 9
10
URBANIZATION – MESSY
AND HIDDEN
Urbanization in the region remains underleveraged. The share of the region’s population
officially classified as living in urban settlements increased only marginally, from 27.4 percent
in 2000 to 30.9 percent in 2011, for annual growth of 1.1 percent a year. By contrast, when
it was at a level of urbanization similar to that of South Asia today, China experienced growth
in its urban share of population of 3.1 percent a year, moving from 26.4 percent in 1990 to
35.9 percent in 2000. Likewise, Brazil’s urban share grew at 2.5 ­      percent a year between
1950 and 1960, while moving from 36.2 percent to 46.1 ­       percent. Going back even further,
for the United States, the urban share rose from 25 percent to 35.9 percent between 1880
and 1900, for growth of 1.8 percent a year.

In a process of messy urbanization, however, a sizable proportion of the region’s urban
population lives in slums, and cities have been growing outward, spilling over their
administrative boundaries, rather than upward through the construction of taller buildings.
And with growth occurring beyond city limits, much urbanization has been hidden—a growing
number of people in the region live in places that possess strong urban characteristics but
that are not officially recognized as urban.


COMPARISON OF AVERAGE, ANNUAL URBAN POPULATION SHARE GROWTH RATES

                               CHINA


                             3.1%                                26.4%
                                                                 1990
                                                                                35.9%
                                                                                2000


                               BRAZIL


                             2.5%                                36.2%
                                                                 1950
                                                                                46.1%
                                                                                1960


                               UNITED STATES


                             1.8%                                25.0%
                                                                 1880
                                                                                35.9%
                                                                                1900


                               SOUTH ASIA


                             1.1%                                27.4%
                                                                 2000
                                                                                30.9%
                                                                                2011




                                                   LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 11
Messy
Messy urbanization is reflected in the estimated 130 million people who live in slums typified by
poor quality housing in hazardous areas and a lack of access to basic ­   services. It is also reflected in
faster population growth on the peripheries of major cities in areas beyond municipal boundaries.
For the 12 largest Indian cities, satellite imagery shows that, for many of these, the proportion of
built-up area outside a city’s official boundaries exceeds that within its boundaries. For all 12 cities,
the proportion of built-up area outside city boundaries exceeds the proportion of population, implying
that the spillover is associated with relatively low-density sprawl.

The spillover of cities across their boundaries creates challenges for metropolitan coordination in
the delivery of basic services and the provision of infrastructure. And the scale of the challenge has
grown, evident in the rapid spread of urban footprints. Analysis based on night-lights data shows that
the region’s urban areas expanded at slightly more than 5 percent a year between 1999 and 2010.
But the region’s urban population grew a little less than 2.5 percent a year. So cities grew about
twice as fast in area as they grew in population, which suggests declining average city population
densities and increasing sprawl. Furthermore, as the footprints of neighboring cities have expanded,
the number of multicity agglomerations—­   continuously lit belts of urbanization that contain two or
more cities, each with a population of at least 100,000—in the region has also grown, from 37 in
1999 to 45 in 2010. These urbanization belts present an opportunity for greater agglomeration
economies, but realizing these economies will again require better coordination between different
urban local governments.




12
KOLKATA URBANIZATION 2011
                                                                                    0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10 KM
     BUILT-UP AREA                WATER              MUNICIPAL BOUNDARY
Sources: Landsat USGS | Boundary: Administrative Atlas 2011, Kolkata | Datum: WGS 84 | Projection: GCS
Elevation: 15m above MSL | IIHS Analysis 2011-12 | Prepared by Geospatial Lab, Geodata Library, IIHS, November 2011




                                                              LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 13
Hidden
Hidden urbanization stems from official national statistics that understate the share of South Asia’s
population living in areas with urban characteristics. An alternative measure of urbanization, the
agglomeration index—which, unlike official measures, is comparable across countries and regions—
shows that official statistics may substantially understate the number of South Asians living in areas
that look and feel urban, even if they are not counted as such in national population and housing
censuses. This undercounting is in addition to the population in India’s census towns, which are
towns that the country’s census classifies as urban even though they continue to be governed
as rural entities. The reclassification of rural settlements into census towns was responsible for
30 percent of India’s urban population growth between 2001 and 2011, reflecting a more general
process of in situ urbanization across much of the region.6

For major cities in India, population growth has been fastest on their peripheries in areas beyond
their official administrative boundaries. This type of urban spread is reflected in a large growth
differential between the districts in which the cities are located and some of the immediately
neighboring ­ districts. For example, the district of Delhi experienced population growth of 1.9 ­ percent
a year between 2001 and 2011, while population growth in Gautam Budh Nagar, just to the east, was
4.1 percent a year. The picture is similar for major cities in other countries in the region. For example,
several divisional secretariat (DS) divisions within the district of Colombo—Colombo, Dehiwala–
Mount Lavinia, Moratuwa, Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte, and Thimbirigasyaya—saw their ­            populations
decline, but the immediately surrounding localities had comparatively rapid population growth.




14
                                            Kharian
                PAKISTAN                     !
                                              !
                                              Lalamusa
                                                    Jalapur Jattan
                                                    Jalapur Jattan
                                         Gujrat !
                                                !           Sialkot
                                      Wazirabad        !   !
                                                 !
                                        Ghakhar         Sambrial
                                                                !
                                       Lohilanwala
                                                        !       Daska
                                                            Gujranwala
                                                            Gujranwala
                                                   !     !
    !                         Qila Didar Singh
                              Qila       Singh               Kamoke
                         Lahore                    Muridke
                                                            !
                                                                                         Batala
            !
                Rabwah Farooqabad
                           Farooqabad !            !                                 !
                !                          !         Ferozewala
                                                     Ferozewala               Amritsar
                  Chiniot      Sheikhupura         !                      !
                                                  !
                                                                                                                 Hoshiarpur
                                                                                                                 Hoshiarpur
                     Faisalabad
                     Faisalabad
                                        Shahdara !                                                           !                                       INDIA
                   !
                              Jaranwala
                              Jaranwala                                                     !        Jalandhar
                                                                                                     Jalandhar
                            !                                                  Kapurthala          !
                                            Bhai Pheru
                                            Bhai Pheru                                                     Phagwara
                                                                                                           Phagwara
                                          !                                                              !
    !                                                    Kasur
                                                        !
                                         Pattoki
                                             !
                                                  !
                                                      Chunian                                                Ludhiana
                                                                                                         !
                                   Okara
                               !
                                                                                                                        Khanna        Chandigarh
                                                                                                                                       Chandigarh
    !                  Sahiwal            Dipalpur                                                                     !            !!
                   !                  !                                                                                S.A.S. Nagar
                                                                                                                       S.A.S. Nagar     !
                                                                                                Malerkotla               (Mohali)         Panchkula Urban Estate
                                                                                                                                         Panchkula        Estate
        !                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                           Ambala
                                                                                                                                          !!
                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                     Patiala                Ambala Sadar
                                                                                                                                            Ambala   Sadar                           !
                                                                                                                                                   !   !
                                                                                                                                                          Jagadhri
                                                                                                                                                          Jagadhri
    !                                                                                                                                   Mustafabad     !
                                                                                                                                           Thanesar
                                                                                                                                           Thanesar      Yamunanagar
                                                                                                                                                         Yamunanagar
                                                                                                                                           !

                                                                                                                                                                                 !
                                                                                                                                                                       Roorkee
!
                                                                                                                                                    Karnal
                                                                                                                                                !


                                                                                                                                                    Panipat
                                                                                                                                                !




                                                                                                                                                                  Meerut
                                                                                                                                       Rohtak                              !
                                                                                                                                   !                     Modinagar
                                                                                                                                                          Burari !
                                                                                                                       Kirari Suleman
                                                                                                                       Kirari         Nagar
                                                                                                                              Suleman Nagar              ! !
                                                                                                                                                         ! Mandoli
                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                   Dallo Pura
                                                                                                                   Delhi
                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                   Chhattarpur ! Deoli ! Greater
                                                                                                                                                         Noida
                                                                                                                           Rewari        Bhiwadi
                                                                                                                                  !    !           Palwal
                                                                                                                                                              !



                                                                                                                                                                                         !



                      DELHI–LAHORE URBAN CORRIDOR                                                                                                                                    !
                  0      25      50              100 Km
                           CITIES
                                                                                                                           0       25 50                 100 KM
                           1999 AGGLOMERATION
                                  !                                      2010 AGGLOMERATION                                                                        !
                                                                                                                                                                                     !


                           1999 SINGLE CITIES WITHIN 2010 AGGLOMERATIONS

                      Source: Based on CIESIN Columbia University, 2013




                                                                                                  LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 15
CONGESTION CONSTRAINING
THE BENEFITS OF
AGGLOMERATION
South Asia’s urbanization has been messy and hidden in part because its towns and cities have
been struggling to deal with the pressures of population on their infrastructure, basic services, land,
and housing, not to mention the environment. These congestion pressures undermine the region’s
exploitation of the full range of agglomeration economies and its ability to compete in international
export markets. In doing so, they also constrain the ability of the urbanization process overall and
of cities individually to deliver improvements in both prosperity and livability. This struggle to deal
with congestion pressures is due not only to failures of the market but also to failures of policy.

The strength of congestion forces can be mitigated, to an important extent, if investments in
infrastructure and basic services keep pace with demand as more people and firms congregate in
urban areas. Without sufficient investment, urban infrastructure and services become stretched,
reducing quality and access. The effects of congestion forces also depend on the ability of land
and housing markets to respond to rising demand for urban residential, industrial, and commercial
property—and the ability to address the environmental concerns associated with pollution.

Not only does the interplay of agglomeration economies with congestion forces determine the pace
and character of urbanization, it also determines the prosperity and livability outcomes delivered.
This is true both for the urban system overall and for individual towns and cities.

A key insight is that successful cities inevitably are also congested cities, at least for their transport
infrastructure and their land and housing markets. Geneva; Hong Kong SAR, China; London; New
York; Paris; and Singapore are among the most prosperous and livable cities in the world. But they
also have property markets that rank among the most expensive globally. Similarly, the speed of
traffic in downtown London today is little changed from the speed when horse-drawn carriages rather
than cars dominated its streets. What separates world-class cities like New York and London from
South Asian ­ cities is not that they have conquered c   ­ ongestion—it is that they have much higher
prosperity and livability at comparable or lower levels of congestion.

The focus in this report is more on congestion costs than on agglomeration economies. The forces
that generate agglomeration e    ­ conomies—for example, spillovers of ideas between firms and
workers—provide relatively difficult targets for policy to address. The forces of congestion, by contrast,
are directly influenced by policy decisions regarding the supply of both infrastructure and basic
services and the way cities are planned. Congestion forces, moreover, act as a direct constraint
on the exploitation of agglomeration economies. Why? Because high congestion costs constrain
both urban growth and agglomeration by making cities less attractive places to migrate to and
encouraging cities to grow outward rather than upward.




16
LONDON           NEW YORK CITY




BANGLADESH   LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 17
18
ADDRESSING DEFICITS
IN URBAN GOVERNANCE
AND FINANCE
To address key congestion constraints, policy makers need to address three fundamental
urban governance deficits—an empowerment deficit, a resource deficit, and an accountability
deficit. Addressing these deficits will require improving intergovernmental fiscal relations to
empower urban local governments. It will also require identifying practical ways to increase
the resources available to urban local governments to allow them to perform their mandated
functions. And it will require strengthening the mechanisms that hold local governments
accountable for their actions.

Empowerment
Most urban local governments in South Asia suffer from unclear institutional roles and limited
functional and revenue assignments. That leaves local governments with uncertain authority
and limited power to make decisions for most service delivery obligations. Despite generally
having the authority to prepare their own budgets, local governments have limited capacity
and few incentives to do so. They depend greatly on transfers from upper tiers of government,
and the reporting requirements for budget approvals are heavy.

Most urban local governments across the region have limited control over hiring, performance
appraisal, and firing. In Bhutan, Maldives, and Nepal, senior local government staff
appointments tend to be made by the national government. Exceptions include India and
Pakistan, where some local governments have control over the hiring and firing of lower
cadre staff, but even their powers are subject to concurrence and clearance by the states or
provinces.

Empowering urban local governments in South Asia will require a dedicated commitment
to clarifying intergovernmental fiscal legal frameworks by amending existing laws, enforcing
them, and in some cases, establishing new and simple laws. Amending the legal framework
will clarify the institutional roles and the revenue and expenditure obligations of various tiers
of government. It will also increase the decision-making authority and fiscal autonomy of local
governments.

Significant effort will be required to establish and align incentives for urban management,
governance, and finance. Higher tiers of government should provide guidance and oversight
to ensure attention to national policy goals. The central government should encourage and,
where possible, facilitate greater interjurisdictional cooperation and coordination among tiers
of local government and agencies. Improving this enabling environment will allow urban local
governments to better deliver on their compacts with the local populations they serve.




                                                   LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 19
Resources
Revenue mobilization and management are difficult for most urban local governments. Revenue
mobilization is constrained by established fees and tax rates, as well as by narrow tax bases.
In Afghanistan, Maldives, and Nepal, the central government sets all local revenue rates. In
Bangladesh and Bhutan, local governments must follow nationally defined guidelines or secure
central government approval in setting tax rates. In India and Pakistan, local governments have some
formal discretion over setting local tax rates but are generally subject to strong state and provincial
revenue regulations and oversight.

Local governments generally do not tap into all of their tax bases as prescribed by law. The reasons
include weak administrative capacity, service delivery breakdowns, o     ­ utdated registers, rigid and
ambiguous laws, limited private sector involvement, and complex governance setups and political
­
economies. Very few local governments have robust revenue-enhancement plans and programs,
while the ones that do have very weak political and bureaucratic support for implementing them.
Urban local governments, regardless of their size and economic significance, must develop and
exploit practical options for own-revenue mobilization, for more effective use of transfers, and where
appropriate, for borrowing to finance infrastructure.

Most South Asian countries have some type of formula-allocated, unconditional transfers from
central to urban local governments, ranging from large allocations in India and Pakistan to much
more modest transfers in Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, and Nepal. However, although the transfers
are officially unconditional, they often come with higher-level rules and “guidance” on use. In
Afghanistan, municipalities do not receive transfers from the central government; instead, block
grants are channeled directly to community development committees that deliver local services,
bypassing the municipalities in the process. Across the region, the key challenge is to design,
implement, and increase the effectiveness of intergovernmental fiscal transfers.




20
LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 21
Accountability

Several accountability mechanisms are in place for many urban local governments. They range
from financial and performance audits to citizen report cards and social audits. These mechanisms
could be an important source of information to be used by higher-level governments and citizens for
monitoring local government performance, particularly governance and service delivery. However,
in practice, their effectiveness varies markedly across the region.

Formal administrative accountability systems generally exist in the region, but many are fairly weak
or little used. The main causes for their infrequent implementation are the fragmentation and lack
of clarity in institutional roles and the lack of interjurisdictional cooperation. Nor are the links strong
between development plans, public investment programs, and annual budgets.

All countries in the region have some type of audit mechanism led by a national audit institution,
in many cases with a mandate for auditing both local and higher-tier ­governments. In Bangladesh,
                                                      ­ overnments. However, even though the audits
private auditors support the center in auditing local g
are legally mandated, poorly performing local governments continue to receive transfers without
penalty. Poor enforcement mechanisms, weak capacity, and political interference impair the
responses to audit findings.

Bridging the accountability deficit will require the development of better systems and practices and
building the capacity of both government (at all levels) and citizens. Accomplishing these tasks
means nurturing the social contract between citizens and local governments and clarifying fiscal
relations between local governments and higher tiers of government. In addition, local elections
need to be transparent and sufficiently competitive to give voters meaningful choices. Nonelectoral
mechanisms—input-oriented processes, such as participatory planning and budgeting, and feedback
mechanisms, such as complaint bureaus and report cards—can be highly productive if well designed
and appropriately implemented. But they require building the capacity of citizens to use them.




22
LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 23
             ADDITIONAL
             AREAS FOR
             POLICY ACTION
     Three additional, and
     interrelated, areas for policy
     action are instrumental
     to addressing congestion
     constraints and facilitating
     the further leveraging of
     urbanization for improved
     prosperity and livability—­
     connectivity and planning,
     land and housing, and
     resilience to disaster and the
     effects of climate change.




24
       Connectivity and Planning

For South Asian cities to realize their potential and transform themselves into prosperous
and livable centers, they must not only manage the frequently rapid expansion on their
peripheries; they must also address existing and future challenges at their cores, which
often have largely locked-in spatial structures, contributing to heavy traffic congestion and
congestion in land and housing markets. At the national level, how cities are connected as
a system through flows of goods, labor, and ideas is important. Market forces interact with
public policy decisions regarding both the placement of infrastructure and the ways cities
are planned to influence both congestion forces and the evolution of cities.

To bolster opportunities for prosperous and livable cities, planners and government decision
makers can focus on four strategies. The first is to invest in strengthening transport links
that improve connectivity between urban areas—between large and secondary cities,
and secondary cities and towns. Strengthening these links can facilitate the efficient
deconcentration of land and capital-intensive industries from more to less congested
cities and allow different urban areas to become more specialized in what they produce.
Better transport links will lead to the development of more efficient systems of cities.
Complementing this, investments in improved intracity connectivity and traffic management
can enhance mobility within urban areas and ease problems of traffic congestion.

The second strategy is to adopt forward-looking planning approaches to guide expansion
where it is most rapid—on city ­   peripheries. Urban growth projections will have to be
­
continually updated to better respond to l  ­onger-term needs and to safeguard space for
future development. This strategy will reduce the messiness of urbanization, prevent the
locking in of undesirable spatial forms, and facilitate the future provision of infrastructure
and basic urban services.

As a complement, the third strategy is to unlock the potential of city cores, rejuvenating
those in decline. Revitalizing city cores will require investing in better-quality public urban
spaces to enhance pedestrian walkability and livability. It will also require promoting better
management of developable land in city cores through effective land-assembly mechanisms,
freeing up publicly owned land, and repurposing structures for appropriate uses.

Fourth, to facilitate the formation of more vibrant neighborhoods, granular spatial planning
approaches can permit greater v    ­ ariation in land uses and development i­ntensities. Such
planning should be dynamic and flexible, allowing land uses to adapt to changes in market
demand in a framework that takes a long-term view of a city’s d     ­ evelopment. This effort
should be supported by strengthening the capacity of city planners and local governments
to plan, implement, and enforce development to deliver integrated, coordinated, and smarter
planning policies.




                                                  LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 25
 A      Land and Housing

Highly congested land and housing markets are exacerbating South Asia’s affordable housing
crisis and undermining the livability of the region’s cities. A shortage of affordable housing already
contributes to messy urbanization, with at least 130 million people living in slums. Furthermore, it is
not just the poor, but also many middle-income households, that lack access to affordable housing.
Without fundamental reform, the crisis will only get worse—a further 203 million housing units will
be required between 2010 and 2050 to meet the projected growth in urban population.

To turn back the tide of proliferating slums, South Asian cities must embark on land and housing
reforms and foster innovative housing finance. City and suburban governments need to go beyond
slum upgrading and embrace measures to stimulate the supply of affordable housing and offer
more options to both low- and middle-income households. The supply of affordable housing can
be increased over time through more permissive land-use and development regulations. Also
needed are infrastructure to open up land for residential development, easy-to-use land titling
and registration systems, and greater access to construction and mortgage finance. In addition,
government regulations need to be revised to foster the provision of more affordable rental housing.

Making land management more effective will require cities to enhance their capacity to guide urban
development and provide a framework for planning infrastructure investments that can make them
livable and inclusive. One aspect of land management is making land available for development.
Across South Asian cities, government agencies own vast tracks of prime land, which are typically
mismanaged and inadvertently constrain the urban land supply.

South Asia’s cities desperately need efficient land tenure and ownership record ­     systems. The lack of
such systems is preventing private residential development in South Asian countries from reaching
sufficient scale to accommodate urbanization. Except in Nepal, land titling in South Asia is inefficient
and expensive, encouraging many households to avoid formal processes, particularly when the
risk of eviction or sanctions is limited. Faced with this situation, private developers are reluctant to
acquire and assemble multiple parcels of land for residential development because they are unsure
of the security of title. Financial institutions, likewise, are reluctant to finance land development or
to accept land as collateral. South Asia can learn, based on the experience of other regions, how to
make land tenure and titling procedures more efficient, accurate, and transparent, and thus easier
to navigate.

Improving access to affordable land and housing will require significant investments in sustainable
and affordable models of finance to provide sufficient funds for building, operating, and maintaining
infrastructure. Housing markets fail when developers (­   private and public) cannot recover costs
because of the lack of financial instruments. Innovative approaches to address infrastructure
provision should therefore include the assessment and overhaul of existing policies and tools to
enable infrastructure financing through, for example, strategic disposition of publicly held land,
betterment levies, developer exactions, impact fees, and public-­ private partnerships.




26
ADDITIONAL HOUSING
UNITS WILL BE
REQUIRED BETWEEN
2010 AND 2050 TO MEET
THE PROJECTED GROWTH
IN URBAN POPULATION


                   27
 A     Resilience to Disasters and Climate Change

By concentrating people and property in risk-prone areas, such as deltas, floodplains, coasts, and the
Himalayan belt, urban population growth and economic development have increased the exposure
of people, property, and structures to natural hazards. Some 80 percent of major South Asian cities
are exposed to floods, with about 45 percent of urbanized locales lying in flood-prone areas and
14 percent in extremely flood-prone areas. Cities in Afghanistan, Pakistan, Nepal, and northern India
that lie along the Himalayan range are at risk of earthquakes; many cities in Pakistan and northern
India are also at risk of heavy inland flooding.

The first step in developing a resilience strategy is to accurately identify and quantify the national,
subnational, and city risks. Governments at all levels should conduct risk assessments to define
the potential risks and the characteristics (such as frequency and severity) of potential hazards and
to identify the vulnerabilities of communities and the potential exposures to given hazards. A risk-
assessment framework can also guide governments in prioritizing measures for risk management,
giving due consideration to the probability and impact of potential events, the cost-effectiveness
of preventive measures, and the availability of resources. The next step would be to build a
national georeferenced hazard exposure database, which would include public and private assets.
Such information is critical to facilitating the insurance industry in its offering of affordable property
catastrophe insurance products.

With the help of urban planners, engineers, and academics, cities should revisit the design and
enforcement of building codes and land-use plans to avoid further building in risk-prone areas and
to reinforce structures so they are resilient to various hazards. As South Asia further develops its
construction industry, its cities can prevent substandard structures from being built and substandard
construction practices from being used. City leaders can use various policy tools and incentives to
enforce building codes, which may mean extra costs for the government but will be an investment
that can mitigate the costs associated with the aftermath of disasters.

As South Asia addresses its infrastructure deficit, and in so doing relieves congestion pressures,
city leaders must be cognizant of future risks and hazards and ensure that new infrastructure is not
built in hazard-prone areas and does not expose communities to additional risks. And in building
                                                   critical infrastructure that is subject to higher-than-
infrastructure, they need to identify and plan for ­
usual “margins of safety” (the extra strength that engineers build into designs).

National disaster risk-financing frameworks need to be developed based on risk layering to match
risks with appropriate financing instruments. Such frameworks will help urban areas cope with
disasters. But to reduce the financial risk of disasters even more, cities can develop risk-insurance
frameworks independently and under a national umbrella. The most extensive current risk financing
in the region is in Sri Lanka, which has a contingent credit line that provides immediate liquidity to
the country should it declare a state of emergency after a natural disaster strikes.




28
LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 29
30
MOVING FORWARD:
LEVERAGING URBANIZATION
FOR GREATER PROSPERITY AND
LIVABILITY
South Asia has so far struggled to make the most of its urbanization. Difficulties in dealing with the
congestion forces brought about by the pressure of population on land, housing, infrastructure,
basic services, and the environment lie at the heart of the relative lack of its cities’ livability. By
fostering messy and hidden urbanization, those forces are also constraining the potential of powerful
agglomeration economies to bring about faster improvements in prosperity.

Looking ahead, South Asia’s policy makers face a choice between two paths. The first is to continue
with the same policies that have allowed congestion pressures in urban areas to mount faster than
might have otherwise been the case, thus undermining the exploitation of agglomeration economies.
This path would leave South Asia on its current trajectory of underleveraged urbanization, structural
change, and development—locking in the worst of the region’s urban problems and risks.

The second path is to undertake difficult and appropriate policy reforms to alleviate both current and
future congestion pressures and to facilitate the exploitation of agglomeration economies, thereby
enabling the tremendous untapped potential of its cities to be realized. This path will significantly
improve the likelihood that South Asia’s development trajectory will follow that of other countries
that have successfully transitioned to upper-middle and high incomes. It will not be easy. But it is
essential to making the region’s cities prosperous and livable.


NOTES:                                                            IMAGE CREDITS BY PAGE:
1
 GDP per capita is measured in 2011 constant international        Cover: Barjor Mehta
dollars using purchasing-power-parity exchange rates.             4-5, 7 Top Left, 10-11, 27 Top Left:
2
 These include benefits arising from, for example, the            Melissa Hollingsworth
spillover of ideas and knowledge between firms and
workers, the better matching of firms and workers that tends      14, 20, 24-25: Jon Kher Kaw
to occur in dense urban labor markets, and the existence of       17 Top Left: Vadim Timoshkin. Untitled. 05 July 2014 via
dense networks of local suppliers of intermediate inputs.         Flickr, CC BY 2.0. Image cropped.
3
    Data on urban poverty are not available for Maldives.         17 Top Right: Matteo De Felice., “Bike & Taxi, A Times
4
 This designation is according to data on annual mean             Square.” 23 May 2009 via Flickr, CC BY-NC-SA 2.0. Image
concentrations of particulate matter with a diameter of less      cropped.
than 2.5 microns (that is, PM2.5) from the World Health           17 Bottom: Thomas Sennett
Organization’s “Ambient (­  outdoor) air pollution in cities      18-19, 22, 30: Ming Zhang
database 2014” (http://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/
outdoorair​/­databases/cities/en/).                               29: Ignacio M. Urrutia
5
 Data reused by permission of The Economist Intelligence          Other pictures came from the World Bank’s
Unit. Further permission required for reuse.                      Flicker and Picasa accounts and be accessed
                                                                  at: https://www.flickr.com/photos/worldbank/
6
 In situ urbanization is urbanization that is driven by natural   sets/72157616621277375; https://plus.google.com/
population growth, by the reclassification of a settlement        photos/104038058230391750476?banner=pwa
from rural to urban, or both. Such urbanization differs from
that driven by net rural-urban migration.
                                                                  RESEARCH UNDERLYING THIS REPORT WAS
All maps in this publication have been vetted by the Map          FINANCED IN PART BY:
Design Unit of the World Bank. The boundaries, colors,            Australian Aid
denominations and any other information shown on these
                                                                  Norwegian Contribution to the Multi-Donor Trust Fund for
maps do not imply, on the part of the World Bank Group,
                                                                  Sustainable Development
any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
endorsements or acceptance of such boundaries.                    Government of Korea

Graphic Design: Allied Design and Urbanism, LLC                   LEVERAGING URBANIZATION IN SOUTH ASIA | 31
South Asia Development Matters




For more on this study, refer to the full report:

Leveraging Urbanization in South Asia:
Managing Spatial Transformation
for Prosperity and Livability

Available at www.worldbank.org/southasiacities
