                                                                        99760




Transforming Our World –
Aiming for Sustainable Development
Using Independent Evaluation to Transform Aspirations to Achievements
© 2015 InternaƟonal Bank for ReconstrucƟon and
Development/The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staﬀ of The World Bank with
external contribuƟons. The ﬁndings, interpretaƟons, and
conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reﬂect the
views of The World Bank, its Board of ExecuƟve Directors, or the
governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominaƟons,
and other informaƟon shown on any map in this work do not
imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning
the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.


Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The
World Bank encourages disseminaƟon of its knowledge, this
work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full aƩ ribuƟon to this
work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights,
should be addressed to World Bank PublicaƟons, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA;
fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.

Cover Photo: ©Arthimedes/ShuƩ erstock
Introduction

Background

2015: A Key Milestone between 2000 and 2030. The year 2015 is pivotal in international development. In the
lead-up to 2000, the global community came together at various conferences to agree on, for the first time in
known history, shared development goals. The eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) set 18 targets
that were aimed at significantly reducing disease, illiteracy, gender inequality, hunger, and poverty, and
improving access to water and sanitation by 2015. Leading up to this point where the era of the MDGs
concludes, progress has been monitored and discussions started well ahead of this momentous year to define
and meet the more ambitious Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), building on and bringing to fruition
what has been started under the MDG agenda.

From MDGs to SDGs: How Far Have We Come? Much progress has been made toward achieving the MDGs.
The world reached the poverty reduction target five years ahead of schedule, and progress has been reported
in a number of other areas. However, considerable challenges remain: even while declaring success on
MDG1, roughly a billion people remained in poverty. A large number of MDG targets will not be met by the
end of 2015 (figure 1), and progress remains uneven among the different countries. Moreover, new
challenges to progress are emerging deriving from natural and manmade calamities.


 Figure 1. Progress Toward Achieving the MDGs (percent)

 100

  80

  60

  40

  20

    0
        Poverty    Hunger    Primary Gender        Infant  Under-5 Maternal      Water    Sanitation   Slums
                            education parity      motality mortality mortality


Source: World Bank and International Monetary Fund, 2014.
Note: Data shows progress toward meeting some MDG targets; 100% = target met.



Time for a Historic Shift? The new sustainable development agenda has made two significant shifts. First, the
broad-based consultation process has generated goals that have much greater ownership by a global
community, a group that is much wider and deeper than at any time before. It brings together not only
development practitioners, donors and recipient governments, but also actors from civil society,
beneficiaries, private sector, and new organizations that are forming and transforming the development
landscape. Second, the SDGs are global goals, not just to be attained by so-called “developing” or partner
countries, but by all countries around the world. As is obvious from the related Conference of Parties (COP)21



1|T r a n s f o r m i n g O u r W o r l d – A i m i n g f o r S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m e n t
process, sustainability is everyone’s business and so is sustainable development. This shift has implications
for the relationship between countries and actors within countries and across boundaries. The vision that the
United Nations (UN) General Assembly sets out to endorse in September is ambitious and aspires to
transform the world.

More Players, More Goals. The upside of greater ownership has come hand-in-hand with the need to
accommodate many more goals than before: 8 MDGs have become 17 SDGs. They are complex in that they
are interdependent, and in that sense more in tune with the realities of our world, which has always been
complex, but is becoming more so in light of a changing climate and its effects on natural resources and
human competition for them. As the (draft) outcome document of the upcoming UN summit suggests:
“[t]hey are integrated and indivisible and balance the three dimensions of sustainable development: the
economic, social, and environmental.” The document goes on to say that the “Goals and targets will stimulate
action over the next 15 years in areas of critical importance for humanity and the planet.” These areas are
people, planet, prosperity, peace, and partnership.

Who Contributes What? The MDGs and forthcoming SDGs define goals and targets, which lend themselves to
evaluation. However, there are several obstacles to evaluation, including the evaluability of the goals and
targets themselves. In addition, trying to determine the contributions of a single development institution to
these goals is hampered by the broad development agenda the MDGs and SDGs set out. There is a broad
range of potential interventions and multitudes of agents who can work towards the goals. Deciphering
which agent contributed what to the achievement of specific goals is hard, if not impossible. Concepts of
mutual accountability have been discussed as part of the development effectiveness discussions from Paris to
Busan, but have not achieved a satisfactory conclusion.


Shaping a Global Agenda: The World Bank Group’s Engagement

The Role of the World Bank in Developing the MDG Indicators. In May 1997, the World Bank, the UN, and
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) sponsored a seminar for Development
Assistance Committee (DAC) members and development partners to review the concepts, methodologies,
and data issues in development indicators. Pulling the various declarations at the UN summits into a coherent
framework, they produced a synthesis report that articulated seven International Development Goals (IDGs)
with 21 indicators. In 2001, the World Bank hosted a seminar on the IDGs, “From Consensus to Action:
Making Cooperation on the Goals More Effective,” which was attended by key agencies to reconcile the IDGs
with the goals in the Millennium Declaration. This led to the emergence of a unique set of goals, targets, and
indicators—the MDGs—that could be quantified and for which there were reasonable data.

Alignment of SDGs and World Bank Group’s Goals. The World Bank Group’s twin goals, adopted in 2013, of
eradicating poverty and boosting shared prosperity are mirrored in the SDGs, in particular in SDGs 1 and 8.
Although the World Bank Group has not spelled out goals in the many areas relevant to the SDGs, it
effectively has worked in most, if not all, domains of the new development agenda. It had been an important
partner, providing intellectual leadership and knowledge work, at conferences during the 1990s that
eventually resulted in the MDGs. But, already from the beginning, the World Bank Group pursued a more
comprehensive approach to poverty reduction than the MDGs by combining private sector–led growth with
empowering the poor to participate in development—the twin pillars of World Bank Group strategies since
2000. The World Bank Group has made explicit commitments to support the 2030 agenda.




                                                                F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t |2
Measuring Progress—Learning for the Future

Seeing the Agenda Through. The MDGs were unique in that they were setting for the first time commonly
agreed goals and measurable targets. The SDGs follow the same with some 169 targets that describe what
success looks like by 2030. In addition, the UN General Assembly’s outcome document contacts provisions
for follow-up and review to ensure progress is tracked, reported transparently, and evaluated rigorously
and based on evidence. This commitment is accompanied with a call for developing in-country capacities
for data systems and evaluation. In line with this commitment to learning from the past and taking
corrective actions when necessary, this synthesis paper presents findings from independent evaluations of
the World Bank Group.

Insights from the Past. As it is doing for the other key events of 2015—Financing for Development in Addis
and COP21 in Paris (forthcoming)—the Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) presents here findings from
evaluations it has undertaken over the past years. This paper draws heavily on IEG’s 2014 Results and
Performance report to:

        Draw out lessons from World Bank Group engagement with the MDGs and what they mean for
         engaging with the SDGs, bringing together global goals with institutional agendas;
        Showcase World Bank Group experience in the education, health, and water and sanitation sectors,
         specifically related to the MDGs;
        Share select lessons from evaluations that speak to specific SDGs, reviewing experience that has
         preceded the adoption of the new goals but are drawn from relevant sectors.

These insights are presented to help decision-makers and development practitioners build on past successes
and avoid preventable mistakes. Additional evaluations are planned over the coming years under IEG’s work
program in three Strategic Engagement Areas, designed to address the World Bank Group’s twin goals.


Meshing Global Goals with Institutional Agendas
This section reviews how the World Bank Group as an institution engaged with the MDGs, both contributing
to shaping them and incorporating them into institutional commitments, country strategies, and operational
programs.

During the 1990s, World Bank Group strategies had incorporated the issues embodied in the MDGs. The
World Bank Group formally endorsed the MDGs in the 2001 Strategic Framework Paper and found the MDGs
to be a useful results-based framework for assessing development impact and to provide a context for
coordination among donors and for engagement with countries. However, the strategy emphasized that
meeting the MDGs was a joint responsibility within the international community and expressed concern
about the time frames. The World Bank Group’s approach to supporting the MDGs was to strengthen its
country focus by using the comprehensive development framework on the one hand, and pursuing private
sector-led growth strategies on the other.




3|T r a n s f o r m i n g O u r W o r l d – A i m i n g f o r S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m e n t
Providing Intellectual Underpinning to Development
Thinking

The World Bank’s analytical work has influenced global development                                              Getting at
thinking, as well as its own strategies and results agenda. The World                                           Poverty: Data
Development Report 1990: Poverty was instrumental for deepening                                                 and Diagnostics
the development community's understanding of poverty reduction
as a core underpinning of any development effort. Since 2000
several flagship publications, such as World Development Report              IEG’s 2015 evaluation, The Poverty Focus of Country
2004: Making Services Work for the Poor, advanced the thinking on            Programs: Lessons from World Bank Experience
achieving the MDGs and significantly influenced the World Bank               reviewed how the World Bank had developed and
Group’s corporate and sector strategies.                                     used data and analytical capacity to better understand
                                                                             country-specific causes of poverty, and how such
                                                                             analyses were translated into country strategies,
Drawing on its strong statistical expertise, the World Bank played a         operational programs, and learning from experience.
key role in defining the IDGs in the late 1990s and the MDGs in 2001,
                                                                             Data. Data is the foundation for understanding the
and pushed forward the Managing for Development Results agenda
                                                                             causes of poverty and informing solutions: it is “the
through a series of international roundtables on the use of                  lifeblood of decision making”. The evaluation found
quantitative, time-bound indicators for measuring development                excellence in the Bank’s core work on developing
impact. Starting in 2004 the World Bank and the International                internationally comparable poverty data, but also
Monetary Fund produced the annual Global Monitoring Report,                  identified major challenges. There remain significant
                                                                             shortcomings in the consistency, quality, and
which complemented the UN MDG reports by providing analysis of
                                                                             timeliness of the data. Lack of data transparency,
the policies and actions needed for achieving the MDGs and related           inadequate resources, and in some instances,
development outcomes.                                                        restricted access to country data inhibit the Bank from
                                                                             completely fulfilling its global role in generating robust
One such source of results data are impact evaluation (IE). The              and standardized information on poverty.
production of IEs in the World Bank Group grew rapidly during FY02–          Diagnostics. Diagnostics depend on quality data.
14, as shown in IEG’s evaluation of IEs. Recognizing the role of IEs in      Unsurprisingly, when data are not timely or robust, the
furthering the knowledge agenda, the World Bank in 2005 created              quality of diagnostic work suffers. Overall, the
the Development Impact Evaluation Initiative, a global program               evaluation confirmed the generally high quality of the
                                                                             Bank's diagnostic work, but found a need for greater
hosted by the Development Research Group to help guide policy
                                                                             actionability of the recommendations to help guide
choices and improve results. Through the Spanish (now Strategic)             policy. Country context, including ethnic and regional
Impact Evaluation Trust Fund, there has been a more systematic               differences, and factors such as social exclusion and
approach to identifying and financing IEs, notably in the human              the political economy, are critical for getting at the
development network. IEG reviews of IEs for some MDGs—                       root causes of poverty. Making sure diagnostic work
                                                                             addresses these issues and is picked up in public
maternal and child health, nutrition, and water and sanitation—
                                                                             debate and policy-making helps ensure that decision-
identified lessons about what works and what is needed to expand             makers can make informed choices about the poverty
knowledge about the impact of MDG interventions and programs,                implications of policies and programs they adopt.
as summarized in the second chapter of this paper. However, the
                                                                             Learning. Learning from project experience is
2012 IEG evaluation found that the feedback loop between IE
                                                                             important for strengthening project outcomes. Robust
production and World Bank project operations and learning has                monitoring and evaluation systems, and feedback
been modest, and recommended improved integration of IEs into                loops to improve project design and country
the design and review of projects to sharpen their results focus.            strategies, are key instruments for learning. The report
                                                                             identified significant shortcomings in the design and
                                                                             use of these instruments, by the Bank and borrowers,
The World Bank’s knowledge work played an important and growing              to learn from experience and improve outcomes.
role in supporting the MDGs. In line with the World Bank’s corporate
strategies, MDG-related analytical and technical assistance work



                                                                  F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t |4
grew in both absolute terms (by expenditure and by number) and as a share of total knowledge work
delivered (figure 2). In particular, non-lending technical assistance, which was used to help improve client
capacity to design and implement reforms and development programs, expanded rapidly.


 Figure 2. MDG-Related Knowledge Work

                                                                                   b. Composition of MDG-related
              a. MDG-related knowledge work in total (percent)                     AAA (percent)
   100                                                                                       FY90–01    FY02–14

    80                                                                             MDG 1           2         10
                                                                                   MDG 2          12           3
    60
                                                                                   MDG 3          14           8
    40                                                                             MDG 4           0           1
    20                                                                             MDG 5           0           1
                                                                                   MDG 6           2           3
     0
         FY00–04      FY05–09       FY10–14    FY00–04         FY05–09   FY10–14   MDG 7          22         23
                   By Expenditure                         By Number                MDG 8          48         51
                                                                                   Total         100        100
                            Studies     Technical assistance




Embedding the MDGs into Country Strategies

World Bank Group country strategies are designed to link its institutional priorities with the clients’ own
priorities. The 2002 Monterrey Consensus stated up front that “each country has primary responsibility for its
own economic and social development.” In endorsing the MDGs, the World Bank Group emphasized the
primacy of country ownership and stepped up the country focus in the implementation of its strategies. This
heightened country focus was supported by organizational changes initiated in the late 1990s, which included
decentralization and matrix management. IEG’s 2012 evaluation The Matrix System at Work found “[t]he
World Bank’s country-based model increased client responsiveness by using the Poverty Reduction Strategy
Paper (PRSP) as a key country instrument (in International Development Association (IDA) countries) and
country budgetary actions under the Heavily Indebted Poor Country Initiative and the subsequent
Multilateral Debt Reduction Initiative as sources of funding for the social sectors. In Bangladesh, for example,
the entry points for World Bank engagement were largely to align the Country Partnership Strategy objectives
with the national goals outlined in the PRSPs, which also formed the basis for collaboration among
development partners that led to major sector-wide approaches in health and education.




5|T r a n s f o r m i n g O u r W o r l d – A i m i n g f o r S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m e n t
Under the World Bank’s country-based operational model, the
MDG themes were incorporated substantially into country
programs. In the nine countries reviewed for the Results and
Performance report, MDG-related issues were important
components of World Bank Group country strategies, even
before the introduction of the MDGs. Although the term “MDG”
was rarely used (either spelled out or as an acronym), nearly 80
percent of the strategic pillars supported specific MDGs. Virtually
all country strategies included objectives in education and health
areas, and environmental sustainability also received considerable
attention. In this regard, there were no significant changes in the
country strategies after adoption of the MDGs since the country
strategies were already well attuned to MDG priorities. There
were, however, some examples where the MDGs figured                        Getting to Poverty: Country Strategies
prominently in the strategy formulation, such as the Yemen FY03–
05 Country Assistance Strategy, where the World Bank stepped in
                                                                           IEG’s 2015 evaluation, The Poverty Focus of Country
to address MDG targets that the country was not expected to meet           Programs: Lessons from World Bank Experience
(for example, basic education and gender disparity).                       reviewed how the World Bank had used its data and
                                                                           analytical capacity to generate a better understanding
The MDGs had a modest impact on the choice of indicators for               of country-specific causes of poverty, and how such
results monitoring in World Bank Group country strategies. In the          analyses were translated into country strategies and
40 country strategies prepared between FY97–14 for the nine                operational programs.
countries, the use of MDG-related indicators in the results matrices       Country Strategies. The World Bank’s country strategies
remained stable between 35 and 38 percent of all indicators for            (Country Partnership Frameworks) are determined
measuring achievement of the objectives. This is consistent with           through discussion with governments, who ultimately
the finding that the World Bank’s overall MDG-related                      set the priorities. In countries with high levels of
commitments stayed at about 40 percent of all commitments                  commitment to poverty eradication, World Bank
during FY90–14. For MDG-related objectives, formal MDG                     country strategies did a good job at translating
indicators continued to be less frequently used than indicators that       diagnostics into strategic choices. Where countries have
                                                                           not prioritized poverty eradication, the Bank faces
addressed some aspects of an MDG objective; even so, there was a
                                                                           tensions between engaging with government priorities
modest increase in the use of formal MDG indicators from 11 to 15
                                                                           versus meeting corporate goals for focusing on poverty
percent between FY01–05 and FY10–14. This suggests a gradual               reduction.
uptake of internationally adopted indicators, where appropriate,
for measuring the results of World Bank country strategies.                Strategy Implementation. The evaluation found most
                                                                           operational programs to be aligned with priorities for
                                                                           poverty reduction set out in strategies. Not
Subject to individual country context, World Bank Group country
                                                                           infrequently, adjustments were made to programs
strategies had varying degrees of MDG focus. Measured by the use           either for legitimate reasons (such as adjusting to
of MDG-related indicators in the results frameworks, the World             shocks, capacity constraints, political change), or if
Bank Group focused more on MDG issues in the two fragile and               government commitment to poverty reduction falters.
conflict-affected states (FCSs) than the low-income countries (LICs)       If commitment changes, high-quality, timely diagnostics
and middle-income countries (MICs) in the sample (figure 3).               and technical assistance can be used to identify entry
Significant variability existed among the three MICs: in Indonesia,        points and lay the groundwork for engagement when
MDG issues figured prominently in the World Bank Group program             opportunities for greater impact on poverty arise.
prior to the adoption of the MDGs, and this emphasis was
maintained (though at a lower level) afterward; in Tunisia, the
relatively strong MDG focus eroded as time passed, with the most
recent country strategy addressing mainly macroeconomic and



                                                                 F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t |6
private sector development issues; and in Brazil, attention to the MDGs grew rapidly from a low starting point
to make the Brazil program one of the most MDG-intensive in the sample. By contrast, the World Bank
Group’s country strategy for Malawi focused on the MDGs as well as growth (agricultural productivity,
business environment, and infrastructure) and governance (macroeconomic management, public financial
management and accountability) issues. There is no evidence that the World Bank Group considered the
MDGs to be less relevant for FCSs or MICs from this sample.


 Figure 3. MDG-Related Indicators in Nine Country Strategies, FY97–14 (percent)

 100

   80

   60

   40

   20

    0
           Nepal         Yemen   Bangladesh     Georgia         Malawi    Nigeria    Brazil    Indonesia     Tunisia
                   FCS                                    LIC                                     MIC

                                      FY97–00      FY01–04          FY05–09    FY10–14


Source: IEG based on World Bank Group Country Assistance/Partnership Strategies and Interim Strategy Notes.
Notes: Early CPSs Country Partnership Strategies for Nigeria did not have results frameworks; therefore no outcome
indicators were defined. FCS = fragile and conflict-affected states; LIC = low-income country; MIC = middle-income country.




World Bank support for the MDGs in the nine countries was followed up through lending (including trust
funded projects) and knowledge support (figure 4). The three MICs had a higher proportion of MDG-related
lending (42 percent on average) than the LICs (36 percent) and FCSs (34 percent) in the 1990s, and this gap in
MDG focus widened after the introduction of the MDGs. To a large extent, this reflects the MICs’ choice to
work with the World Bank on MDG-related issues. In Brazil, for example, the World Bank strongly supported
MDG 7 throughout the period, as well as objectives in poverty, education, maternal and child health, and
communicable diseases. However, in Nepal, one of the poorest countries in the sample, the MDGs were
highlighted in World Bank Group strategies, but much of the World Bank’s lending program was directed to
transport, energy, and mining. Similarly, the World Bank’s MDG-related knowledge work in the nine countries
was high and increasing—from 63 percent in 2000–04 to 74 percent in 2010–14 (by number), consistent with
the World Bank’s overall trend.




7|T r a n s f o r m i n g O u r W o r l d – A i m i n g f o r S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m e n t
 Figure 4. MDG-Related Lending Commitments in Nine Countries (percent)

 100

  80

  60

  40

  20

    0
          Nepal         Yemen   Bangladesh    Georgia         Malawi    Nigeria      Brazil   Indonesia     Tunisia
                  FCS                                   LIC                                      MIC

                                                   FY90–01       FY02–14


Source: IEG reviews of World Bank Group Country Assistance Strategies, Country Partnership Strategies, and Interim
Strategy Notes.
Note: FCS = fragile and conflict-affected states; LIC = low-income country; MDG = Millennium Development Goal; MIC =
middle-income country.




However, the 2012 IEG evaluation The Matrix System at Work found that the country-based model, while
having improved the World Bank Group’s responsiveness to client needs, made it difficult to integrate sector
and corporate strategies with country strategies. Also, global and regional programs were not well integrated
into World Bank Group country strategies and country programs. The IEG evaluation recommended, among
other things, rebalancing the relationship between the country and sector units to ensure that the country-
focused model is complemented by appropriate attention to global priorities.


Linking Results: The World Bank Group’s Role, Approach, and Expected Contributions

The World Bank Group strengthened its results orientation, and as time passed, its results monitoring
systems and results frameworks used MDG indicators. As part of the institutional effectiveness reforms in the
late 1990s, a new system of performance indicators for client responsiveness and drivers of project outcomes
was introduced and included baselines and time-bound targets. Results-based country strategies were
mainstreamed in 2005, and results based financing is now widely used in many sectors.

But, as IEG found when reviewing the quality of results frameworks in country strategies, “[d]esigning an
effective operational results chain is possibly the most critical and challenging task in developing the results
framework for a country strategy. The results chain is intended to present a logical statement of how planned
World Bank Group interventions will lead to the realization of objectives, beginning with inputs, moving
through activities and outputs, culminating in outcomes, impacts, and feedback. A well designed results chain
identifies risks and makes explicit any underlying assumptions about client (government) or other stakeholder
(e.g., firms, civil society organizations, communities) actions. A clearly constructed, logical results chain is
critical to accountability, mid-course correction, and learning, and is also integral to exercising selectivity. In
IEG’s experience, the operational results chain is often the weakest element in the results frameworks. A



                                                                       F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t |8
common weakness is in the reporting of outcomes where, for example, there can often be very little 
association or linkage between project‐ and higher level outcomes. In the absence of a clear results chain to 
explain why the Bank Group is pursuing any given objective, the results matrix (metrics) is less meaningful, 
making it more difficult to evaluate success or to draw lessons for the future.” 

Many World Bank Group country programs addressed statistical capacity issues. In most of the countries 
reviewed, one or more country strategy documents included dialogues and assistance for statistical capacity 
building, although normally these were not highlighted and not reflected in the objectives or the results 
frameworks. Support was usually provided through small trust‐funded grants (except for a large International 
Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) loan for Indonesia), but was also included as part of 
broader economic management programs. In some cases (Yemen for example), the support for statistical 
capacity building was linked directly to results monitoring under the PRSP and the country strategies; in other 
cases, the support was linked more generally to the need for improved poverty analyses (for example, 
Bangladesh) or improved domestic resource management (Nigeria, for example). Note, however, that the 
World Bank provided the least statistical support in the poorest countries in the sample—no specific project 
in Malawi, and one recent operation each in Nepal and Yemen. 

                                                           The World Bank Group did not have a clearly 
                                                           articulated results chain for the MDGs, nor did it 
                                                           have a systematic process for assessing or 
                                                           evaluating its contribution to MDGs. Given the 
      Feedback Loops are the weakest link in               different views and expectations—both 
      the poverty and development chain.                   externally and internally—on how the Bank 
      Although good at collecting data on 
                                                           Group should address the MDGs, a corporate‐
      poverty and generating insightful poverty 
                                                           level results framework and a robust monitoring 
      diagnostics, these (very similar) capacities 
                                                           and evaluation system for the MDGs would 
      were not applied to monitoring and 
      evaluation. The Poverty Focus of Country             have provided stakeholders and partners with 
      Programs report reiterates observations              better information on the Bank Group’s 
      made in many other evaluations about                 institutional response and contribution to the 
      weaknesses in results frameworks,                    MDGs. Consequently, there was no effective 
      indicators and metrics, and measurement              feedback loop that would enable addressing 
      systems. It also highlights that country and         specific MDG areas that might need special 
      project results frameworks are not well              attention. Identifying intermediate outcomes 
      integrated, and recommends that all Bank             that can be monitored would have helped link 
      projects include baseline data and                   the MDGs to World Bank Group activities. The 
      guidelines for sustained monitoring and              2001 World Bank Group Strategic Framework 
      evaluation. 
                                                           emphasized that intermediate goals should take 
                                                           into account the differences in country and 
                                                           regional conditions and develop realistic 
timeframes. Many World Bank and International Finance Corporation (IFC) projects (both financing and 
knowledge services) contributed to the MDGs, but measuring the impact of these projects based on specific 
MDG indicators focuses on only one facet of the Bank Group’s work; other intermediate outcomes are 
needed to take into account the long‐term nature of the MDGs while clarifying the paths through which the 
Bank Group contributes to the MDGs.  




9 | T r a n s f o r m i n g   O u r   W o r l d   –   A i m i n g   f o r   S u s t a i n a b l e   D e v e l o p m e n t
Engaging Collectively for Achieving the MDGs
This section reflects on how, in partnership, the World Bank engaged with key stakeholders in pursuit of the
MDGs. Evaluation of that experience has yielded lessons that will be valuable going forward.

The SDGs are global goals, not just to be attained by so-called “developing” or partner countries, but by all
countries around the world. As is obvious from the related COP21 process, sustainability is everyone’s business
and so is sustainable development. This shift has implications for the Bank Group’s relationships with a wide
range of stakeholders—for relationships between public and private organizations working in development,
relationships between countries and relationships between actors within countries and across boundaries.

In engaging with the MDGs, the World Bank adopted the principle that it would step back in cases where
other institutions had a clear comparative advantage and would encourage and support leadership roles for
partner organizations. The 2001 World Bank Group Strategic Framework recognized that “the alignment of
the efforts of the development community with the MDGs presented an unprecedented opportunity to
improve effectiveness in poverty reduction.” Applying this principle in the context of other partners’ support
programs for the MDGs, the Bank Group engaged in partnerships at several levels in the pursuit of the MDGs.

Since the adoption of the MDGs, the World Bank Group experienced an increase in MDG-related trust
funds. Between fiscal years 2002 and 2014, a total of $81 billion was channeled through the World Bank
alone (figure 5). The expansion of trust funds, in particular the financial intermediary funds, created
opportunities as well as challenges. Trust fund reforms resulted in the integration of Bank-executed trust
funds and recipient-executed trust funds into regular Bank processes. For the financial intermediary funds,
with all but the Global Environment Facility being established after 2000, and with the expressed objective
to support MDG issues, each had its own governance structure and operating modalities. This made it
challenging to fully integrate and align programs through intermediary funds with World Bank Group
country strategies.


 Figure 5. Trust Funds Support for MDG-Related Sectors, FY02–14


        Bank-executed trust funds:               Recipient-executed trust                  Financial intermediary
               $5.4 billion                        funds: $30.8 billion                      funds: $44.6 billion

                       EDU , 8%                                                                            EDU , 1%

                                  HNP, 11%
                                                              EDU ,
                                                                                                 Others,
                                                               15%
                                                                                                  20%
                                                                      HNP,
                             ENV, 12%                                 14%                 ENV,
                                                                                          13%
               Others, 70%                           Others, 65%                                     HNP, 66%
                                                                             ENV,
                                                                              6%



Source: Operations Policy and Country Services Concessional Financing.
Note: EDU = Education; ENV = Environment; HNP = Health, Nutrition, and Population.




                                                                      F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t | 10
Independent reviews and IEG evaluations identified issues with some partnerships and global programs. IEG,
in its work on partnerships and trust funds, has found four common challenges related to selectivity,
oversight, linkages to country operations, and results frameworks:

        Selectivity: Most donors allocate funds from a fixed envelope for total official aid; trust funds have
         not increased the size of that envelope. As earmarked pots of money with separate approval and
         allocation processes, trust funds tend to increase transaction costs for client countries and for the
         Bank and to impose parallel budgeting and approval processes. That is why the Bank needs to be
         selective in what trust funds and what governing procedures it agrees to.
        Oversight: Evaluations have found weaknesses in governance and transparency in many partnership
         programs, as well as frictions and conflicts of interest from the multiplicity of roles that the Bank
         typically performs in partnerships. Yet The Bank has no routine oversight and tracking of
         partnerships and of how it engages in them.
        Links to country programs: The Bank is uniquely placed to help client countries benefit from global
         programs. However, there are often missed opportunities at the intersection of the Bank’s
         participation in global programs and its country engagements. There are no explicit agreements on
         division of labor between the Bank and some major global health programs.
        Results are often unknown. Although there has been progress in recent years, many of the
         partnerships IEG has reviewed lacked clear goals and indicators. It is often hard to attribute results
         to specific partnerships let alone assess results across the portfolio.

IEG identified seven guiding principles that could enhance evaluation of partnership programs, and with that
their results-focus and accountability:


    What Helps Reforms Succeed?

    1         To improve the authorizing environment, make sure there is a mutually agreed evaluation
              policy. Many partners will have different ideas about evaluation. Agreeing, right from the start,
              what will be evaluated, by whom, when and why is important to ensure evaluations are
              conducted in a timely manner. If it is a self-evaluation, then arrangements for an independent
              validation or review are needed to ensure credibility.

    2         To improve credibility, ensure evaluation independence. How much independence is necessary?
              The answer to that question will vary considerably across multilateral development institutions
              and bilateral donors. Varying standards of independence among partners is often a source of
              confusion and has a direct impact on evaluations of partnership programs. That’s why it is
              important that partners develop a shared understanding about what are the acceptable
              standards for independent evaluation.

    3         Invest time in planning the evaluation. Partnership programs often cover a wide range of
              activities, all of which need to be assessed by the evaluation. Frequently, the partnership
              arrangements themselves, from governance, to funding and staffing issues, will also be
              evaluated. Defining the scope and coverage of the evaluation in clearly defined ways is
              necessary to ensure that partners share expectations, that their most important questions are
              answered, and that adequate resources are allocated for the exercise. The clearer the
              boundaries, the more focused the evaluation will be.




11 | T r a n s f o r m i n g O u r W o r l d – A i m i n g f o r S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m e n t
    4        Choose criteria that fit the purpose. Evaluations of partnership programs use two broad sets of
             criteria: one for the development outcomes of the partnership program itself, and the other for
             its organizational effectiveness to measure how well the partnership is functioning. In assessing
             outcomes, evaluations build on the standard evaluation criteria established by the OECD/DAC in
             1991. For questions of organizational effectiveness, the focus is on governance structures—
             sharing of voice and power on one hand and of financial burdens on the other—and on whether
             the partners are in fact getting what they expected out of the partnership.

    5        Make sure the evaluation is transparent and that key stakeholders are consulted. It’s not enough
             for an evaluation to be properly carried out—if it is to have an impact, its findings need to be
             well received, discussed, and acted upon. Transparency is paramount in this context. If any of
             the partners or stakeholders do not understand the evaluation process or the criteria against
             which activities are evaluated, they may reject the findings, however sensible they may be.
             Consultations with stakeholders—from all different perspectives and interest groups—are
             essential. They will also help to ensure that the findings don’t come as a surprise.

    6        Ensure that recommendations are agreed on and followed-up. As with all evaluations,
             recommendations should derive from findings and conclusions based on evidence. In
             partnership programs, these recommendations might be directed more towards one group than
             another. In general, the wider the scope of these evaluations, the harder it can be to limit the
             recommendations to those that are the highest priority and where their implementation can be
             monitored.

    7        Plan dissemination in advance. Making a difference with an evaluation can also require thinking
             beyond the main stakeholders. Broader sharing of the evaluation’s findings through the Internet
             and various other means is an important aid to learning. Unfortunately, we’ve found that this is
             something that too few of these evaluations do.




MDGs: Education, Health, Water Supply and Sanitation
Different sectors within the World Bank responded to the MDGs differently, reflecting analysis of the World
Bank’s added value in the respective sector. The responses of the education, health, and water and sanitation
sectors to the MDGs were reviewed in the 2014 Results and Performance report as illustrative examples.

Sector Strategies. In education, the World Bank shifted its focus from primary education in the 1990s to a
broader agenda starting in 2005 to include learning outcomes, education and labor market linkages, and
service delivery systems. Given the massive increase in health-related trust funds, the World Bank took a
more focused approach in 2007 by emphasizing health systems strengthening. In water supply and sanitation
(WSS), the World Bank addressed access issues, but emphasized sustainability of sector investments on the
basis of an important lesson from the 1980s where “performance by target” led to pursuing quick results at
the expense of bypassing more difficult reforms.

Commitments. The World Bank’s support for education, health, and water and sanitation increased relative
to overall commitments and became more focused. Primary education focused on IDA countries: average
annual IDA commitments to primary education increased by 26 percent between FY90–01 and FY02–14, but
IBRD commitments declined by 28 percent. Almost half of Health, Nutrition, and Population (HNP)



                                                               F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t | 12
commitments went to strengthening health system performance, although close to 70 percent of the
reproductive health and disease-related (except HIV/AIDS) projects had health system components. In line
with the status of the respective MDG targets—the global water supply target has been met but the
sanitation target is not likely to be achieved—World Bank lending to sanitation increased almost eightfold,
while that to water supply increased by 40 percent.

Country coverage increased in all three sectors (table 1), which had operations in almost all countries in the
Africa Region and FCS. About two-thirds of the countries covered by maternal and child health (MCH) and
sanitation projects were off target, which is consistent with the call to focus on lagging MDGs. Primary
education and water supply had a lower proportion of off-track countries in their portfolios: support to
primary education in the on-target countries focused on quality issues since the World Bank’s past experience
was that global priorities were not the highest priorities in all countries (World Bank 1999). In water supply,
World Bank support sought to address institutional strengthening and capacity building.


 Table 1. Country Coverage in Primary Education, Health, Water, and Sanitation Portfolio,
 FY 02–04
                                        Countries added           Countries covered        Countries off-track
  MDG sectors                                 (number)                    (number)                  (percent)
 Primary education                                     26                        103                           54
 Maternal and child health                             29                          92                          64
 Water                                                 28                        106                           51
 Sanitation                                            30                        107                           66


Source: Business Warehouse.




The World Bank adopted multi-sector approaches in these three sectors. Public administration was the most
prevalent component in primary education and HNP projects. Close to 70 percent of primary education
projects approved during FY02-14 had public administration components, with 22 percent having HNP
components. In HNP, 62 to 82 percent of projects in various sub-sectors supporting different MDGs had
public administration components, with 9 to 27 percent having education components. Although improved
water and sanitation were considered critical to health outcomes, a negligible number of HNP projects had
WSS components. Nonetheless, because 95 percent of the countries with HNP projects also had WSS
projects, the country strategies were seen as the instrument to ensure synergy between HNP and WSS
programs. In the case of WSS, there has been an increase in WSS components in projects managed by other
sector boards, mainly in Urban Development and Environment. Existing evaluation evidence is inconclusive
with regard to the effectiveness of multi-sector approaches in delivering results. More analysis is needed to
fully understand how this approach would help in achieving the MDGs.

Development outcomes for projects in primary education, HNP, and WSS hovered around World Bank
averages, but many faced significant or high risk to development outcomes due to uncertain financial
sustainability and institutional weaknesses (table 2). Addressing the financial sustainability risk would
require greater attention to improving domestic resource mobilization capacity and, more generally,



13 | T r a n s f o r m i n g O u r W o r l d – A i m i n g f o r S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m e n t
establishing stronger linkages between direct MDG support and public sector governance initiatives.
During FY02–14, about half of the World Bank’s non-MDG public sector governance commitments were in
public expenditure and tax policy, and administrative and civil service reform. Although MDG-related
projects included institutional and capacity building components, the effectiveness of these components
would need to be improved.


 Table 2. Risk to Development Outcomes in Primary Education, Health, and Water and Sanitation
 Projects
                                                         Primary
 Risk factors                                          Education               MCH           HIV/AIDS                 WSS
                                                           (N=48)            (N=59)             (N=48)             (N=52)
 Uncertain Financial Sustainability                             29                50                 32                    26
 Institutional/Capacity Weaknesses                              27                22                 36                    33
 Lack of Ownership                                               4                24                  4                     9
 Political/Security Risks                                       11                 7                  9                    15


Source: IEG reviews of the Implementation Completion Reports of relevant projects approved during FY02–14.
Notes: A project may have multiple risk factors. MCH = maternal and child health; WSS = water supply and sanitation. N =
number of projects.



The World Bank Group followed different sectoral approaches to MDG partnerships. Although trust funds
supported all sectors reviewed, there were some notable partnerships that complemented the World Bank’s
MDG efforts. IEG’s 2011 evaluations of trust funds and global and regional partnership programs found that
on specific issues such as primary education and child immunization, trust funds facilitated substantive
coordination of donor funds, but there was no clear evidence that trust fund resources added to global
official development assistance, and that half the partnership programs reviewed faced issues of
sustainability due to ineffective resource mobilization strategies, poor management, or difficulty in
demonstrating results. In response, the World Bank is pursuing reforms of its trust fund activities.

        In education, it relied on the Education for All-Fast Track Initiative to channel donor assistance for
         primary education in low-income countries, with the World Bank managing and supervising the
         projects. This gave space for the World Bank to channel its own resources into support for education
         and labor market linkages and accountability and incentive systems to improve service delivery.
        In health, disbursement from the health sector financial intermediary funds was equivalent to the
         total HNP sector commitments approved during FY02–14. The Global Fund to Fight AIDS,
         Tuberculosis, and Malaria, which was established in 2002 to support the MDGs, disbursed $26.7
         billion during 2002–14, about five times the Bank’s disease-related commitments. The Five Year
         Evaluation of the Global Fund in 2009 found that the external financing of the disease control
         services, although helped to mobilize existing capacity in the affected countries, had stretched the
         countries’ generally weak health systems to their limits. IEG’s review of the Global Fund found that
         country-level stakeholders saw the Global Fund as not well integrated into the donor coordination
         mechanism in the countries.




                                                                     F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t | 14
        In Water Supply and Sanitation, the partnerships focused mainly on advocacy, coordination, and
         knowledge sharing, as with the Sanitation and Water for All partnership. Public-private partnerships
         were viewed as key to scaling up service delivery in WSS. The World Bank and IFC developed various
         forms of engagement with the private sector, and several Bank projects supported private sector
         participation in urban and rural WSS.




15 | T r a n s f o r m i n g O u r W o r l d – A i m i n g f o r S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m e n t
MDG 4 and 5: Mother and Child Mortality

In 2013, IEG released its report, Delivering the Millennium
Development Goals to Reduce Maternal and Child Mortality,
which provided a comprehensive and systematic review of
impact evaluation evidence in this area, looking beyond the
World Bank Group’s experience. The study focused on a first-
tier outcome, namely skilled birth attendance, which at the
time of adopting the MDGs was one of the targets, and higher
level outcomes of mother and child mortality rates. The findings
are relevant to the continued pursuit of the MDGs and SDGs.

Overall, the evidence base on intervention effectiveness is remarkably thin. Even when data from
test settings (with controlled environments) point towards effective solutions, these test results do
not guarantee that the same intervention will work in real-life settings. It is therefore paramount
that the SDG commitment to rigorous data collection, monitoring, evaluation and informed decision-
making be upheld.

In spite of mixed evidence, the review indicates that

      Countries where mortality rates are highest and rates of skilled birth attendance are lowest
       are more likely to be impacted by appropriately designed interventions;
      Where reported, existing impact evaluations indicated that households with a lower socio-
       economic status realized larger benefits from these interventions. Countries with a heavier
       child mortality burden at baseline or fewer births attended by skilled health personnel are
       more likely to see an impact on those outcomes;
      Skilled birth attendance was used as a major intervention in reducing the under-five mortality
       rate, and combined with other interventions, can improve breastfeeding practices and
       increase immunization rates and anthropometrics of children;
      Reductions in maternal mortality are attributable to integrated mother and child health
       interventions that promote skilled birth attendance together with complementary and
       reinforcing strategies. Interventions in non-health sectors were found to consistently and
       substantially lower infant mortality, which calls for greater coordination and collaboration
       across sectors

The reviews suggests bundling health interventions affecting both provision (supply side) and use
(demand side) for both maternal and child mortality, including:

      Formal education and community-based delivery of service packages with interventions
       affecting mothers’ knowledge and information for neonatal mortality
      Energy and air pollution, water and sanitation, education, and governance interventions
       affecting strategy and planning to affect child mortality, especially infant and under-five
       mortality
      Conditional cash transfer or voucher interventions that affect mothers’ ability to pay to
       improve skilled birth attendance rates
      Health worker training in conjunction with providing family services and increasing household
       health knowledge to improve infant mortality

Interventions with longer periods of exposure, which are more likely to report significant effects.




                                                              F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t | 16
New Evaluation Evidence Relevant to Specific SDGs
Although the SDGs will be adopted only in September 2015, many of them have been part of the agenda of
many broad-based development institutions like the World Bank Group for many years. Past experience,
therefore lends itself to draw lessons and ensure progress can be accelerated.

Goals and targets are numerous. Some have been dealt with in the two other papers in this series, namely:

        Financing for Development, which provides insights on public, private, and pooled funding from both
         domestic and international sources, and
        A forthcoming paper for the COP21, which covers all of the climate-related SDGs.

The following offers lessons from evaluations that address specific goals or targets beyond those that have
been discussed in the MDG section above, and includes links to the source documents for additional
insights. These findings are presented in the numerical order of the SDGs (goals and targets) to make cross-
referencing easier.


Target 3.2: Road Safety

Building safer roads has been a pillar of the World Bank Group’s strategy for its transportation sector since
2008. IEG’s Making Roads Safer aims to accelerate progress towards this strategy with lessons drawn from
independent evaluations. With the help of the Global Road Safety Facility, established in 2006 as a global
partnership program, the World Bank has promoted, together with the World Health Organization (WHO),
the “safe systems” approach which integrates road engineering, user behavior, policing, and accident
response into a transportation system. This multifaceted approach calls for:

        In-country coordination across departments and agencies concerned with various dimensions of
         road safety. As the IEG review suggested, this should ideally be done by a body that is adequately
         financed and staffed and is equipped with a rigorous results framework to measure progress.
        Road projects that have not only road safety as their objective, but incorporate specific activities to
         support it, including actions to improve the behavior of road users and to raise their awareness of
         safety issues. Attention still focuses more on completing road works, with safety components of
         projects being addressed too late.
        Road safety funding is often well below the 10 percent standard, recommended by the Commission
         for Global Road Safety. This is also the case for World Bank projects, but with its decision to
         mainstream safety into its budget allocations for road projects, this type of funding is steadily
         increasing.


Target 3.8: Access to Health Services—Health Finance

Providing fair health care for everyone without financial risk means helping countries find effective ways to
fund and sustain quality health systems.

As IEG’s evaluation of World Bank Group Support to Health Financing found, that it is not just poor countries
that struggle to develop health systems that efficiently make use of available resources and provide quality



17 | T r a n s f o r m i n g O u r W o r l d – A i m i n g f o r S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m e n t
care in an equitable way to the entire population. The evaluation points to health financing as a key policy
instrument in meeting this challenge. The way countries finance health care influences how well the service
delivery system performs, including how equitable and efficient it is. Countries decide how to mobilize
revenues from public and private sources for financing health care, how to pool revenues and protect
populations against financial risk, and how to purchase services wisely from health care providers.

IEG found that efforts to improve resource mobilization, pooling, and purchasing for health are more
effective and institutionally sustainable when they are coordinated and linked to broader public sector
reforms. Elements of an integrated approach include compulsory and less-fragmented pooling in insurance
and national health systems as well as strategic purchasing that examines potential adverse effects in a
broader public sector context. Where Bank support to purchasing was combined with other health financing
functions and linked to the public finance context rather than limited to narrowly defined payment methods,
it has been relatively effective.

Results-based financing has become more popular as a means to make health services accessible to all. It
typically involves a cash payment or nonmonetary transfer made to a government, manager, provider, payer,
or consumer of health services after predefined results have been verified. Availability of care increased
where countries moved from line-item budgets to activity- or performance-based payments. But without
measures to reduce user fees and improve risk pooling, results-based financing is unlikely to lead to greater
equity in access to health care services and protection from financial hardship caused by illness.


Target 4.2: Early Childhood Development

Early childhood development is a particularly strong case to illustrate the need for a multisector approach
and spans a number of SDGs, such as target 2.2. on malnutrition in children under 5 years of age, given the
strong association between stunting and subsequent delays in children’s development, and target 4.2., which
focuses on early learning opportunities such as child care or preprimary education for all children by 2030 to
improve primary school readiness. Countries will need implementation support in health, nutrition, social
protection, and education programming to improve children’s development (i.e. physical, cognitive, language,
and socio-emotional).

The 2015 IEG evaluation on World Bank Support to Early Childhood Development noted the need for a
strategic framework and organizational structure to support a coordinated approach within the Bank and
with its partners. The evaluation also suggested that the impact of the World Bank could be increased by
changing its focus on health and survival to include child stimulation and development interventions in
health, nutrition, and social protection. Given the important role that parents play in stimulating their
children’s development, more emphasis is needed to support families within existing programs in health,
nutrition, social protection, and education.

IEG’s Systematic Review of Impact Evaluation Evidence on the Lasting Effects of Early Childhood Interventions
found that stimulation positively impacted children’s development across a range of domains. The review
also noted the need for nutrition interventions to be sustained during the first 1,000 days and beyond to have
lasting impacts.




                                                               F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t | 18
Goal 7: Sustainable Access to Sustainable Energy—Access to Electricity

The World Bank Group has committed to contributing to the Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All) Initiative to
achieve universal access to electricity by 2030. The SE4All challenge is most firmly centered in Sub-Saharan
Africa, where 40 of the 51 “low-access” (less than 50 percent population connected) countries are located.
Achieving the SE4All commitment for low access countries requires a quantum leap from the present pace of
1.6 million connections per year to 14.6 million per year until 2030. The corresponding annual investment
required, including generation needs, is $37 billion.

IEG’s 2015 evaluation, World Bank Group Support to Electricity Access, underscores the scale of the
challenge, and prods the World Bank Group to reposition its role in the sector by going well beyond the
confines of its own direct support of $63.5 billion over a 10-year period. The evaluation finds that the
associated development outcomes were favorable overall. But low-access countries, particularly in Sub-
Saharan Africa, were not particularly well served. Low-access countries received only 22 percent of World
Bank, and 6 percent of IFC lending for the sector.

The report calls for a new and transformative Bank Group strategy to help country clients—one that moves
from a predominantly project-by-project approach to a greater use of a sectorwide organizing framework and
process for mainstreaming the sustained engagement needed to implement rapid access scale-up. To crowd
in much-needed financial resources from both public and private sources, the report calls for a new
investment financing platform that goes beyond the Bank Group’s own conventional project and transaction
modes of operation.


Target 8.2: Innovation

IEG’s 2013 evaluation of World Bank Group Support to Innovation and Entrepreneurship noted the critical
role of innovation in economic growth and the substantial World Bank Group engagement in the area.
Although market and government failures and other bottlenecks impede innovation and entrepreneurship,
developing countries need to build the capacity to find, absorb, and use new technologies and processes as
well as foster entrepreneurs who can take risks, look for finance, and bring new products and processes to
market. The evaluation states that “countries at different stages of development identified five common
principles that can be useful in promoting innovation and entrepreneurship:

        Support public investment in research and development (R&D) that focuses on improving efficiency
         and relevance to end users as well as on strengthening the use of research results in public policy
         decisions;
        Build domestic science, technology, and innovation capabilities to make effective use of global
         knowledge;
        Strengthen linkages between public R&D and private sector users of technology and knowledge;
        Build a strong enabling environment, including effective use of information and communications
         technology; and
        Provide flexible financing arrangements to encourage innovative firms to develop new products,
         processes, and services.”

Although the World Bank Group’s portfolio contains interventions in these areas, a number of client
countries, especially upper middle-income countries like China, Chile, and Brazil have given high priority to


19 | T r a n s f o r m i n g O u r W o r l d – A i m i n g f o r S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m e n t
innovation in their development plans, which then is reflected in countries strategies of the World Bank
Group and its lending portfolio. The evaluation found that interventions may individually be successful, but
they do not automatically foster synergies or an integrated system. Instead, it is essential to—and the Bank
Group has done so—invest in fostering linkages between actors in the innovation system. The examples given
in the evaluation suggest that successful projects linked actors from various domains (research, private,
sector, service providers, government, development partners, etc.) and used a variety of mechanisms,
including competitive grants and business incubators to foster the development of innovation and
entrepreneurship. Being successful in adopting policies that stimulate private investments in innovation, and
making public investment choices that further R&D will require the understanding of the dynamics among
agents to make strategic choices about where and how to intervene.


Target 8.10: Financial Inclusion

Access to financial services has long been believed to lift people out of poverty by allowing them to seize
economic opportunities. Strong progress has been made in the last three years: the number of people
reached by formal financial services increased by 700 million. Yet a substantial credit gap remains, and 2
billion adults do not have access to formal financial services.

IEG’s forthcoming evaluation, Financial Inclusion: A Foothold on the Ladder toward Prosperity?, seeks to
inform both the short-term drive and the longer-term activities concerned with connecting the poor to
financial services that improve their well-being.

The evaluation found that:

        The World Bank Group contributed significantly to progress in financial inclusion. It has reached a
         significant share of the microfinance industry and helped make it more sustainable. Yet it is unclear
         how much of this support reaches actual microenterprises and the poor—as opposed to
         substantially larger businesses, like small- and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
        World Bank Group support to create policy frameworks that allow financial intermediaries to better
         serve the needs of the poor was effective. Yet its approach to identifying and tackling constraints to
         financial inclusion is neither systematic nor comprehensive—of particular concern is areas that
         affect the poor, like mobile banking or rural savings and credit cooperatives.
        Through its global partnerships, the Bank Group has been able to substantially increase its impact in
         advancing financial inclusion; however, partnerships also carry some risks and costs.

Most importantly, the World Bank Group’s strategy on financial inclusion can be strengthened. The Bank
Group’s public commitment to Universal Financial Access by 2020 is likely to yield a push for transaction
accounts. However, high dormancy rates of newly opened accounts raise doubts about whether providing
access through such accounts results in universal inclusion. Instead of focusing on “headline numbers” the
relevant goal may be to provide service to everyone with a productive and beneficial use. Finally, IEG’s
findings point to a need for a more sequenced and evidenced approach as evidence has been growing
showing that financial inclusion has been less effective in fighting poverty than was previously hoped.




                                                                F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t | 20
Target 9.3: Small and Medium Enterprise Development

IEG’s 2014 evaluation The Big Business of Small Enterprises observed that the World Bank Group promotes
SME growth through both systemic and targeted interventions. A critical challenge is to root the many
activities now undertaken in this broad space in a clear understanding of the characteristics and dynamics of
SMEs, their role in the broader economy, and their actual and potential contribution to jobs, growth, and
shared prosperity. A closely related challenge is to formulate clear strategies that connect interventions to
intended outcomes and are accompanied by solid measurement systems that provide evidence of results and
allow learning.

Targeting means focusing benefits on one size class of firms to the exclusion of others. Targeted support for
SMEs is a big business for the World Bank Group, averaging around $3 billion a year in commitments,
expenditures, and gross exposure over the 2006–12 period. In the context of broader reforms, targeted SME
support can be a powerful tool and, given the size of the recent program, it is vital for the World Bank Group
to use it effectively. Targeting SMEs is not an end in itself, but a means to create economies that can employ
more people and create more opportunity for citizens to achieve prosperity. A thriving and growing SME
sector is associated with rapidly growing economies.

As the World Bank Group continues to support SMEs, to help them realize their potential contribution to
developing economies, the IEG evaluation concludes that, to make targeted SME support more effective, the
Bank Group needs to do several things. Targeted support for SMEs needs to be firmly rooted in a clear,
evidence-based understanding of how the proposed support will sustainably remove the problems that
constrain SMEs’ ability to contribute to employment, growth and economic opportunity. This requires a
tailored research agenda to support and assist these clarifications and refinements of its SME support
approach, using the best qualified researchers. Likewise, interventions that make it their objective to assist
SMEs should be designed in ways that they define and justify the specification of the beneficiary group,
provide specific targeting mechanisms, and include impact indicators in their results and monitoring and
evaluation frameworks. Finally, the Multilateral Investment Guaranty Agency’s (MIGA) Small Investment
Program should undergo a radical change in approach to providing guarantees for investments in SMEs,
considering either a merger with its regular program or a fundamental redesign to improve performance.


Learning from the Previous for the Next 15 Years
Translating global goals to sustainable national programs remains a key challenge in the post-2015 era. In
particular, it will require ensuring country ownership and leadership that is combined with the best advice
and solutions from a global perspective so that countries can learn from each other and together achieve the
more challenging SDGs. For development finance institutions like the World Bank Group it requires balancing
its global mandate with its country engagement, both of which the institutions aims to strengthen through
the recent reform process.

The experience with the MDGs highlights the importance of having a country instrument such as the PRSP to
help identify realistic national medium-term targets and programs toward achieving long-term goals and
securing ownership among stakeholders. In this process, there is a need to balance “quick wins” and long-
term sustainability, manage the constructive tension between country focus and issue focus, address
domestic resource mobilization and institutional capacity issues, and build strong partnerships at all levels.




21 | T r a n s f o r m i n g O u r W o r l d – A i m i n g f o r S u s t a i n a b l e D e v e l o p m e n t
To deliver on the twin goals and the post-2015 agenda, the Bank Group would benefit from a clearly
articulated role, approach, and expected contribution to the SDGs, both externally for enhancing partnerships
and internally to facilitate prioritization and synergies. As this paper has shown, the World Bank Group works
actively in many areas relevant to the SDGs—actually many more than covered here— but various
evaluations have pointed to the importance of multi-sector integrated approaches that challenge countries
and their partners to find new ways of working. The challenges that the SDGs aim to address, and the SDGs
themselves, are complex, and solutions will have to be tailored to context, bring together multiple actors, and
benefit from dynamic, constantly adjusted planning and execution that is informed by ongoing monitoring
and evaluation.




                                                               F i n a n c i n g f o r D e v e l o p m e n t | 22
www.ieg.worldbank.org
