Report No. 99777-KG


TRANSITIONING TO BETTER JOBS IN THE
KYRGYZ REPUBLIC:
A JOBS DIAGNOSTIC
September 18, 2015

Poverty Reduction and Economic Management Unit
Europe and Central Asia Region




Document of the World Bank
                           CURRENCY AND EQUIVALENT UNITS
                        (Exchange Rate Effective as of August 3, 2015)

                                 Currency Unit       =   Kyrgyz som (KGS)
                                          US$        =   61.02


                               WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
                                    Metric system


                                       ABBREVIATIONS



CIS    Commonwealth of Independent States           OECD       Organization for Economic Cooperation
                                                               and Development
ILO    International Labor Organization             PER        Public Expenditure Review
IZA    Institute for the Study of Labor             SITC       Standard Industrial Tariff Classification
KER    Kyrgyz Establishment Reporting sample        SOE        State owned enterprises
KIHS   Kyrgyz Integrated Household Survey           TFP        Total Factor Productivity
LFS    Kyrgyz Labor Force Survey                    UN         United Nations
NBKR   Central Bank of the Kyrgyz Republic          VA         Value Added
NACE   European Industrial Activity                 WDI        World Development Indicators
       Classification
NSC    National Statistics Committee of the         WITS       World Integrated Trade Solution
       Kyrgyz Republic
MoF    Ministry of Finance                          W&R        Wholesale and Retail




                      Vice President   :   Cyril E. Muller
                   Country Director    :   Saroj Kumar Jha
                   Country Manager     :   Jean-Michel Happi
                   Practice Director   :   Ana L. Revenga
                   Practice Manager    :   Carolina Sanchez-Paramo
                       Task Leaders    :   Sarosh Sattar (GPVDR)
                                           Jennifer Keller (GMFDR)




                                               ii
                            ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
       This report is part of the Kyrgyz Republic poverty analysis program led by Sarosh Sattar
(Task Team Leader).

         The diagnostic analysis has been led by Jennifer Keller (GMFDR) with Aibek Baibagysh
Uulu (GPVDR). Additional inputs have been contributed by Bill Battaille (GMFDR), Anita Guelfi
(consultant), Larisa Praslova (consultant), and Saida Ismailakhunova and Judy Yang (GPVDR).
The team benefited from advice and contributions of Dino Merotto (Peer Reviewer), Mary
Hallward-Driemeier (Jobs CCSA), Nigel Twose (Jobs CCSA), Bob Rijkers (DECTI), Bakyt
Dubashov, Gallina Andronova Vincelette (Peer Reviewer), Susana Sanchez (GMFDR), Pierella
Paci (GPVDR), Jieun Choi (Peer Reviewer, GTCDR), and Najy Benhassine (Peer Reviewer,
GTCDR). Editing assistance was provided by Robert Zimmermann (consultant). The jobs
diagnostic analysis has been conducted in close coordination with government counterparts, with
earlier PowerPoint presentations and workshops used to support a dialogue on jobs analysis and
the jobs priorities facing the Kyrgyz Republic.

        The team is grateful to the National Statistics Committee for the access to the establishment
financial reporting data, the Kyrgyzstan Integrated Household Survey, and the Kyrgyzstan Labor
Force Survey that were drawn upon for the analysis within. The team is also grateful for
consultations with government officials of the Kyrgyz Republic, primarily with the representatives
of the Ministry of the Economy, Ministry of Labor, and the National Statistics Committee of the
Kyrgyz Republic. Any errors and omissions remain the responsibility of the authors.




                                                 iii
CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY…………………………………………………………………………… V
CHAPTER 1. THE CONTEXT FOR JOBS IN THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC ................... 1
  A. COUNTRY CONDITIONS SHAPING DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES ... 1
  B. LABOR MARKETS IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE TRANSITION ....................................... 5
  C. CONTEXT-SPECIFIC SOLUTIONS FOR JOBS IN THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC ...................... 9
CHAPTER 2. A CHANGING MODEL OF GROWTH AND JOBS .............................. 11
  A. GROWTH RESUMPTION AND POVERTY REDUCTION THROUGH LABOR EXODUS ..... 11
  B. KEY SHIFTS IN EMPLOYMENT ................................................................................ 13
  C. GROWTH, PRODUCTIVITY AND WAGE IMPLICATIONS OF THE MODEL .................... 18
  D. LIMITED DEVELOPMENT OF A FORMAL PRIVATE SECTOR ...................................... 23
  E. IMPLICATIONS OF THE MIGRATION LED DEVELOPMENT MODEL ON SUSTAINABLE,
  PRODUCTIVE JOB GROWTH ........................................................................................... 24
CHAPTER 3. GROWTH, PRODUCTIVITY AND COMPENSATION DYNAMICS
FROM FIRM LEVEL DATA ANALYSIS ...................................................................... 27
  A. A SNAPSHOT OF EMPLOYMENT IN THE FORMAL SECTOR ....................................... 28
  B. A SNAPSHOT OF GROWTH AND EMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES IN FORMAL
  ESTABLISHMENTS.………………………………………………………………… …33
  C. UNDERSTANDING JOB CREATION DYNAMICS IN THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC…………38
  D. IMPLICATIONS OF THE JOBS AND GROWTH DYNAMICS IN THE FORMAL SECTOR ..43
CHAPTER 4. ASSESSING JOBS CHALLENGES AND LEARNING FROM
COMPARATORS............................................................................................................. 52
  A. DUTCH DISEASE..................................................................................................... 54
  B. BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT ....................................................................................... 55
  C. THE CHALLENGES OF GEOGRAPHY .......................................................................... 59
  D. MIGRATION RELATED CHALLENGES ....................................................................... 62
  E. THE MIGRATION SUCCESS STORY “TRAP” .............................................................. 64
APPENDICES .................................................................................................................. 65
  A. NOTES ON DATA AND ANALYSIS AT THE FIRM LEVEL .............................................. 65
  B. REGRESSION ANALYSIS OF NET JOB GROWTH IN FORMAL ESTABLISHMENTS ........... 68
REFERENCES ................................................................................................................. 77




                                                              iv
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

1.       Jobs are a central lens to a country’s economic development. Job outcomes largely
determine the growth of national earnings and are thereby fundamental to improving standards of
living. The ability of an economy to provide good jobs outcomes—to create sufficient jobs for
those seeking work, to generate productive jobs, and to ensure that high-quality jobs are available
to the broad population—is a key measure of a country’s overall development performance.

2.       This report takes an in-depth look at the development of jobs in the Kyrgyz Republic
over the past decade to understand why the country has not realized better job outcomes.
Drawing on evidence at the macro, household, and firm level, it examines key shortcomings in the
current migration-led, remittance-driven development model that have weakened the country’s
ability to create sufficient and high-quality employment opportunities and are likely to result in
deteriorating job outcomes in the future. The report argues that several broad transformations will
be needed to develop engines of growth in the Kyrgyz Republic outside remittances and shift to a
better jobs path. The distortions and obstacles that currently prevent the expansion of private sector
employment need to be unraveled; macroeconomic, regulatory, and logistical impediments to
greater, more diversified export orientation need to be strategically addressed; the compensation of
public employees must be reformed to reduce the level of corruption that discourages business
growth; and the migration phenomenon, which will be a part of the employment mosaic for at least
another decade, must be made to contribute to domestic employment creation and the country’s
development.


A GROWTH RECOVERY BASED ON LABOR EXODUS


3.       Over the first decade of the 2000s, because of the severe lack of jobs and low salaries,
Kyrgyz workers began to move abroad in droves in search of better employment prospects.
The country thus managed to pull itself out of the deep economic collapse following independence
largely through the incomes of these migrants and the remittances they sent back home. Unofficial
estimates of the extent of migration put the number of migrants abroad between 500,000 – 1 million,
or between 9-17 percent of the population. Most are young men (between 15 and 34), where the
deficit in needed domestic jobs was highest. In the span of a decade, the Kyrgyz Republic moved
from a country with virtually no out-migration to one in which remittances accounted for more than
32 percent of gross domestic product (GDP).

4.      Remittances were instrumental in reducing poverty, particularly in the poorest
regions of the country. Poverty, which impacted almost three-quarters of rural areas and over half
of urban households in 2003, had fallen by more than 30 percentage points by the mid-2000s
(Figure 1). For households with a migrant abroad, the receipt of remittances accounted for almost
double the reduction in poverty over the 2008 to 2013 period (with lower levels of domestic
employment and lower domestic wages for those working contributing to some poverty worsening).
Remittance flows not only aided migrant sending families directly, but they financed a boom in
domestic consumption spending that spurred a rebound in domestic job growth, primarily in


                                                  v
services (Figure 2). This allowed initially strong productivity improvements as workers in
agriculture moved to higher-value work in cities and abroad.

                                   Figure 1: Remittances supported                                                            Figure 2: and a shift from agriculture to
                                   significant declines in poverty…                                                          services, facilitating a consumption boom

                                    National poverty rate, by region                                                           Total employment by sector, 2003-
                                              2003-2013                                                                 Employme            2012
                                                                                                                            nt ('000)
                                   80%
      in pecent total population




                                   70%                                                                                  1,200
                                   60%                                                                                  1,000
                                   50%
                                                                                                                            800
                                   40%
                                   30%                                                                                      600
                                   20%                                                                                      400
                                   10%
                                                                                                                            200
                                    0%
                                         2003
                                                2004
                                                       2005
                                                              2006
                                                                     2007
                                                                            2008
                                                                                   2009
                                                                                          2010
                                                                                                 2011
                                                                                                         2012
                                                                                                                2013

                                                                                                                               0



                                                                                                                                    2003
                                                                                                                                           2004
                                                                                                                                                  2005
                                                                                                                                                         2006
                                                                                                                                                                2007
                                                                                                                                                                       2008
                                                                                                                                                                              2009
                                                                                                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                                                                                             2011
                                                                                                                                                                                                    2012
                                         Total                       Urban                              Rural                               Agriculture                              Industry
                                                                                                                                            Services

    Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz Integrated                                                                          Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz Integrated
    Household Survey. Note: Estimates based on                                                                              Household Survey.
    constant 2013 poverty line.


5.       Remittances and the growth of jobs in new areas also reduced long-standing
geographical disparities. The north and the south of the country are divided by mountain ranges,
and there are ethnic and socio-economic divisions between the north and south as well. In part
stemming from the natural disadvantages of its rough topography (rendering access to many
services difficult), large socio-economic disparities have existed between rural and urban areas,
which have on occasion led tensions significantly impacting economic performance1. The influx
of remittances (many to rural families) and the creation of new employment (largely in the services
sector) in rural areas has mitigated these socio-economic differences.


…BUT A DEVELOPMENT MODEL SHOWING SIGNS OF DISTRESS


6.      Despite many of the positive byproducts that accompanied migration, there are increasing
signs that the current model of economic growth and jobs based on a migration-led, remittance-
driven model of development is unsustainable.

7.     The domestic economy is unable to generate sufficient employment to accommodate
the growing labor force. While the inflow of worker remittances supported a boost in economic

1
  The Kyrgyz Republic has experienced violent conflict on several occasions since its independence,
including ethnic clashes in 2010.




                                                                                                                       vi
growth and domestic employment creation, mostly in the services sector, domestic job growth has
continued to lag the expansion in the size of the labor force. In 2009–13, job growth averaged only
0.9 percent a year, about two-thirds the pace of the expansion in the labor force. Although the
official unemployment rate held relatively steady, the gap between the number of available workers
and the number of jobs was filled by climbing rates of out-migration and exits from the labor force.
The presence of remittances affected reservation wages, and as migration expanded, domestic labor
force participation declined. The steepest decline emanated from females, where between 2000
and 2013, participation declined from over 62 percent to less than 50 percent.

8.      Job quality is not improving sufficiently to ensure convergence in the region. The
Kyrgyz Republic has the second-lowest level of output per worker—worker productivity—in the
Europe and Central Asia region, providing abundant potential for productivity convergence with
neighbors. However, although it realized stronger productivity growth than in previous periods, its
productivity growth relative to comparators has been low. Output per worker has increased, on
average, by only 4.3 percent a year since 2005, below the average productivity growth in the
economies of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) and far off the pace of the poorer
CIS countries. Were productivity growth rates in the region to continue as over the past decade,
output per worker in the Kyrgyz Republic would not approach that of any neighboring country for
70 years. The current model of job creation does not provide the pace of productivity growth needed
to move the Kyrgyz Republic to a higher income status.

9.       Productivity growth is steadily declining. Not only is productivity growth slower than
the pace achieved by neighboring economies, productivity growth in the Kyrgyz Republic has
steadily declined (from an average of 7.0 percent a year in 2005–09 to 0.7 percent a year in 2009–
12), suggesting there are limits to the current model (Figure 3). Most of the country’s productivity
gains have derived from services (Figure 4). While the initial growth in services was spectacular,
it was largely accounted for by a dramatic increase in transport and communications, which
shadowed the needs of the migration-led economy. As migration expanded, so did the need for
transport services and communications technology, including mobile telecommunications and
Internet. Over 2009–12, however, that robust source of productivity growth waned. Without
continued strong growth in migration, services are unlikely to buoy the country’s productivity
enhancements.

10.      Productivity has been dragged by informality. A comparison of economy-wide
productivity estimates with productivity estimates from the formal sector suggests that informality
has been a significant factor in the deteriorating productivity growth both at the national level and
particularly within the industrial sector. Formal sector firm data suggests that aggregate
productivity growth in the formal sector has been strong, averaging 6.7 percent a year since 2009.
Economy wide, however, productivity growth averaged less than 1 percent a year, hinting at
significant productivity declines emanating from the informal sector. The formal/full economy
productivity differential is particularly large in the industrial sector, where informality has risen
strongly. The results suggest that both rising informalization (and productivity declines within the
informal sector) are strongly impacting overall productivity.

11.     The decline in productivity has provided weakening scope for rising wages and
income per capita growth. Indeed, between 2009 and 2012, wage growth averaged only 2.8
percent a year (Figure 5). This amounts to about a quarter of the wage growth achieved in
neighboring countries. Long term income per capita growth also has trailed neighbors. Between
2003 and 2014, income per capita growth in the Kyrgyz Republic averaged 3.1 percent a year,
lower than every other CIS economy, half the rate of Uzbekistan, and a third of the rate in



                                                 vii
Azerbaijan and Turkmenistan. As a result, while in 2003 income per capita in the Kyrgyz Republic
was about 30 percent of the CIS average, by 2014 it had fallen to only 23 percent ($607).

 Figure 3: Productivity growth in the Kyrgyz             Figure 4: Services supplied strong initial gains
      Republic trails that of neighbors                                  in productivity

       Average output per employed                              Decomposition of real output per
      worker across countries, 2005 and                              worker growth, 2003-2012
         2010 (constant int'l $'000)                      Productivity      10




                                                                             Annual Change (percentage points)
                                                          change,
                                                          agriculture                                            8
50                                                                                                               6
         2005                                             Productivity
40                                                        change, industry                                       4
         2010
30                                                                                                               2
20                                                        Productivity                                           0
                                                          change, services
10
                                                                                                                 -2
0
                                                          Productivity                                           -4
                                                          change: labor
                                                          reallocation
                                                          across sectors


Source: Estimates based on data from country sources     Source: Value added: estimates based on data in
and World Development Indicators. Note: The figure       Kyrgyz Republic, World Bank Development
shows the average output per employed worker in          Economics    LDB     Database,   2015.    Sectoral
thousands of constant international U.S. dollars.        employment: estimates based on data of the Kyrgyz
                                                         Labor Force Survey.

12.     Despite lackluster wage growth compared with neighbors, Kyrgyz’s real wage growth
exceeds productivity growth, weakening competitiveness. Real wages have grown by 10 percent
a year since 2005, driven by strong wage growth in both construction and services. Productivity
growth, on the other hand, has averaged less than 5 percent a year. The difference between wage
growth and productivity growth has been particularly high in the tradables sectors, weakening
external competitiveness. Real wages in agriculture averaged 17 percent a year, compared with 4
percent a year productivity growth. Manufacturing wages increased by an average of 6 percent a
year compared with productivity declines averaging 4 percent. This could be a symptom of labor
shortages developing from both internal and external migration. The general rise in wages in
tradeables without accompanying productivity growth is concerning because it signals a further
weakening of external competitiveness.

13.      Rising migration may be further undermining human capital accumulation and
inclusive growth. The current model may be putting longer-term skill development at risk because
young workers are increasingly opting for work abroad over secondary-school completion. As
migration has risen labor force participation rates among young workers have increased, while the
proportion of workers who have not completed secondary education has almost doubled (Figure
7). The decision to leave school early has been particularly prevalent among poor workers. Between
2004 and 2007, the labor force participation rate among young workers increased from 72 to 76
percent, while the proportion with incomplete secondary education grew from 5 percent to 11
percent.




                                                  viii
14.      The formal private sector, with the potential to generate higher-quality jobs, remains
trivial in size and has not exhibited strong employment creation given its level of output
growth. A range of supply and demand factors are inhibiting the growth of the private sector,
ranging from distortive patent and compliance systems to logistical constraints. As a result, the
informal sector, in which productivity and wage growth have been anemic, has continued to be the
core job-creating sector.

Figure 5: The decline in productivity has                 Figure 6: Wage growth exceeds
resulted in significantly lower wage growth              productivity growth in tradeables,
                                                       weakening competitiveness in 2005-2012
          Real wage growth 2009-2012, select
    200               economies
                                                     25%
                                                            05-09   09-12   05-09    09-12   05-09   09-12   05-09   09
    160                                              20%
                                                     15%
    120
                                                     10%
    80                                                5%

    40                                                0%
                                                     -5%
      0
                                                     -10%




                      2009   2012                                      Wage         Productivity


Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.             Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.

15.      The small formal private sector has not expanded rapidly… The Kyrgyz Republic has
one of the smallest formal private sectors in the region in terms of employment (Figure 8). Formal
private sector jobs account for only 11 percent of overall employment in the Kyrgyz Republic. This
is the lowest share among all CIS countries. More than 70 percent of employment occurs in the
informal sector, and about 18 percent in the public sector. While formal private sector output has
grown an average of 6.6 percent a year since 2009, the rate of growth has been inadequate to change
the employment dynamics meaningfully in the country. Informal sector activities continue to
dominate employment creation, but the activities are smaller in nature—most operate with fewer
than five employees each—and are of significantly lower value. Moreover, while the formal private
sector demonstrated some productivity improvements in 2009–12, output per worker in the
informal sector stagnated, averaging about 1 percent a year.2

16.      . . . and it has demonstrated limited capacity to create jobs. On top of low levels of
growth, the employment-creation capacity of growth in the formal sector is low. On average, while
the formal sector grew in real terms by 6.6 percent a year, job creation averaged less than 0.4
percent. The bulk of formal sector job creation comes from the public sector and nonprofit
establishments, and value-creating firms actually shed labor in net terms in 2009–12.

2
  Estimate based on overall productivity and productivity exhibited in formal sector value-producing
establishments (based on employment shares in the nonpublic sector).


                                                ix
      Figure 7: Migration has changed                                                                         Figure 8: Employment in the formal
 participation rates and schooling decisions                                                               private sector is among the lowest in ECA

        Labor force and secondary school                                                                        Share of employment in private formal,
      decisions of young persons, 2003-2011                                                                    public formal and informal sector in 2010,
                                                                                                                            select economies
80%
                                                                                                           100%
60%

40%                                                                                                         75%

20%
                                                                                                            50%
 0%
         LFPR


                Second complete




                                                       LFPR


                                                                Second complete
                                   Second incomplete




                                                                                  Second incomplete
                                                                                                            25%

                                                                                                             0%



       Full population 15-29 Poor population 15-29

        2003-2004                 2005-2007                   2008-2011                                       Public sector   Private formal   Private informal


Source: Staff estimates from country sources,                                                             Source: Staff estimates from country data, including
Kyrgyz Integrated Household Survey and Labor                                                              World Bank 2014a and 2014b; National Statistics
Force Survey.                                                                                             Committee of the Kyrgyz Republic data and Kyrgyz
                                                                                                          LFS (to calculate share formal and informal); IZA
                                                                                                          2011; ILO 2011, 2012; Bayramov 2012; Bino 2009;
                                                                                                          OECD 2012.

17.      Underlying these job outcomes are challenges to private sector productivity growth
and job creation, to which the remedies may stretch across a range of potential policy areas
and the development arena. Labor demand is inhibited by a distortive patent and compliance
system that constrains small-firm growth. Likewise, the limited amount of competitive pressure
faced by large establishments tends to help discourage firm entry and exit and technology
spillovers. Informality may be additionally fueled on the supply side by factors blocking
registration and formal sector employment.

18.     Small firms create jobs, but are incentivized to stay small or informal. The formal
sector does not exhibit barriers to entry in aggregate, but it does exhibit barriers to firm growth
among small firms. Small firms exhibit significantly higher exit rates and significantly lower
graduation rates past smallness (Figure 9). Indeed, the lowest probability of an additional job
created among formal sector firms occurs among small firms on the cusp of medium size.

19.     Growth past smallness is cost ineffective because of significant regulatory
requirements and formal or informal payments. Medium firms face the largest regulatory
burdens among firms according to size. They encounter higher taxes, additional payments for labor
insurance and social security, and additional costs associated with compliance, often stemming
from greater government harassment. Medium firms face the highest incidence of graft payments
in the operation of business. The burdens associated with growing past smallness inhibit formal


                                                                                                      x
 sector firm growth and, indeed, formalization altogether. There are few advantages for small firms
 in becoming formal.

 Figure 9: The dynamics of firm entry and growth suggest small firms face the greatest
 constraints on job growth

                 Dynamics of firm growth 2009-2012 by employment size
                                                                                                            1000
                                                                                                            800
                                                                                                           600




                                                                                                                   Number of firms
                                                                                                          400
                                                                                                          200
                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                Entrant
                                                                                    Initially 1 person
                                                                                                  2-3
                                                                                                 4-5
                                                                                                6-9
                                                                                            10 - 15
                                                                                           16 - 19
                                                                                          20 - 30
                                                                                        31 - 60
                                                                                     61 - 100
                                                                                   101 - 200
                                                                      201 - 1000
                                                    Initially 1000+




Source: Staff estimates from KER data. Note: Black bars reflect firms that stayed within the same employment
 size band over the four-year period.

 20.      A handful of large firms account for the majority of economic growth, but face few
 incentives to create jobs. Economic growth is overwhelmingly concentrated in a small number of
 large establishments that, as a whole, have created limited employment. Little more than 40 firms
 are responsible for more than half the overall output growth of growing establishments, but their
 contribution to employment growth is negligible.

 21.      As a group, these large establishments demonstrate limited competitive pressures,
 reducing their incentives to invest and hire (Figure 10). They have about twice the access to
 bank lending as other large establishments and 5 times the access to government budgetary
 financing relative to other large firms. While they produce similar proportions of tradables relative
 to other companies, they face much less competition in terms of imports, suggesting that there is
 implicit or explicit protection.3 Because many of these large growing firms are involved in the
 production of heavy goods (concrete, bricks, motor vehicle parts, and so on), geography may also
 provide natural import protections given the appreciably higher freight costs. The evidence suggests
 there are substantially larger economies of scale available to the largest growing companies. And,
 the limited competitive pressures facing these large conglomerates have reduced business
 dynamism in the formal sector, thereby preventing the exit of otherwise unproductive industries

 3
   The correspondence between import data and production data is not exact. Nonetheless, a rough
 correspondence between Standard International Trade Classification revision 2 product classifications at the
 four-digit level and Statistical Classification of Economic Activities in the European Community codes
 suggests that, under any circumstance, there was significantly greater import value relative to production
 among large firms and firms that were not large, but not among high-growth establishments.


                                                           xi
and the opening up of space for new firms, limiting entry in some sectors, particularly the most
important job-creating sectors, and limiting the technological spillovers to other firms, which
ultimately impedes job growth.

 Figure 10: Top growing firms face fewer competitive pressures


                Characteristics of top performing firms versus other firms, 2012
 100%




  60%




  20%



           Average firm    Access to bank Access to budget Share of growth        Of which     Economies of
              share            loans           loans        from tradables       imported       scale index
  -20%
                                     Top growers       Other large      Other



 Source: Staff estimates from KER, COMTRADE data. Economies of scale index calculated as average
 returns to additional inputs (intermediate + depreciation of fixed assets) over the average returns of original
 inputs. To graph with other indicators, that index value has been divided by 10. Access to bank/budget
 loans calculated as the share of establishments in sample with reported bank or budget loan. Top growers
 represent large establishments (with 60+ workers) in the top 5 percent of establishments with regard to
 value added growth. Average firm share = the share of overall value added in the sector (3-digit European
 Industrial Activity Classification) held by the establishment on average over the 2009–12 period.

22.      Export-oriented manufacturing is particularly impeded from stronger growth. While,
in aggregate, the rate of entry of establishments into the formal sector is high, particular sectors,
such as export-oriented manufacturing, exhibit significantly lower rates of firm entry. Given the
job-creation capacity of export-oriented manufacturing (on average, firms create 29 jobs), lack of
entry into this sector is particularly troublesome for jobs. As importantly, the experience of other
countries suggests that manufacturing firms are more likely to innovate, and the innovation that
takes place in manufacturing leads to productivity improvements throughout the economy. The
lack of entry in export-oriented manufacturing sectors may stem from the impediments to
competitiveness, those associated with inherent disadvantages in transport and logistics associated
with the fact that the Kyrgyz Republic is a landlocked country far from ports. Indeed, the Kyrgyz
Republic is one of the most logistics-disadvantaged countries even among landlocked economies,
and it has failed to make substantial progress in improving logistics in the last decade (Figure 11).




                                                      xii
 Figure 11: The Kyrgyz Republic has made little progress in logistics performance relative
 to other landlocked states
                       LPI performance of LLDCs in 2007 and 2014




 Source: World Bank 2014c.

23. Informality is also fueled on the supply side. Despite revisions in laws on internal migration,
there is evidence that the registration system for employment remains both complicated and
nontransparent. This especially impacts internal migrants from predominantly poor southern
regions to the urban north. Because of higher utility fees and associated fees, there are incentives
for landlords not to provide tenants with necessary documentation, hindering migrant registration
and legal employment. This provides a large pool of unregistered, cheap labor that feeds the
informal sector. Between 2003 and 2012, there was a fivefold increase in the share of industrial
employment outside the construction sector held by workers from other oblasts (regions), and,
among these internal migrants, the proportion working without a contract rose from 28 percent to
47 percent. In construction, a similar trend occurred whereby internal migrants accounted for 11
percent of construction jobs by 2012 (up from 3 percent), and, among these internal migrants, the
share working without a contract increased from 36 percent to 81 percent. Without registry in the
city, migrants not only have more limited access to higher-value formal sector employment, they
also have more limited access to medical treatment, education, and other basic services.

EMPLOYMENT CREATION ON THE PATH TO GREATER GROWTH

24.     The current model of growth has resulted in both employment insufficiency and
declining productivity and wage growth. Shifting to a higher job growth path will require
fundamental transformations in the sources of economic growth and jobs, which call for efforts
across several policy fronts. In addition to reducing the regulatory distortions that inhibit private
sector growth and employment, efforts will be needed to maintain an enabling environment for
export competitiveness through appropriate macroeconomic management and improvements in
transport and logistics, to ensure businesses are unshackled from the widespread prevalence of low-
level corruption, and to facilitate the utilization of remittances for domestic growth and
employment creation through greater financial intermediation.



                                                xiii
25.     Job growth in the formal sector is thwarted by regulations and a lack of competition.
Distortions in the patent and regulatory system and the costs associated with compliance that affect
especially small firms need to be addressed to reduce the current barriers to small-firm survival and
growth. The degree of concentration of output among a small number of large firms suggests there
are barriers to competition that impede the growth of business and jobs. Other obstacles to
operations may also exist that contribute to the lack of dynamism among firms.

26.      Enabling the expansion of the export-oriented manufacturing sector will require
greater efforts to improve competitiveness. The influx of worker remittances into the Kyrgyz
Republic has heightened the risks of Dutch Disease, which could hinder the expansion of exports.
Migration-sending countries can adopt a range of policies to offset the effects of remittance flows
on the equilibrium real exchange rate, or compensate the economy’s traded goods sector for the
loss of competitiveness that it suffers from real exchange rate appreciation. Investment in the
export-oriented sectors (for example, improving transport and logistics infrastructure) could help
to increase productivity and drop costs for firms in the sector, helping offset the Dutch Disease
effect. These are examples of issues that can be explored as part of the Kyrgyz Republic’s jobs
policy agenda.

27.     The business environment can also be enabled through a concentrated reduction in
the facilitating factors behind corruption. The Kyrgyz Republic ranks higher than other
developing countries in Europe and Central Asia and even higher than the average among low-
income countries across a range of corruption indicators. One contributor to corruption is the
problematically low wages among public servants, which creates greater incentives for corruption.
If wages are unrealistically low, the incentives for gaining income through corruption increase,
thereby not only lowering the quality of public service, but significantly deterring formal sector
growth.

28.     While remittances are well targeted to individual needs, their broader economic
impacts can be enhanced by reducing the costs of remittance transfers and better
intermediation. At present, only a small portion of remittances are transferred through formal
channels. Strengthening the financial intermediation of remittances can improve the ability of the
economy to mobilize savings and direct savings toward high-return projects, to improve the access
of formal remittance recipients to other financial products (thereby reducing risks), and to enable
policy makers to monitor and react more effectively to changes in remittance flows that could
impact poverty and job-creating investments. Table 1 illustrates a range of policy areas that should
be considered to create a more promising environment for the creation of jobs.

29.     The policy directions for improving jobs outcomes are multiple. To break out of the
migration trap, the Kyrgyz Republic will need to redirect its policy direction toward the creation of
more and higher value jobs domestically, which must come from an expanding and competitive
private sector. Table 1 outlines some of the major policy directions that can underpin more
effective domestic and external job creation.

30.      …but the rewards are high. At present, jobs options for the majority of Kyrgyz workers
are largely limited to low-value (but better paid) migration opportunities and domestic work in low
value services. Expanding the pool of employment options domestically, driven by new engines
of growth, will reduce the vulnerabilities of Kyrgyz workers to external shocks, incentive
educational investments, and support continued favorable growth and poverty reduction prospects
for the Kyrgyz Republic.




                                                xiv
                  Table 1: Policy directions for more effective job creation

Suggested policy areas for improved jobs outcomes
Development objectives for better jobs                           Policy areas
Make migration work for jobs            Reduce potential for the “Dutch Disease” by offsetting the
                                        effects of remittance flows on competitiveness by investing in
                                        the export sector (for example, in transport and logistics,
                                        which particularly constrain export-oriented development).

                                        Combat early-exits from school for migration opportunities
                                        by better monitoring and evaluating decision making process
                                        of young migrants, and improving the environment for
                                        domestic jobs.

                                        Strengthen the financial intermediation of remittances to
                                        improve the ability of the economy to mobilize savings and
                                        direct savings to high-return projects, to improve the access of
                                        formal remittance recipients to other financial products
                                        (thereby reducing risks), and to enable policy makers to
                                        monitor and react more effectively to changes in remittance
                                        flows that could impact job-creating investments and help
                                        reduce poverty.

Improve higher value job creation       Improve the environment for formal firm entry, growth
                                        and job creation, through improving firm entry in key job-
                                        creating sectors, reducing the distortions that hinder formal
                                        small firm growth, and creating more level playing field
                                        between the large firms which dominate growth (but create
                                        few jobs) and the rest of firms (small and large), by assessing
                                        inequities in bank and budgetary finance, levels of protection,
                                        and economies of scale. Improve formal firm entry and
                                        growth additionally to improve productivity and wage growth,
                                        reducing the tendency for small low value firm growth at the
                                        informal level.

                                        Reduce widespread corruption, including through paying
                                        sufficient salaries to public servants, which incentivizes low
                                        level corruption and reduces firm growth in the formal sector.

Make geography work for jobs            Improve the environment for merchandise and
                                        services trade and export diversification by improving
                                        transport and infrastructure, creating incentives for firm
                                        growth close to trade routes, and finding niches in
                                        products that capitalize on geography (such as mineral
                                        exports) or are geographically neutral (activities where
                                        the geography is not a factor).




                                                xv
CHAPTER 1. THE CONTEXT FOR JOBS IN THE KYRGYZ
                  REPUBLIC


    A.    COUNTRY CONDITIONS SHAPING DEVELOPMENT AND EMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES

1.1      The Kyrgyz Republic’s jobs possibilities will be strongly influenced by its underlying
social and development context. The 2013 World Development Report4 highlights how key
underlying social, political, geographic and economic features will to a large extent dictate the jobs
challenges that confront countries. Youth bulge countries, not surprisingly, must deal with the
specific challenges of youth employment. Aging economies must confront rising age dependency
ratios and at times labor deficiencies. Conflict affected countries must continually square jobs
solutions on aggregate with the delicate balances needed to maintain peace and stability. The
typologies of countries with regards to jobs are not mutually exclusive. Countries face many
divergent challenges simultaneously. Understanding some of the key country features that have
impacted jobs outcomes to date and are likely to continue to exert influence over the future is a
priority in describing the jobs agenda.

1.2     Several characteristics of the Kyrgyz economy are helpful entry points in
understanding recent jobs outcomes and future opportunities and challenges. These are: (1)
the country’s challenging geography and natural resources; (2) Long-standing spatial disparities;
and (3) the economic after-effects of the transition from Soviet central planning. In some sense
these are the structural features of jobs, as they represent the conditions with which the Kyrgyz
Republic must contend in its search for jobs solutions.

1.3      The Kyrgyz geography – both its location and topographic features – have shaped the
nature of economic activity. Rugged and remote, the Kyrgyz Republic is geographically
dominated by the Tien Shan mountain range, covering 95 percent of its territory. The rough
landscape has provided the country a set of natural resources as a base for economic activity, but it
has also limited the ability for the Kyrgyz Republic to exploit them fully (through resource use
intensification, surplus generation, reinvestment and trade) or to move beyond them. Inaccessibility
has increased costs for inputs and technology that might raise productivity at all levels.
Mountainous territories by their nature are characterized by a narrow set of resources on which to
draw, with limited possibilities for economies of scale. This rugged terrain has also increased the
costs associated with the public services delivery and infrastructure development such as transport
and ICT. This has not only further increased costs associated with production, it has contributed
to wide disparities across the country in terms of access to basic services (discussed below).

1.4    The Kyrgyz Republic also suffers the disadvantages of small landlocked economies.
Smallness has increased the need for trade (to expand beyond its limited market). But its
remoteness within Central Asia and landlocked status increase the transport costs, weakening
competitiveness. Exports outside of gold and non-ferrous metals are constrained, with non-gold
merchandise exports accounting for on average 20 percent of GDP between 2010 and 2013. These

4
    World Bank. 2012. World Development Report 2013: Jobs. Washington, DC: World Bank.


                                                  1
disadvantages were partially masked under the Soviet command economy, as complex output and
supply arrangements ensured dependable trade networks and steady demand.

1.5      Secondly, the Kyrgyz Republic is characterized by its long-standing spatial disparities
in economic welfare and economic activity. The north and the south of the country are divided
by mountain ranges, and there is socio-economic divisions between the north and south as well.
While poorer and predominantly rural south is linked more to its neighboring countries of
Uzbekistan and Tajikistan, the north borders Kazakhstan and is more closely connected to Russia.
In part stemming from the natural disadvantages of its rough topography (rendering access to many
services, from health to education to markets to infrastructure [see Figure 1.1], considerably more
difficult) large socio-economic disparities exist between rural and urban areas. Overall poverty in
rural areas is 41.4 percent (2013), compared with 28.5 in urban areas. While 70 of the population
in urban areas have access to improved sanitation facilities, in rural areas, the proportion is 8
percent5. Almost all measures of human opportunity show a wide divide between rural and urban
areas (see Figure .1.2).

1.6     The ethnic and socio-economic division between the rural south and the north has on
occasions led to tensions which have had significant impact on the country's performance.6

    Figure 1.1: Market accessibility index of the Kyrgyz Republic: Population Potential




        Source: Market Accessibility and Regional Maps: The Kyrgyz Republic, Blankespoor, 2013.




5
  Kyrgyz LDB, 2015.
6
  The Kyrgyz Republic has experienced violent conflict on several occasions since its independence,
including ethnic clashes in 2010.


                                                  2
Figure 1.2: Oblast level Human Opportunity Index for select opportunities


    Clean drinking Water                              Not Stunted




    Phones                                            Some Tertiary




Source: Human Opportunities in the Kyrgyz Republic, Tiwari and Mitra, 2012.


1.7      Overlaying these economic and social disparities, differences in population and labor
dynamics between the north and south have heightened pressure for jobs and income for
workers in the south. The Kyrgyz Republic’s population is young. The working age population7
increased by 2 percent over the 2003-2013 period, and this rate of growth is expected to continue
in the future (Figure 1.3). In rural areas, the working age population has grown faster than in urban
areas (1.2 percent a year over the past decade, compared 1 percent in urban areas), while domestic
job creation has been half as fast (0.5 percent a year versus 1 percent). Heightened growth of young
workers with significantly lower jobs prospects has created many of the pressures for migration out
of rural areas, both externally and internally to urban areas.




7
    16-62 for male and 16-57 for females.


                                                  3
Figure 1.3: Population Dynamics in Kyrgyz Republic, 1990-2020




Source: United Nations.


1.8      Finally, the Kyrgyz Republic is characterized by the both legacy of central planning
and the significant labor market after-effects of the difficult transition from that model. The
Kyrgyz Republic gained its independence as the second poorest country in the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS). Although it gained its independence almost 25 years ago, many of the
struggles confronting Kyrgyz labor markets have their roots in the difficult transition which all of
the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) confronted following independence. The
disintegration of the Soviet systems plunged the Kyrgyz economy into collapse, with a complete
breakdown in supply chains and Soviet demand. The Soviet model had internally integrated all
Soviet production, such that production might involve the transport of inputs across vast geographic
distances. Once these elaborate cross-republic supply chains were disrupted, the Soviet market
demand for most of Kyrgyz’s industrial outputs and agriculture collapsed. Over the 1990-1995
period, agricultural output fell by 26 percent, while industrial output was cut by more than two
thirds (Table 1.1).




                                                 4
      Table 1.1: Decline and Recovery in Economic Activity, 1990-2013
                                                                       Average annual growth
                                               Total
                                              change
                                            over period
                                            1990-1995
                                                (%)       1995-2000    2000-2005   2005-2010    2010-2013
GDP at market prices                           -49%            7%         3%           5%           3%
GDP at factor cost                             -48%            7%         3%           5%           5%
Agriculture                                    -26%            8%         3%           -1%          2%
Industry                                       -71%            5%         0%           3%           7%
 Manufacturing                                 -73%          12%          -1%          2%           4%
 Construction                                  -64%            -5%        8%           8%          23%
 Gas, elect, water                               ..            -1%        0%           6%           4%
 Mining                                          ..             ..        2%           6%          14%
Services                                       -43%            3%         7%           9%           6%


GDP by aggregate demand
Resource balance                               -23%         -45%          77%         10%          30%
 Exports of goods and services *               -6%             3%         2%           5%           2%
 Imports of goods and services *               -12%            -4%        7%           7%          10%
Total consumption                              -57%            2%         10%          2%           8%
 General government                            -64%            3%         1%           1%           1%
 Private consumption                           -54%            2%         13%          2%          10%
Gross domestic investment                      -41%            3%         -2%         13%          16%
  Gross domestic fixed investment         -46%                 0%         0%          14%          10%
Source: Kyrgyz LDB, 2015. *: 1992-1995 figure.




                        B.    LABOR MARKETS IMMEDIATELY AFTER THE TRANSITION

      1.9    The economic collapse associated with the disintegration of the Soviet system had
      several important and long-standing ramifications on Kyrgyz labor markets and
      employment:

              (i) First, high unemployment emerged. The precipitous decline in GDP following
                  independence resulted in emerging and significant unemployment (Figure 1.4). The full
                  extent of unemployment was likely masked by labor hoarding in agriculture, withdrawal
                  from the labor force, and by low levels of unemployment registration. An estimate of
                  unemployment in other CIS countries in the early 2000s found that less than 20 percent of
                  unemployed persons actually registered. Even with these factors, official unemployment
                  as a share of the labor force in the Kyrgyz Republic grew to double digits in the first decade
                  following independence.




                                                           5
                      Figure 1.4: Rise of Unemployment, 1992-2012

 25%

 20%

 15%

 10%

   5%

   0%
                                    1996




                                                                                                                 2007
        1992
               1993
                      1994
                             1995


                                           1997
                                                  1998
                                                         1999
                                                                2000
                                                                       2001
                                                                              2002
                                                                                     2003
                                                                                            2004
                                                                                                   2005
                                                                                                          2006


                                                                                                                        2008
                                                                                                                               2009
                                                                                                                                      2010
                                                                                                                                             2011
                                                                                                                                                    2012
                      Unemployment (total)                                              Urban unemployment
                      Rural unemployment                                                Youth unemployment (15-29)

         Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.



(ii) Second, the lack of jobs caused a shift of workers to agriculture as a means to survive,
    resulting in significant surplus labor on farms. The transition from the Soviet model
    resulted in mass privatization of large farms and distribution of private plots for large
    numbers of people. As privatization of state-owned industry resulted in widespread
    slashing of urban jobs, an urban to rural migration took place as people displaced from
    industry returned to their villages to farm, their only means of subsistence. While
    agriculture had been the main source of employment for less than a third of the population
    under the Soviet Union, by the early 2000s, agriculture was officially the main source of
    employment for about half of the labor force. However, with a collapse in the wool market,
    low levels of investment, and lack of imported feed, agricultural productivity had
    plummeted. Lack of financial resources for farm mechanization resulted in many of the
    newly acquired arable farm holdings being unable to produce crops. Lack of maintenance
    on infrastructure around remote summer pastures led to overgrazing pastures close to
    villages. Thus, while farming had become the main employment source for the country,
    the average output per worker in the sector was about 40 percent less than the average
    output per worker outside of agriculture.

(iii) Third, the industrial sector contracted strongly, with sizeable job losses. A large
    number of inefficient enterprises had relied on government subsidies to remain operational
    under the Soviet system, but following independence and privatization, most were
    eventually closed. Over the 1990s, production declined in almost all industrial sectors,
    including power, engineering and metal work, and fuel, chemicals and petrochemicals.
    Only the minerals sector experienced real output growth, thanks to foreign investment in
    Kumtor gold mining company. In all, industrial output declined by almost three quarters.
    The industrial sector, which used to provide about a quarter of jobs in the 1990s (and 40
    percent of output), by early 2000s accounted for less than 15 percent of jobs (and only 25
    percent of output, down from about 40 percent in the 1990s).



                                                                              6
(iv) Fourth, the labor model was shifted from a (largely guaranteed) regular wage
    employment model to predominantly irregular and self-employment. This shift was
    especially pronounced in agriculture and services, where the share of workers with a
    guaranteed wage fell from about 6 out of 10 workers in the 1990s to only 2 in 10 by the
    early 2000s. Kyrgyz employment has become predominantly informal, with employment
    outside of registered establishments and companies accounting for 70 percent of
    employment. This is a ratio higher than in all other CIS countries, and on par with
    informality in Africa.

(v) Finally, and most importantly for jobs outcomes today, the erosion in living
   standards triggered by the economic collapse spurred a large-scale labor migration
   out of the Kyrgyz Republic. The lack of employment opportunities initiated a wave of
   migration out of the country, beginning in the early 2000s. Estimates of the extent of
   migration vary significantly, with estimates from household data suggesting a figure of
   about 250,000 migrants while unofficial sources put the figure at closer to 500,000- 1
   million (see Box 1.1). Within the span of a decade, the Kyrgyz Republic became the second
   highest remittance receiving economy in the world as a share of GDP, estimated at 32
   percent of GDP in 2013 (Figure 1.5).

         Figure 1.5: Personal remittances received, 2013 (% of GDP)




    50


    40

            Kyrgyz Republic
    30


    20


    10


     0
                              Honduras




                                 Tunisia




                                   Benin
                                  Samoa


                                Kosovo

                       Marshall Islands




                                 Bolivia
                              Tajikistan


                                    Haiti
                               Comoros




                                Jamaica


                                 Tuvalu


                           Yemen, Rep.


                   Dominican Republic

                               Morocco




                       Macedonia, FYR
                               Hungary


                                Ecuador
                           Luxembourg
                                   Nepal




                   West Bank and Gaza




                                Ukraine

                                  Belize
                                  Tonga




                             Philippines


                                  Serbia
                                  Jordan




                                Albania

                                Kiribati
                              Sri Lanka




                              Lithuania
         St. Vincent and the Grenadines




 Source: World Development Indicators (12/14 update).




                                            7
                Box 1.1: Accounting for Emigration from the Kyrgyz Republic
 Getting an accurate estimate of migration from the Kyrgyz Republic is challenging. The Kyrgyz Integrated
 Household Survey provides two questionnaires that allow for a measurement of labor migrants. First, the
 household roster (questionnaire 1) that is collected in the first quarter of each year includes a question
 about household members who are present or absent in the household. If members are absent, the
 questionnaire inquires about the reason for the absence, including employment. If this is the reason for the
 absence, the individuals are classified as labor migrants. There are a couple of disadvantages to this
 approach. The biggest disadvantage is that absence for work is not specified as international or domestic
 work. Second, the roster is only completed once a year, which may bias seasonal labor migration.

 The second source of information is the Labor Force Survey (questionnaire 4). In this survey, basic
 information, economic activity, and income information are recorded for household members aged 15 and
 over. Members who report they work abroad are classified as labor migrants. Other members of the
 household can report information about members who are labor migrants if these are absent. Virtually all
 labor migrants identified in the household roster in quarter 1 are also reported in quarter 1 of the Labor
 Force Survey.

 Information on the characteristics of migrants is based on analysis of the data in the Labor Force Survey.
 Because there is no clear advantage in using the household roster to identify labor migrants, the Labor
 Force Survey is our key source for the identification of labor migrants and migrant households.

 While the Labor Force Survey allows an analysis of the broad trends and characteristics of migration, there
 are limitations that may significantly bias downwards the estimates of the migration stock. It does not
 account for household members no longer considered household members, nor does it account for entire
 families that have migrated. Given the characteristics of migrants from the Kyrgyz Republic, the first
 limitation is significantly more important. Because migrants are generally young -- 20–30 years of age
 who often leave their birth households for employment, marriage, and the like, it is probable that a large
 portion of migrants are excluded. Additionally, the exclusion of seasonal migrants—who are not identified
 as emigrants—may significantly underestimate the true number of migrants. Thus, while the data of the
 Labor Force Survey show net migration at around 250,000, the Kyrgyz International Organization for
 Migration puts the figure at closer to 350,000, and the United Nations puts the migrant stock at around
 740,000, with about 575,000 living in Russia (2013). For analysis relying on the overall magnitude of
 migration (such as simulations of the total labor force, migrant and domestic), a conservative estimate of
 500,000 is employed.


 Source: Yang 2015.




1.10     Spatial disparity in economic prospects also spurred large scale internal migration.
Most migrants have come from the south, which has experienced significantly poorer job prospects
and higher rates of poverty (Figure 1.6). External migrants have predominantly found work in
Russia in construction or trade (with a sizeable degree of shuttle-traders, traveling by existing rail
lines to transport goods to Russia) or Kazakhstan (Figure 1.7). The exodus from the rural south
has also fueled a swelling of internal migrants into Bishkek, Osh and Jalal-Abad, which has fostered
the growing informality of urban employment.




                                                     8
  Figure 1.6: Poverty Rates and Rates of Labor                                                                                   Figure 1.7: Main destination of Kyrgyz
                Migration, 2012                                                                                                              Migrants, 2008
                   70                                         30




                                                                    % of workers abroad


                                                                                              Proportion of external migrants
                   60                                         25
Poverty rate (%)




                   50
                                                              20                                                                80
                   40
                                                              15
                   30                                                                                                           60
                   20
                                                              10
                                                              5                                                                 40
                   10
                    0                                         0                                                                 20
                              Talas (R)
                               Osh (R)


                            Batken (U)


                             Naryn (U)
                              Chui (U)


                           Bishkek (U)
                             Naryn (R)
                        Jalal-Abad (U)




                              Chui (R)
                         Issyk-Kul (U)
                            Batken (R)




                              Talas (U)
                               Osh (U)
                        Jalal-Abad (R)




                         Issyk-Kul (R)




                                                                                                                                0



                             Poverty   % of workers abroad


                   Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyzstan’s LFS.                                                               Source: ILO, 2009.


                           C.   CONTEXT-SPECIFIC SOLUTIONS FOR JOBS IN THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

             1.11    All of these features have had an important role in explaining jobs developments in
             the past. The development model that has arisen in the Kyrgyz Republic has sprung from the seeds
             of a very severe economic collapse following independence from the Soviet Union. Were the
             geography different, the Kyrgyz Republic might have responded to the collapse with a redoubling
             of exports to neighboring countries with surplus cash. Surrounded as it was by other struggling
             countries, with deficient trade-related infrastructure, and dependent upon sovereign access, the
             response was workers leaving Kyrgyz altogether. Once that migration network has taken hold, it
             has become a condition that is no longer a development but is a feature of the country.

             1.12     These key features of the country context must also underpin jobs solutions for the
             Kyrgyz Republic. Migration is a development and jobs phenomenon with which the Kyrgyz
             Republic will need to contend for the next several decades. Jobs solutions will need to recognize
             the many direct implications of a remittance-driven growth model on growth and job creation, and
             integrate this understanding into specific jobs strategies. Geography also narrows the possibilities
             for growth and jobs. A jobs agenda in the Kyrgyz Republic must look for jobs solutions that
             minimize the costs and maximize the advantages of a challenging geography and location. That
             may be through targeting more “geographically neutral” economic activities, where transport
             comprises a smaller share of overall costs, by facilitating expansion of businesses in locations closer
             to cross-border trade routes, or by utilizing the geography as an asset. While these are sector-
             specific development issues, the jobs agenda cannot be viewed as separate from the development
             agenda.

             1.13     The jobs diagnostic makes use of several benchmark country groupings based on
             important features affecting jobs. Throughout the report, the jobs diagnostic draws upon country
             groupings sharing similar country features to the Kyrgyz Republic (but varying depending upon
             the feature of importance). Because each country typology creates its own development frontier,



                                                                                          9
these similar countries can provide a landscape in a sense of what has been achieved by the set of
countries with the same set of key structural features. Three features are particularly important for
benchmarking for the Kyrgyz Republic: its geographic challenges, its high level of out-migration,
and its transition from the Soviet-Union. The report deliberately draws upon countries at varying
stages of development, to consider at the broadest level the strategies for growth and jobs that
worked within these country context features.




                                                 10
     CHAPTER 2. A CHANGING MODEL OF GROWTH AND
                         JOBS
                             MACRO AND MICRO FINDINGS

      A.   GROWTH RESUMPTION AND POVERTY REDUCTION THROUGH LABOR EXODUS

2.1     Following the grueling transition that accompanied independence from the Soviet
Union, the Kyrgyz Republic managed an unsteady recovery over the 2000s. A strong
economic liberalization, addressing price and subsidy reforms, privatization of state-owned
enterprises (SOEs), land reform, exchange rate liberalization, and other measures, along with robust
growth of remittances lifting domestic demand, helped the Kyrgyz Republic to recoup some of the
sizeable losses it had incurred immediately following independence. Between 2000 and 2013, the
economy managed to grow by a relatively robust rate of 4.5 percent per year. With widespread
income gains from both migration and the domestic demand it has fueled, the country has been able
to achieve significant gains in welfare and poverty reduction. Overall poverty fell from 68 percent
to 37 percent between 2003 and 2013, with rural poverty reduction driving the dramatic fall.

2.2      Migration provided a new engine for growth. Underpinning the growth recovery was
a spectacular movement of workers, both abroad and internal. On the external front, and starting
in the mid 2000s, migration of Kyrgyz workers on a wide scale began to take root, with lack of jobs
and low salaries propelling workers to Russia for employment and study. Estimates of the extent
of migration vary between 500,000 and 1,000,000 workers abroad, with the peak of migration over
the 2006-2008 period. With this movement came higher incomes, a large portion of which were
transferred back home for savings and purchases ranging from housing to education expenses to
farm equipment to
personal consumption Figure 2.1: GDP growth and worker remittances, 1997-2013
items to small business
seed capital8. Over the
2003-2012        period,           40
                              Constant som (millions)




worker       remittances           35
                                   30
increased       16-fold,           25
providing the impetus              20
behind a resumption in             15
                                   10
economic         growth              5
(Figure 2.1).                        0
                                                        1997
                                                        1998
                                                        1999
                                                        2000
                                                        2001
                                                        2002
                                                        2003
                                                        2004
                                                        2005
                                                        2006
                                                        2007
                                                        2008
                                                        2009
                                                        2010
                                                        2011
                                                        2012
                                                        2013




2.3      Migration also
provided a release                                  GDP           Worker remittances
valve for an economy
which had not created
enough jobs to keep Sources: GDP: Kyrgyz LDB (January, 2015 update). Remittances: WDI
pace with the labor (12/14 update).
force. Kyrgyz's young population has put an additional burden on creating employment which the
domestic economy has been unable to fulfil. Between 2004 and 2012, the labor force has grown
by about 1.5 percent a year, while domestic employment grew by less than half that rate (0.6 percent
a year). The jobs gap has been filled by migration, with little change in overall unemployment over

8
    Tynaliev, Urmat. 2010.


                                                        11
                     the period.9 Migration played an especially large role in alleviating the jobs gap for rural workers
                     and youth (Figure 2.2).

                     Figure 2.2: Job Deficits in the Kyrgyz Republic (including migrants in the labor force)
                     Job deficits by education level and                                         Job deficits by age and urban/rural, 2013
                             urban/rural, 2013

                                                                                            0




                                                                              Thousands
                                                                                           -20
                                                                                           -40
                                                                                                                                              Urban
               0                                               Urban                       -60
Thousands




             -40                                                                           -80                                                Rural
             -80
                                                               Rural
                                                                                          -100
            -120
                                                                                          -120
            -160
            -200                                                                          -140
            -240                                                                          -160



                  Jobs deficit by education and urban/rural                                      Jobs deficit by education and urban/rural,
                                  Males, 2013                                                                   Females, 2013




                                                                Urban                        0
                                                                                                                                              Urban
                    0
                                                                              Thousands
      Thousands




                   -40                                          Rural                      -40                                                Rural
                   -80                                                                     -80
                  -120                                                                    -120
                  -160                                                                    -160




                     Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.



                     2.4      Internal migration also contributed to the growth recovery. The disparity in welfare
                     between the largely urban northern oblasts and the rural south created a pocket of poor with both
                     higher rates of growth of the working age population and more limited jobs opportunities. The
                     ability for workers to move within the country, mostly from the south to the cities (about 60 percent
                     of internal migration has been inter-oblast), has also allowed the Kyrgyz Republic to relieve a
                     source of social pressures and instability. It is estimated that over the past two decades, internal
                     migrants in the Kyrgyz Republic reached 1.9 million, meaning that one in every three citizens of
                     the Kyrgyz Republic had changed his or her domestic residence at least once10.


                     9
                       The jobs gap may be larger than the domestic unemployment rate suggests, though, as the share of working
                     age inactive adults has also increased. This exit from the labor force may reflect a discouragement from job-
                     search, but remittances may also impact labor supply decisions.
                     10
                        Fryer, et al. 2014.


                                                                         12
2.5     Remittances supported significant gains in poverty reduction. In addition to the direct
impact on households receiving remittances, the economic expansion that was fueled by
remittances has led to a massive movement out of poverty across all regions and demographics.
Not only has poverty been reduced across geography, it has fallen steadily for employed and
unemployed alike, as households have adjusted labor responsibilities with increased incomes from
migration. For households with a migrant abroad, the receipt of remittances accounted for almost
double the reduction in poverty over the 2008 to 2013 period (with lower levels of domestic
employment and lower domestic wages for those working contributing to some poverty worsening).

 Figure 2.3: Poverty rates in the Kyrgyz                              Figure 2.4: Decomposition of poverty
 Republic by residence, 2003-13 (using                                decline of working age population, 2003-
 constant poverty line for 2013)                                      2013

                                 80%                                     Poverty
                                                                                         0
    in pecent total population




                                 70%                                     change:
                                                                         employed
                                 60%                                                     -4
                                 50%
                                                                                         -8
                                 40%                                     Poverty
                                 30%                                     change:    -12
                                                                         unemployed
                                 20%                                                    -16
                                 10%
                                                                                        -20
                                 0%                                      Poverty
                                         2003
                                         2004
                                         2005
                                         2006
                                         2007
                                         2008
                                         2009
                                         2010
                                         2011
                                         2012
                                         2013




                                                                         change: non-
                                                                         active
                                       Total   Urban        Rural




 Source: Staff estimates from KIHS.                                   Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.


                                                       B.   KEY SHIFTS IN EMPLOYMENT

2.6     A dominant feature of the Kyrgyz Development model was labor movement: across
space, across sectors, and across types of employment. A major shift involved family and small
farmers leaving agriculture. In part pushed by further deterioration of agricultural prospects through
overgrazing, large scale abandonment of unsustainable farm employment occurred, such that within
6 years, the share of the population employed in agriculture had declined from 45 percent to 30
percent, a decline of about 150,000 jobs (Figure 2.7).

2.7     Many of these workers migrated abroad for work. The labor force statistics cannot
fully capture the extent of migration and likely heavily underestimate its presence for description
of migration estimates from the LFS). The LFS suggests an increase of external migration of more
than 4-fold between 2003 and 2012, from 45,000 to about 190,000. Other sources (including
estimates from host countries) reckon the amount of Kyrgyz migration in the range of 500,000 to
1,000,000 workers, though some of that migration is of very temporary in nature (for example day
trade). With a labor force of about 2.5 million workers, the migration phenomenon must be
considered exceptionally important.




                                                                    13
       Figure 2.5: Total domestic employment by sector, 2003–2012



           Employment ('000)

           1,200
           1,000
            800
            600
            400
            200
              0
                   2003    2004   2005   2006   2007    2008      2009   2010   2011   2012

                                  Agriculture          Industry           Services


       Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.

2.8     But a large number of workers searched for alternative employment within the
Kyrgyz Republic. A comparison of the official net emigration rates and the loss of jobs in
agriculture between 2003 and 2012 reveals that at least half the workers who left agriculture
remained in the Kyrgyz Republic, where they either joined the ranks of the unemployed and of the
inactive or found employment outside agriculture. The change in employment reported in sectors
outside agriculture strongly correlated with the share of agricultural jobs lost, minus the share
represented by emigration. This suggests that a large pool of workers seeking employment outside
agriculture did so within the country.

2.9     Remittances fueled jobs growth in services and construction. As remittances fueled
domestic demand for services and housing, new jobs expanded significantly in both sectors. While
about 150,000 jobs were shed in agriculture between 2003 and 2012, about 275,000 jobs on net
were created in construction and services (a growth of about 40 percent).

Employment shifts largely reflected movement of the poor

2.10     The structural shift was primarily a movement of the poor, to other jobs, other
regions, and other countries. The key sectoral shift was from agriculture to off farm work. In
2003, about 54 percent of all poor workers were engaged in agriculture, while by 2012 only about
37 percent of poor employed workers were in agriculture. But the movement of the poor has had
spatial and formality dimensions, too. Poorer households have disproportionately contributed to
the migration phenomenon. About one in every four families have an external migrant, but for
poor families, that figure is closer to one in every three families. Internal migration of the poor has
been even more prevalent, with about two in every five families having a household member
employed in an oblast other than their place of birth. This dynamic movement has not occurred at
nearly the level for non-poor workers.

2.11   This movement of workers raised wages and labor incomes. This movement of the
economically disenfranchised had significant impact on overall wage and labor income growth.
Between 2003 and 2012, real wages rose by almost 9 percent a year, as the flow of remittances into


                                                  14
the economy buoyed spending and the growth of services which pulled wages economy-wide.
Overall wages grew not only because of wage growth within each sector, but also because of the
shift of workers out of (low wage) agriculture to services. This provided early gains in wage
growth, which have only recently dissipated (Figure 2.6).

       Figure 2.6: Decomposition of wage growth in the Kyrgyz Republic, 2003-2012




                                                                              17.0

                                          Annual Change (percentage points)
           Wage growth, agriculture
                                                                              14.0

                                                                              11.0
           Wage growth, industry
                                                                               8.0

                                                                               5.0
           Wage growth, services
                                                                               2.0

                                                                              -1.0
           Wage change: labor
           reallocation effect (workers
           moving to higher wage
           sectors)


       Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS. Shapley decomposition of estimated growth attributable
       to wage growth within sector versus sectoral reallocation.

2.12     The movement of poor, rural workers heightened informality within sectors. An interesting
consequence of the movement of largely poor, rural farmers was the movement of informality from
rural agriculture to other sectors. Although in aggregate, informality in the Kyrgyz Republic has
remained broadly unchanged since the early 2000s, at the sectoral level informality has increased
significantly, as the movement out of (almost entirely informal) agriculture was balanced by a
growing informality in industry and services (Figure 2.7). Manufacturing and construction have
experienced particularly large increases in informality, driving up the overall industrial informality
rate to more than 75 percent of employment from less than 50 percent (Figure 2.8).




                                                                                 15
 Figure 2.7: Decomposing the growth in informality                Figure 2.8: Informal employment as share
 2003-2012 by sectoral employment                                 of total employment by sector, 2003-2012
     2.5
                                         Informality               100%
                                         change,                    90%
     1.5                                 Agriculture                80%
     0.5                                                            70%
                                         Informality                60%
     -0.5                                change, Industry           50%
                                                                    40%
     -1.5
                                         Informality
     -2.5
                                         change, Services
                                                                                Total            Agriculture
                                                                                Industry         Services


 Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS (overall                 Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.
 employment) and NSC establishment reports (formal
 employment).

2.13    Registration requirements for employment heightened informality. Fueling the
growth of informality was a complex regulatory environment for non-resident employment.
Despite its Law on Internal Migration, the Kyrgyz residential registration system remains a
modified version of the Soviet Propiska system, requiring employees to have official residential
status. The process by which residential status is both complicated and non-transparent, with a
high degree of discretion in required procedures, and there are incentives for landlords not to
provide tenants with the required documents. As a result, many internal migrants don't register,
and thus cannot be legally employed. This alone has allowed for large pools of unregistered, cheap
labor feeding the informal sector of the economy. A study by the American University of Central
Asia11 corroborates this finding, noting that internal migrants are systematically more likely to
engage informal activities, hindered in part by registry requirements (Figure 2.10). The situation
not only impacts job prospects but welfare. Without registry in the city, migrants have more limited
access to medical treatment, access to education, and other basic services.

            Figure 2.9: Differences in formality by residential status, 2010

                                             Resident         Migrant
             60
             50
             40
             30
             20
             10
              0
                     Do you pay taxes?      Is your work registered? Do you transfer money
                                                                      toward your pension
                                                                             fund?
            Source: Nasritdinov, 2010.



11
  Nasritdinov et al, 2010. Informal Economy and Social Vulnerability in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.
American University of Central Asia.


                                                        16
The migration model impacted participation and educational decisions

2.14    Migration increased male participation, while female labor force participation
declined. The movement of work outside of the Kyrgyz Republic had palpable effects on the
domestic labor force, with strong gender dimension. Male labor force participation has increased
(from 72 to 76 percent), and as females have had to adjust to household members working abroad,
their own labor participation declined. The share of working age women engaged in household
work or child rearing rose steeply from 16 percent to 26 percent over the decade, a phenomenon
consistent with other migration-dependent economies in the region. Of the migration-dependent
economies in the CIS (Armenia, Tajikistan, Moldova, and the Kyrgyz Republic), all have
demonstrated a decline in the participation of women, sometimes dramatic, while all other CIS
economies have exhibited an increase in female labor force participation (Figure 2.10).

 Figure 2.10: Female labor force participation rates dynamics, 2000-2013



   70


   60


   50


   40
        2000   2001   2002     2003   2004   2005   2006   2007    2008   2009   2010   2011     2012   2013


                  Kyrgyz Republic                   Tajikistan                      Kazakhstan
                  Armenia                           Moldova                         Russian Federation
                  Uzbekistan                        Turkmenistan                    Azerbaijan
                  Georgia




 Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.

Migration has led to reductions in secondary school completion. As men have increased their
participation to respond to new work opportunities abroad, the age of first time work has reduced,
and secondary school completion has dropped. The decision to leave school early for opportunities
abroad has been particularly prevalent for poor workers, where between 2004 and 2007, the labor
force participation rate for young workers increased from 72 to 76 percent, while the proportion
with incomplete secondary education grew from five percent to eleven percent (Figure 2.11).




                                                    17
     Figure 2.11: Labor Force and Secondary Schooling Decisions for Young Persons,
     2003-2011
      80%



      60%



      40%



      20%



       0%
                 LFPR          Second             Second          LFPR           Second        Second
                              complete          incomplete                      complete     incomplete
                        Full population 15-29                            Poor population 15-29

                                     2003-2004        2005-2007     2008-2011


     Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.


            C.   GROWTH, PRODUCTIVITY AND WAGE IMPLICATIONS OF THE MODEL

The sources of growth turned inward

2.15    Growth turned inward. The inflow of remittances was channeled primarily into
consumption, investment, and imported goods. Total consumption rose by an average of 19 percent
a year between 2005 and 2013, and, by 2013, it averaged 135 percent of GDP, up from around 90
percent in 2001. Investment also increased dramatically, going from about 12 percent of GDP in
2003 to 35 percent in 2012. The bulk of the expansion in consumption and investment was centered
on households and went to finance children’s education, health care, and residential housing
construction.

2.16     Tradeables declined considerably as a source of growth and revenue. Many of the
classic symptoms of “Dutch Disease” accompanied the migration driven growth model. The inflow
of remittances has created a foreign exchange surplus, triggering an exchange appreciation. With
that, there has been a considerable slowdown in manufacturing growth, and a rapid acceleration in
service sector growth. Between 2005 and 2012, manufacturing output declined by 2.3 percent a
year (a 17 percent decline over the period), while the services sector expanded in real terms by 8.9
percent a year (60 percent overall).




                                                      18
      Figure 2.12: Decomposition of GDP growth,                        Figure 2.13: Growth of Remittances
      1995-2012                                                        and Real Effective Exchange Rate Movements
                                                                       1999-2013
                                                                        14                                                 2.5
      16                                       Imports                  12
                                                                                                                           2.0
                                                                        10
      12                                                                                                                   1.5
                                               Exports                   8
       8                                                                 6                                                 1.0
                                               Investment                4
       4                                                                                                                   0.5
                                                                         2
       0                                       Consumption               0                                                 0.0




                                                                             1999
                                                                             2000
                                                                             2001
                                                                             2002
                                                                             2003
                                                                             2004
                                                                             2005
                                                                             2006
                                                                             2007
                                                                             2008
                                                                             2009
                                                                             2010
                                                                             2011
                                                                             2012
                                                                             2013
       -4
                                                 Govt
            1995-



                    2000-



                              2005-



                                      2009-
            2000



                    2005



                              2009



                                      2012




       -8                                                                             Worker remittances            REER


  Sources: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LDB (1/15 update);
Kyrgyz LDB 2015; WDI.


                                                                             Avg
                            Real      Real                                   annual
                            output    output                                 output
                            per       per      Share    of    Share    of    growth   Productivity   Employment
                            worker    worker   employment     employment     2005-    growth 2005-   growth 2005-
                            2005      2012     2005           2012           2012     2012           2012
        Agriculture          926       1,220        38            28          -0.2        4.0              -4.1
        Industry            1,554      1,253        16            21          1.3         -3.0             4.5
          Construction       894        980          6            9           8.6         1.3              7.2
          Mining            1,687      1,474         0            1           3.4         -1.9             5.4
          Manufacturing     1,974      1,473         8            9           -2.3        -4.1             1.8
          Elec/gas/water    1,841      1,462         2            2           2.1         -3.2             5.6
        Services            1,120      1,755        45            51          8.9         6.6              2.1
         Transp/comm        1,372       ...          6            7           ...                          3.1
         W&R trade          1,873       ...         13            17          ...                          4.1
          Other              675        ...         26            27          ...                          0.8

        Total               1,115                                             4.8         4.3              0.5
        Sources: Value added, Kyrgyz LDB 2015. Employment: Kyrgyz LFS.

      Table 2.1: Growth, Employment and Productivity Dynamics 2005-2012



      Early productivity gains, but strong declines in industry

      2.17     Initial productivity gains subsided. Initial movements of surplus labor out of agriculture
      resulted in strong productivity improvements. Over the 2005-2012 period, employment in the
      agriculture sector declined by 25 percent. With very low initial productivity levels in agriculture,
      movement to other forms of employment - even very low-value informal activities - had the effect
      of raising overall labor productivity (and, accordingly, wages and labor income). However, since
      2009, there has been no further productivity growth from labor reallocation. Productivity growth




                                                             19
itself has dropped strongly, from more than 7 percent a year between 2005 and 2009 to less than 1
percent a year since 2009 (Figure 2:16).

2.18    Relative to other CIS countries, Kyrgyz export growth has deteriorated sharply.
Although the Kyrgyz Republic managed strong export growth in the early 2000s, since 2008,
Kyrgyz exports have declined by about a half a percentage point a year, trailing far behind the
positive rate of growth of exports of goods and services observed in most of the other CIS countries
(where export growth averaged 7 percent a year in real terms). Merchandise goods export growth
has been slower still. Whereas in 2009 goods accounted for 72 percent of the Kyrgyz Republic’s
exports, by 2013 they made up just 58 percent.

 Figure 2.14: Growth of exports of goods Figure 2.15: Merchandise exports as a share
 and services 2005-2013 (US$ 2005)       of exports of goods and services, 2005-2013

 40%
                                                                                   125%
 30%                                                                               100%

 20%                                                                               75%

 10%                                        2005-2008                              50%                                  2005-2008
                                            2008-2010                                                                   2009-2010
  0%                                                                               25%
                                            2010-2013                                                                   2011-2013
-10%                                                                                0%




 Source: WDI data (12/14 update).



Figure 2.16: Shapley decomposition of average output per worker growth 2003-2012

                                                                       10.0
                                                                        8.0
                                                 (percentage points)




       Productivity change, agriculture
                                                   Annual Change




                                                                        6.0
                                                                        4.0
       Productivity change, industry
                                                                        2.0
       Productivity change, services                                    0.0
                                                                       -2.0
       Productivity change: labor reallocation                         -4.0
       across sectors                                                         2003-2012 2003-2005 2005-2009 2009-2012

 ________________
 Sources: Staff estimates using value added data (Kyrgyz LDB, 1/15 update) and employment data at the
 sectoral level (Kyrgyz LFS).




                                                                              20
2.19     Current productivity growth has been limited to the service sector, itself concentrated
in transport and communications. Strong output growth in the service sector supported
increasing productivity (averaging almost 9 percent a year) as well as employment. However, the
bulk of the growth in service sector output can be attributed to a dramatic increase in transport and
communications. While transport and communications accounts for only about 15 percent of
services sector employment, real output growth averaging almost 25 percent a year over the period
drove about two thirds of the average annual real output growth in the services sector overall.
Underpinning this stellar growth has been penetration of new communications technologies,
including mobile telecommunications and internet, supported by expanding private sector demand.
Outside of T&C, however, performance in the service sector has been more modest, supporting
relatively low productivity growth (averaging less than 1 percent a year between 2005-2012), and
modest employment advances (averaging 2 percent a year). Thus, while the services sector as a
whole has experienced robust productivity growth, it has largely been limited to the transport and
communications sector, and has not been accompanied by strong employment growth (Table 2.2)

     Table 2.2: Estimated Contribution to Service Sector Output Growth, 2005-2012


                                                                             Contribution
                                 Real                                        to total          Contributi
                                 output                                      growth of         on to total
                                 growth     Employmen        Productivit     output in the     employme
                                 2005-      t    growth      y    growth     services          nt growth
                                 2012       2005-2012        2005-2012       sector /a         in services
 Transport/communication         24.1%      3.1%             20.4%           71.9%             20.4%
 Wholesale/retail trade          4.9%       4.1%             0.8%            23.6%             58.9%
 Other services                  1.5%       0.8%             0.7%            4.5%              20.7%


 Total services sector           8.9%        2.1%            6.6%            100.0%             1.0%
Note: Output growth estimated from national accounts data to 2008 and KER data from
2009-2012.
Sources: Staff estimates using national accounts data, KER service sector data (on output), and Kyrgyz
LFS.


2.20    Productivity has declined strongly in the industrial sector. The inflow of remittances
supported a boom in demand for housing, leading to a large number of new jobs in construction.
With productivity in the construction sector about half that of other industrial activities (mining,
manufacturing and utilities), the growth in construction has lowered the overall productivity of the
industrial sector (Figure 2.17). But beyond a changing structure, the industrial sector has been
marked by heavy declining in manufacturing productivity, which has fallen almost 6 percent a year
over the later 2000s to 2012.

2.21     Productivity has been dragged by informality. A comparison of economy-wide
productivity estimates with productivity estimates from the formal sector suggests that informality
has been a significant factor in the deteriorating productivity growth both at the national level and
particularly within the industrial sector. Formal sector data from firms (examined more closely in
the following chapter) suggests that aggregate productivity growth in the formal sector has been
strong, averaging 6.7 percent a year since 2009. Economy wide, however, productivity growth



                                                    21
averaged less than 1 percent a year, hinting at significant productivity declines emanating from the
informal sector. The formal/full economy productivity differential is particularly large in the
industrial sector (Figure 2.18), where informality has risen strongly. The results suggest that both
rising informalization (and productivity declines within the informal sector) are strongly impacting
overall productivity.


  Figure 2.17: Decomposition of productivity growth in industry, 2003-2012
                                                                                                      4.0

              Productivity growth,




                                                       Annual Change (percentage points)
               manufacturing                                                                          0.0

              Productivity growth,
               mining/utilities                                                                   -4.0

              Productivity growth,
               construction                                                                       -8.0


              Productivity change:                                                          -12.0
               labor reallocation within
               industry effect
                                                                                            -16.0
                                                                                                             2003-2012                             2003-2005               2005-2009              2009-2012
  Sources: Staff estimates using value added data (Kyrgyz LDB, 1/15 update) and employment data at the
  sectoral level (Kyrgyz LFS).




     Figure 2.18: Productivity growth by sector: Full economy versus formal
     establishments 2009-2012
      30.0%
      20.0%
      10.0%
       0.0%
     -10.0%
     -20.0%
     -30.0%
                                                                                           Manufacturing




                                                                                                                                                                WR trade
                                            Mining




                                                                                                                                                     Services




                                                                                                                                                                                                              TOTAL
                                                                                                                                                                                Transport, comm
                                 Industry




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Other
                   Agriculture




                                                                                                            Elec, gas, water


                                                                                                                                    Construction




                                                     Full Economy                                                               Formal establishments



     Source: Staff estimates from KER data (formal establishments); National accounts/Kyrgyz LFS
     (full economy productivity).




                                                                                                                               22
 D.    LIMITED DEVELOPMENT OF A FORMAL PRIVATE SECTOR

2.22    The migration-led growth model has not allowed for the expansion of the formal
private sector. The formal sector is small in the Kyrgyz Republic, and within the formal sector,
public sector dominates employment. Statistics on public employment from the National Statistics
Office suggest that public sector employment accounts for only 17 percent of overall employment
--about in keeping with OECD levels. However, as a proportion of formal employment, public
sector employment accounts for a full 60 percent.

Table 2.3: Public Sector Employment in the Kyrgyz Republic, 2010-2011



                                                          Percent of overall        Percent of employment
                          Number of jobs                    employment                in establishments
                     2010            2011            2010           2011            2010       2011
 Education           149,179         150,604         8%             7%              27%        26%
 Health              63,843          66,263          3%             3%              11%        12%
 Civil Service       18,561          18,644          1%             1%              3%         3%
 Municipal           9,917           10,112          1%             1%              2%         2%
 Other public        93,657          95,275          5%             5%              17%        17%



 Total public
 employment             335,157     340,898      17%           17%   60%          60%
 Sources: World Bank, 2014 (Kyrgyz Republic Public Expenditure Review Policy Notes); National
 Statistics Committee (employment in establishments); Kyrgyz LFS.


 Figure 2.19: Share of employment in private formal, public formal and informal sector,
 select countries
   100%
    80%
    60%
    40%
    20%
     0%




                             Public sector     Private formal    Private informal


 Source: Staff estimates from country data, including World Bank 2014a and 2014b; Kyrgyz NSC data
 and Kyrgyz LFS (to calculate share formal and informal); IZA 2011; ILO 2011 and 2012; Bayramov,
 2012. Bino 2009. OECD 2012.

2.23    There has been limited development of formal private sector jobs. The corollary to the
figure above is that only 40 percent of establishment employment – and 11 percent of overall
employment – takes place in formal private sector establishments. While a comprehensive


                                                     23
accounting of employment in the formal private sector across countries is not easily obtained,
piecing together information from a few studies across countries suggests that formal sector
employment outside the public sector accounts for a very low share of employment relative to
almost all countries. Among CIS economies where estimates could be made, the share of
employment generated in the formal private sector in the Kyrgyz republic is the lowest among all
countries (Figure 2.19).

                           E.   IMPLICATIONS OF THE MIGRATION LED DEVELOPMENT MODEL ON
                                          SUSTAINABLE, PRODUCTIVE JOB GROWTH

Core development challenges with respect to jobs
2.24     Domestic jobs growth has been insufficient to provide employment for the fast
growing labor supply. At the aggregate level, economic growth over the decade has been
"jobless" with the employment elasticity of growth just 0.1 (with the average annual growth of real
output of 4.7 percent resulting in an increase in domestic employment of just 0.5 percent). Current
rates of unemployment, combined with large numbers of workers employed abroad and relatively
rapid labor force growth will make it unlikely that the Kyrgyz Republic can provide sufficient
domestic employment opportunities for all its workers for the foreseeable future. Even assuming
a healthy rate of employment creation capacity of growth of 0.6 percent12, with an estimated half
million workers abroad and another quarter million unemployed, and with labor force growth
averaging 1.3 percent a year, even if economic growth were to average 5 percent a year, there would
be insufficient numbers of jobs created for the domestic labor force and those currently working
abroad at least for the next fifteen years (Figure 2.20).

 Figure 2.20: Domestic employment growth under high employment growth scenario
 versus labor force growth, 2012-2030
                            3,500
       Employment ('000)




                            3,100

                            2,700

                            2,300

                            1,900

                            1,500
                                 2010                2015             2020              2025                2030

                                    Domestic employment, high case*          Labor force + estimated migrants abroad
     Source: Staff estimates from UN and Kyrgyz LFS (estimates of current unemployment and domestic
     labor force). Migrants abroad was estimated at 500,000 workers, a figure between 250,000 estimated
     migrants from the Kyrgyz LFS (See Box 1.1), and the UN estimate of about 750,000. Employment
     growth is estimated at 3% a year, assuming an optimistic average GDP growth rate of 5% a year and an
     average employment elasticity of 0.6.



12
   The overall employment elasticity of 0.1 is likely far below the employment/growth relationship going
forward, as the figure largely reflects the significant labor shedding that has continued in agriculture which
may be beginning to wane. An employment elasticity of 0.6 reflects the past employment elasticity outside
of agriculture (with job growth averaging 3.9 percent a year and output growth averaging 6.6 percent a year).


                                                                      24
2.25    Secondly, productivity growth has been low relative to other CIS economies. The
remittance-financed growth model yielded early productivity gains, with workers moving out of
subsistence agriculture to work in services and industry (primarily construction). But while
continuing growth in services has supported productivity growth (though concentrated in a few
sub-sectors), most other sectors - including manufacturing, mining, and electricity have all
experienced large declines in productivity over the decade. Overall, productivity growth fell from
about 7 percent a year between 2005 and 2009 to about 0.7 percent a year since 2009, significantly
below the productivity growth of Kyrgyz's neighbors (Figure 2.21).


 Figure 2.21: Average worker productivity, Kyrgyz versus other economies 2005 and 2010



     Average output per employed worker (constant int’l $’000)
       50

       40

       30
                                                                                          2005
       20
                                                                                          2010

       10

        0




 Sources: Staff estimates from WDI for value added (12/14 update) and country sources for employment
 data.


2.26     Thirdly, real wage growth exceeds productivity growth, weakening competitiveness.
Real wages have grown by 10 percent a year since 2005, driven by strong wage growth in both
construction and services. Productivity growth, on the other hand, has averaged less than 5 percent
a year. The difference between wage growth and productivity growth has been particularly high in
the tradables sectors, weakening external competitiveness. Real wages in agriculture averaged 17
percent a year, compared with 4 percent a year productivity growth. Manufacturing wages
increased by an average of 6 percent a year compared with productivity declines averaging 4
percent. This could be a symptom of labor shortages developing from both internal and external
migration. The general rise in wages in tradeables without accompanying productivity growth is
concerning because it signals a further weakening of external competitiveness (Figure 2.22).




                                                      25
         Figure 2.22: Wage growth and productivity growth by sector, 2005-2012
                                            Industry, excl.
                     Agriculture             construction            Construction            Services
           25%

           20%

           15%

           10%

            5%

            0%

           -5%

          -10%      05-09   09-12   05-09      09-12        05-09   09-12    05-09   09-12

                                                 Wage         Productivity

         ____________
         Sources: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LDB (1/15 update, value added) and LFS (employment)
         data.


2.27    Fourth, the geographic concentration of migration exposes the Kyrgyz employment
model to risks. Kyrgyz migrants have been primarily young men working in Russia. Over 85
percent of the emigration has been accounted for by only two countries (Russia and Kazakhstan),
making the migration model vulnerable to particular country changes either in economic conditions
(necessitating labor inflows) or in immigrant labor regulations. Indeed, the Russian Federal
Migration Service’s new requirement that, by 2015, all citizens of CIS countries outside the
Eurasian Customs Union who desire to enter Russia must have valid international passports made
the accession of the Kyrgyz Republic to the customs union almost inevitable. With much of the
domestic growth model fueled by the remittances received from these two countries, overall
vulnerability is compounded.

2.28    Finally, the presence of migration has also reduced the imperative for domestic job
growth. With migration to buffer jobs deficiencies, unemployment has remained relatively stable
even as the size of the labor force has expanded rapidly. However, the seemingly limitless
availability of temporary jobs abroad, along with robust consumer demand, may have also dulled
the urgency to create more and better-paying jobs domestically for the labor force. In this way,
migration serves as a disincentive to job-creating structural reforms.

2.29    Formulating strategies for improved jobs outcomes requires a deeper investigation of
micro-level data, with a focus on a formal firms. Thus, using micro level data, we are interested
in exploring the dynamics of growth, productivity, employment creation and labor compensation
in formal establishments to better understand the decline of the formal industrial sector and the
changing formal sector structure. It is through this understanding that constraints to formal sector
job creation can be identified. The following two chapters take a deeper examination into worker
and work, utilizing the household, labor force, and enterprise level data collected in the country.




                                                       26
   CHAPTER 3. GROWTH, PRODUCTIVITY AND
COMPENSATION DYNAMICS FROM FIRM LEVEL DATA
                 ANALYSIS

3.1      Though the formal sector accounts for only about 30 percent of employment in the
Kyrgyz Republic, it is important in overall employment outcomes. To begin, the formal sector
accounts for a majority of output that is produced in the economy. For example, it is estimated that
formal establishments account for almost 70 percent of gross value added in the Kyrgyz Republic.
Secondly, it is generally is the source of the better paying, more productive jobs. Thus,
understanding the constraints it faces is important for improving the better quality jobs. Related,
although the formal sector generally employs a lower proportion of the poor and the bottom 40
percent of the population than the informal sector, formal establishments still provide employment
for a significant number of the less well off. Thus, in its own right, improving the job prospects in
the formal sector can directly improve the labor incomes of the poor. Fourth, informal sector
growth is often closely linked to performance in the formal sector. The development of new formal
industries, for example, often paves the path for ancillary and supporting services that may remain
informal. As a result, improving the performance of formal industries can be the most effective
path for improving income prospects outside of the formal sector. This section assesses the
performance of formal establishments in creating jobs utilizing a dataset created for this report,
based upon the financial reports of establishments (Box 3-1).

3.2      Despite the growth recovery over the 2000s, the Kyrgyz Republic has failed to create
good jobs outcomes. Job creation is not keeping pace with the growth in the labor force. The value
of the jobs being created is improving only marginally, with low productivity and wage growth.
Moreover, jobs are not sufficiently inclusive: there is a dualism and a tension in the jobs market
between the formal sector and the informal sector, and the transition between these two sectors is
difficult.

3.3      A closer look at the formal sector suggests it has fallen short in all three indicators of
jobs success, but most severely with regard to job growth. Formal sector labor demand is muted.
Formal private sector firm growth is stunted among small firms, limiting productivity growth and
small firm job creation. Meanwhile, the growth of the formal sector has been concentrated among
a few large firms with significant market power and scale economies which have not created jobs
on net. While formal sector productivity growth has been substantial, it has been concentrated
among a few firms. Wages have grown in aggregate, but this growth has few demonstrated links
to productivity growth. The aggregate picture of the formal sector is one of limited job and
productivity growth, and wage growth that is unaligned with productivity growth.

3.4     Behind these factors are constraints on private sector growth and job creation. These
include complex, costly labor regulations affecting medium size firms, the array of advantages for
large, sometimes loss-making firms, and the low rates of firm entry in particular job-intensive
industries. Most employment growth is occurring in the large, generally less productive informal
sector.

3.5     Export-oriented manufacturing is particularly impeded from stronger growth. While,
in aggregate, the rate of entry of establishments into the formal sector is high, particular sectors,
such as export-oriented manufacturing, exhibit significantly lower rates of firm entry. Given the




                                                 27
job-creation capacity of export-oriented manufacturing (on average, firms create 29 jobs), lack of
entry into this sector is particularly troublesome for jobs.


          Box 3-1: A description of the Kyrgyz Establishment Reports (KER) dataset

     Kyrgyz Establishments Reports (KER) is a database compiled for this jobs report from mandatory
     statements that all establishments registered in the Kyrgyz Republic are required to submit, either on
     an annual or quarterly basis. Officially, the full financial reports include all establishments in the
     Kyrgyz Republic, but the forms completed differ by establishment type (with some variation in the
     requested information for non-profit establishments, small establishments, financial institutions, etc.).
     The data made available for this analysis include data from the Report on the Key Financial Indicators
     of the Enterprise (annual and quarterly); Statement of Sources and Uses of Funds (non-profit
     establishments); Statement of the Costs of Production and Distribution of Products, Works, Services of
     the Enterprise; Consolidated Report on Denationalization and Privatization of State Property; Report
     on Results of Issue and Subscription of Securities; and, Report on Key Performance Indicators of Small
     Businesses.
     While the official reports submitted by establishments include all organizations and establishments,
     regardless of size, ownership structure, sector, or profit-making status, a smaller subset of these
     financial reports for the period 2009-2012 was provided for the purpose of this analysis. It includes all
     establishments with the exception of (i) financial institutions; (ii) public administration establishments;
     (iii) several large establishments whose identity could be compromised (in particular, the gold mining
     sector and railroads). These missing sectors account for approximately half of the establishment
     employment over the period (with a large proportion in public administration). The KER provides
     detailed information related to firm performance and employment, including inter alia: sales and
     expenses from which to calculate value added, profit, and the like; investment; and employment, man-
     hours and labor compensation. Information is also collected by which it is possible to determine each
     establishment's ownership structure, geographic location, main economic activity and, to some degree,
     age.
     By virtue of several common identifier variables in the KER data (including its location and its sector)
     it is possible to broadly link the analysis of the firms to labor supply from the LFS (which also identifies
     workers who work in establishments, by location and main economic activity). The LFS is not designed
     to be representative at the sector level, and so caution needs to be applied in interpreting results. But
     the linking of labor characteristics to firm decisions on hiring and growth provides added insight into
     the potential impacts of particular job-growth strategies.




    A. A SNAPSHOT OF EMPLOYMENT IN THE FORMAL SECTOR

      The formal sector differs strongly from the informal sector

3.6     The formal sector is largely urban. While overall employment is distributed relatively
evenly across oblasts, the majority of formal sector jobs (and establishments) are urban. Outside
Bishkek, where about half of overall employment occurs outside enterprises, informality dominates
employment by a wide margin. This is evident in data on total employment in rural areas versus
employment in registered establishments (Error! Reference source not found.and Error!
ference source not found.).




                                                     28
 Figure 3.1: Formal Employment by                          Figure 3.2: Total Employment by Region,
 Region, 2009-2012                                         (in ‘000) for 2009-2012

     Employment ('000)

                                                           500
14,000                                                     400
                                 2009 Employment
                                 2012 Employment           300
10,000
                                                           200

  6,000                                                    100

                                                              0
  2,000


 -2,000
                                                                                   2009    2012



 Source: Staff estimates from KER data                     Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS


3.7      Formal sector employment is predominantly in large enterprises, while informal
employment is mostly in small activities. More than 60 percent of employment in the formal
sector takes place in firms with 50 or more workers, and more than a third of employment takes
place in firms with over 200 workers (Figure 3.3). Outside of the formal sector, however, most
employment is in very small activities. For the broader economy, the Kyrgyz LFS suggests that 60
percent of domestic employment (formal and informal) takes place in firms with five workers or
fewer, and only 6 percent in organizations of more than 60 workers (Figure 3.4). The difference in
the picture of employment in formal sector versus the broader economy is evidence of the smallness
of scale of informal activities13.




13 Some of the difference between the proportion of workers employed in small firms according to establishment reports
versus what is suggested economy wide might be attributed to underreporting of employment by small formal firms (that
is, it is possible that the formal sector may also be small in nature, with much more employment taking place in small
firms than reported). While underreporting employment (to social security) and sales (for tax purposes) is common among
registered establishments, smaller firms tend to underreport more than larger firms. Cross-country evidence has found
the degree of underreporting (the fraction of employment and/or sales not reported) to be about twice as high in small
firms than in large firms. . Even doubling of the number of employees for all small establishments in the KER
establishment sample would only raise the share of small firm employment in total employment to about 13%, far from
what is suggested economy-wide. This would suggest that what is not covered by the KER – employment outside of
registered establishments – is even more heavily dominated by micro and very small (less than 5 workers) activities and
establishments.



                                                         29
 Figure 3.3: Distribution of firms and employment            Figure 3.4: Distribution of employment by
 in the formal sector, 2012                                  establishment size -- as recorded by workers
                                                             2003-2012
                                                              100%

                                         1                     80%
 100%
  90%                                    2
                                                               60%
  80%
                                         3-5
  70%
                                                               40%
  60%                                    6-10
  50%
                                         11-20                 20%
  40%
  30%                                    21-30
  20%
                                                                0%




                                                                      2003
                                                                      2004
                                                                      2005
                                                                      2006
                                                                      2007
                                                                      2008
                                                                      2009
                                                                      2010
                                                                      2011
                                                                      2012
  10%                                    31-50
   0%                                    51-100
             Number of     Number of                                      More than 60 workers
               firms        workers      101-200
                                                                          Between 5-60 workers
                                         More than 200
                                                                          Less than 5 workers


 Source: Staff estimates from KER data.                      Source: Staff estimates from KER data.




3.8     There is a significant difference in the sectoral composition of employment for formal
versus informal sectors. Sectors which account for significant employment in the formal sector
are almost not present in the informal sector, including public administration (11 percent of formal
employment and fully formal), education (accounting for 30 percent of formal employment, versus
1 percent of informal employment), and health/social services (accounting for 12 percent of formal
employment and only 1 percent of informal employment). Likewise, informal employment is
dominated by agriculture and trade, as well as construction, which combined account for 70 percent
of informal employment, and only 10 percent of formal employment.

3.9      Related, there are large sectoral differences in the level of informality. Table 3.1
highlights the share of employment in the sector accounted for by registered establishments14.
Formal agriculture employment not surprisingly accounts for a very limited proportion of overall
employment in the sector. But many other sectors are also highly informal, particularly in the
services sector, and these sectors tend to dominate the smaller scale employment in the formal
establishments. Employment in the hotels and restaurant sector is dominated by non-registered
employment (employment not reported by registered establishments), as is wholesale and retail
trade and construction. Among the sectors in which employment is heavily formal, other services
leads the list, largely reflecting public administration (which is fully formal) (see Figure 3.5).




14
     Utilizing the broader NSC establishment reports.


                                                        30
 Table 3.1: Employment Growth in Registered Establishments versus Outside of
 Establishments, 2009-2012

                                               Employment
                                               in registered                                        Employment
                                Sector's       establishments   Employment       Employment         growth:
                                share of       as a share of    growth:          growth:            outside
                                employment     total            Registered       total              registered
Sector                          (overall)      employment       establishments   economy            establishments
Agriculture                     27.8%          2.7%             -6.1%            1.1%               0.9%
Mining                          0.6%           62.1%            7.6%             -22.3%             -8.6%
Manufacturing                   8.9%           27.5%            -5.3%            5.5%               2.0%
Elec/gas/water                  2.2%           58.7%            1.3%             2.0%               1.6%
Construction                    9.4%           9.5%             -7.6%            9.0%               6.9%
W&R trade                       17.0%          6.8%             1.2%             6.8%               6.4%
Hotels and Restaurants          3.3%           5.3%             -7.6%            0.7%               0.2%
Transport/communications        7.4%           21.3%            -0.6%            -2.6%              -2.2%
Other services                  23.3%          78.6%            -4.1%            -1.8%              -15.8%


Total                           100.0%         29.4%            2.0%             1.3%               1.0%
Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS and NSC establishment reports.


Figure 3.5: Distribution of formal vs. informal employment by sector, 2013*

100%
                                                                             Community, other
                                                                             Health/social

 80%                                                                         Education
                                                                             Public admin
                                                                             Real estate/business
 60%
                                                                             Financial
                                                                             Transport/commun

 40%                                                                         Trade
                                                                             Construction
                                                                             Elec/Gas/Water
 20%                                                                         Manufacturing
                                                                             Mining

  0%                                                                         Agriculture
          Share of formal establishments     Share of informal employment
                   employment
_________
Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS (total employment), NSC establishment reports (formal
sector employment).




                                                  31
3.10    The workers themselves differ, with significantly higher education levels in the formal
sector. Formal sector workers are more likely to be well educated, and less likely to be uneducated.
The LFS data provides an estimate of the education levels of workers being employed in the modern
sector. On average, half of all workers in urban establishments have a tertiary education, versus
only one in five outside the formal sector (and only 13 percent in rural areas). And the share of
only-primary educated workers is disproportionately employed outside the modern sector. In both
the urban informal sector and rural areas, 10 percent of workers have completed only primary
school, versus only 3 percent in urban establishments (Figure 3.6).

 Figure 3.6: Share of employed workers with tertiary education versus primary:
 Urban establishments, urban informal and rural 2012

  80%


  60%


  40%


  20%


   0%




                   Share with tertiary education                   Share with primary education

                            Agriculture       Industry        Services   Total


 Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.


3.11     …and significantly lower rates of poverty among the formal sector workers. Though
the KER establishment sample does not provide information on household income levels of
employees, it is possible to get a closer gauge on the types of workers employed in the formal sector
by looking at the characteristics of those employed in establishments versus others from the Kyrgyz
LFS. From the LFS, workers in urban establishments exhibit a household poverty rate of 13
percent, versus 34 percent outside of establishments. The household poverty rate gap between
working in establishments and outside establishments is particularly high in the industrial sector,
where in manufacturing and construction the poverty rate for those employed outside
establishments is estimated to be 3.5-3.7 times that of those working within (Table 3.2).




                                                         32
Table 3.2: Poverty status of employed urban workers, establishments versus outside
establishments, 2011

                                  Proportion of          Poverty rate urban     Poverty rates
                                  urban workers in       workers in             urban workers
                                  establishments,        establishments,        outside
                                  2011                   2011                   establishment
 TOTAL                            50%                    13%                    34%
  Agriculture                     4%                     30%                    59%
   Industry                       45%                    11%                    34%
     Mining                       82%                    23%                    35%
     Manufacturing                43%                    8%                     30%
     Electricity                  99%                    12%                    16%
     Construction                 23%                    11%                    38%
   Services                       54%                    13%                    30%
     Trade                        8%                     12%                    28%
     Hotels/restaurants           39%                    17%                    42%
     Transport/communications     35%                    13%                    39%
     Financial intermediation     93%                    7%                     63%
     Real estate/business         76%                    11%                    18%
    Public administration         100%                   11%                    n.a.
     Education                    95%                    16%                    25%
     Health/social                97%                    14%                    39%
     Community                    49%                    15%                    23%

 Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz LFS.


    B. A SNAPSHOT OF GROWTH AND EMPLOYMENT OUTCOMES IN FORMAL
       ESTABLISHMENTS

    Job growth patterns among formal sector establishments

3.12     Over the 2009-2012 period, the formal sector experienced economic growth, but very
little job growth. On average, growth averaged more than 6.6 percent a year in real terms in the
formal establishments represented in the KER establishment data. That compares with job growth
averaging less than 0.4 percent a year (Figure 3.3). The bulk of job growth has come not from
value-creating private sector firms (who account for two thirds of employment), but from non-
profits and state-owned enterprises, despite the fact that state owned enterprises realized losses over
the period (Table 3.3). While private sector, for profit firms saw productivity growth of more than
7 percent a year, on average they shed jobs at a rate of 0.5 percent a year since 2009.




                                                  33
  Table 3.3: Job Creation, Output Growth and Productivity Growth by Firm Type, (in
  percent except for index)


                   Propor-      Average                                    Average        Contrib    Average
                   tion of      annual        Contribu-      Proporti-     annual         ution to   productiv      Pro-
                   total        job           tion to        on of         growth in      overall    ity per        ductivity
                   employ       growth,       overall        Value         Value          value      worker         growth,
                   ment         2009-         job            added         Added,         added      (index)        2009-
                   2009         2012          growth         2009          2009-2012      growth     2009           2012
 Total             100          0.4           100              100         6.6            100        100            6.2


State owned        22           1.9           107              4           1.1            1          20             -0.8
 Private           78           0.0           -7               96          6.8            99         122            6.8
Revenue
generating         74           -0.1          -23              100         6.6            100        136            6.7
State owned        6            3.8           66               4           1.1            1          66             -2.7
Private            67           -0.5          -88              96          6.8            99         142            7.3
Non profit         26           1.8           123              --          --             --         --             --
State owned        15           1.1           41               --          --             --         --             --
Private            11           2.8           81               --          --             --         --             --



  3.13     The majority of job growth in the formal sector came from new firms. The KER data
  does not provide information on age of the establishment, but based on when the establishment is
  recorded in the sample, it is possible to determine those establishments which entered after 200915.
  Using this gauge, entering firms created more about 60 percent of all the jobs created by
  establishments over the 2009-2012 period. Entrants created more than 32,000 jobs between 2009
  and 2012, while established enterprises shed more than 35,000 jobs – or about 16 percent of the
  jobs that existed at the start of the sample in 2009.

  3.14    Jobs were lost through firm exit, but also through labor shedding of surviving firms.
  Of the 47,000 jobs shed by both exiting establishments and surviving establishments, about a third
  of them came from firms that continued to operate. These surviving companies shed labor at a rate
  of almost 3 percent a year over the 2009-2012 period. While the bulk of these job-shedding
  companies experienced negative output growth, a large share of growing companies also shed
  labor. Among growing establishments, about 60 percent of companies reduced their work forces,
  accounting for almost 20 percent of the job losses by all establishments over the period.

  3.15    At the sectoral level, while manufacturing has contributed the most to output growth,
  it has also shed the most labor. Manufacturing accounted for the bulk of output growth, along
  with wholesale and retail trade and transport and communications (Figure 3.7). Job growth was
  limited across the board, but agriculture experienced strong growth in formal employment from its
  very low initial base, the result of several large poultry, dairy and crop growing establishments
  beginning operations after 2009. Services also experienced modest job growth, particularly from

  15
     Some caution must be exercised in this interpretation, however, as there is the potential for firms to drift
  in and out of operational status (so called zombie firms), and entry may reflect a large portion of firms which
  were in existence prior to 2009.


                                                        34
wholesale and retail trade and several sectors heavily populated with non-profit institutions,
including community services and education. The greatest job losses for the economy came from
manufacturing, where more than 4,200 jobs were shed (about 9 percent of manufacturing jobs in
2009). Not only did exiting firms contribute to the loss of manufacturing jobs, but job shedding by
surviving incumbent firms also contributed heavily. About 6,775 manufacturing jobs were lost in
establishments which remained in operation between 2009 and 2012 - a decline in employment of
more than 15 percent (Figure 3.7)

          Figure 3.7: Contribution to value added growth by sector, 2009-2012




                 Agriculture              Construction           Elec, gas, water
                 Manufacturing            Mining                 Education
                 Health/social            Hotels                 Community
                 Real estate/business     Transport, comm        WR trade


          Source: Staff estimates from KER data.




          Figure 3.8: Employment growth by sector 2009-2012

            9,000
            6,000
            3,000
                0
           -3,000
           -6,000                                                                            Exits
           -9,000                                                                            Survivors
          -12,000                                                                            Entrants




          Source: Staff estimates from KER data.




                                                   35
          The relationship between firm size and employment growth

3.16    Firm size has played a large role in Kyrgyz’s job creation, with small firms unable to
grow (and thus expand employment) and large firms growing strongly with low levels of
employment creation. Analysis of job creation by the life-cycle of the firm and by firm size
provides several important insights into firm growth and job creation. Annex 1 presents the results
of regression analysis of net job creation in Kyrgyz Republic over the 2009-2012 period, with a
view to better understanding the relationship between job growth and firm size, as well as to
determine other factors that influence the overall job creation.

3.17     The formal sector exhibits a considerable amount of churning, without any job
growth. Table 3.4 indicates the rates of entry at each firm size. Aggregate entry is very high, at
about 20 percent over the 4 years (that is, about 20 percent of the firms in the sample entered after
2009). Entrants created employment across all firm sizes (the majority of employment being
created by large entrants), but once they’ve entered, firms in aggregate have difficulties surviving
and expanding (particularly small and medium firms). The greatest churning comes from small
and medium firms, with significant barriers to small firms growing to medium sized, and significant
barriers to medium sized firms staying medium sized (with the highest probability of shrinking
across age group).

       Table 3.4: Firm Size and Employment Distributions, 2009-2012

 Size     category        Average                      Average
 (number        of        number          of   % of    number    of   %       of   Entry   Survival
 workers)                 firms                firms   jobs           employment   rate    rate
 1                        2,954                23.1    2,954          1.4          16%     80%
 2                        2,039                15.9    4,079          1.9          16%     93%
 3,4                      2,346                18.3    7,978          3.7          12%     94%
 5, - 9                   2,257                17.6    14,765         6.9          10%     95%
 10, - 15                 994                  7.8     11,986         5.6          9%      97%
 16, - 30                 925                  7.2     20,017         9.3          7%      97%
 31, - 60                 651                  5.1     28,181         13.1         6%      97%
 61, - 100                288                  2.3     22,044         10.2         5%      98%
 101, - 200               195                  1.5     26,777         12.4         6%      98%
 201, - 1000              135                  1.1     55,173         25.6         3%      99%
 > 1000                   12                   0.1     21,538         10.0         5%      100%


 Total                    12,796               100.0   215,490        100.0        9%      68%s
 Source: Staff estimates from KER data.



3.18    The probability of job growth and survival for large firms is much higher than for
small and medium sized establishments.              Figure 3.9 displays the evolution of growth in
employment by initial firm size. Column sections show the number of jobs provided (in 2009 and
2012) by firms that grew or shrank to a particular size category in 2012. The column section
designated “exit” in 2009, for example, reflects the total employment in 2009 in firms which
eventually exited by 2012. Several interesting features emerge from this breakdown.



                                                       36
             3.19     Small firms have high rates of exit, while medium size firms have a high probability
             for shrinking. Jobs in small firms have the highest rates of loss through exit, suggesting difficulty
             of survival for small entrants. Of the more than 25,000 small firm jobs that existed in 2009, for
             example, more than 5,000 were jobs that would be lost by 2012 because of firm exit. Medium
             sized firms, meanwhile, exhibit the highest rates of reversal to smaller size, in addition to fairly
             high rates of exit (about 4,300 of the 37,000 jobs in medium firms in 2009 would be lost due to
             firm exit). The reversal to smaller size is reflected in the fact that of the 37,000 jobs in medium
             sized firms in 2009, about 6,000 would be lost to firms shrinking in employment size (shedding
             labor)16.

             3.20    Small firms don’t grow. Figure 3.10 shows the dynamics of firm growth by initial firm
             size, with the black bars reflecting firms that remained in the same size category (in terms of
             employment). The dynamic picture of firm growth indicates that the probability of shrinking in
             size has been significantly higher for smaller firms than for larger ones, with very few firms
             graduating to the higher employment size section of the chart.

             Figure 3.9: Evolution of Employment Growth of Firms, by initial firm size

                             Micro firms                                                  Small firms
 4,000                                                                  30,000                                Ending size
                                                       Large size       25,000                                    Large
 3,000                                                Ending
                                                                        20,000                                    Medium
                                                       Medium
 2,000                                                                  15,000
                                                        Small                                                     Small
                                                                        10,000
 1,000                                                  Micro                                                     Micro
                                                                         5,000
     -                                                  Exit                -                                     Exit
                     2009              2012                                           2009         2012



                            Medium firms                                                  Large firms
 40,000                                                                 100,000                              Ending size
                                                    Ending size
                                                      Large              80,000                                     Large
 30,000
                                                        Medium           60,000
 20,000                                                                                                             Small
                                                        Small            40,000
 10,000                                                                                                             Micro
                                                        Micro            20,000
         -                                              Exit                  -                                     Exit
                     2009              2012                                            2009          2012


Source: Staff estimates from KER data.




             16
                While micro firms appear to display exceptional growth to large size, this likely reflects “zombie” large
             firms, which, when they go into non-operational status, revert to 1 employee.


                                                                  37
Figure 3.10: Dynamics of firm entry, growth and survival, 2009-2012
Transition of Firms from original Employment Size
                                                                                 900
                                                                                800    Entrant
                                                                                700
                                                                                       Initially 1 person
                                                                                600
                                                                               500     2-3
                                                                               400     4-5
                                                                               300
                                                                              200      6-9
                                                                              100      10 - 15
                                                                              0
                                                                                       16 - 19




                                             Entrant
                                              Initially 1 person
                                               2-3
                                                4-5
                                                                                       20 - 30




                                                 6-9
                                                  10 - 15
                                                   16 - 19
                                                     20 - 30
                                                                                       31 - 60




                                                      31 - 60
                                                       61 - 100
                                                         101 - 200
                                                          201 - 1000
                                                            Initially 1000+            61 - 100
                                                                                       101 - 200
                                                                                       201 - 1000
                                                                                       Initially 1000+




Source: Staff estimates from KER data.


3.21     The results on net job creation have had implications on the size of formal sector
establishments in the Kyrgyz Republic. With strong rates of entry coming from relatively smaller
establishments (relative to the existing composition of jobs), and significant job shedding by larger
established firms, the size of the formal sector is shrinking. Between 2009 and 2012, the number
of firms increased by almost 4.5 percent a year over the period, with no employment creation
beyond (small) entrants. The result has been a decline in the average employment of formal sector
companies, from about 18 employees per establishment to about 16.


    C. UNDERSTANDING JOB CREATION DYNAMICS IN THE KYRGYZ REPUBLIC

3.22     An aggregate accounting of jobs by large versus small established firms suggests
small and medium firms have neither created jobs nor grown, while large established firms
grew but did not create employment. Figure 3.1 decomposes the dynamics of small and medium
sized firm and large firm growth in terms of value added and employment. Over the 2009-2012
period, small and medium sized firms lost much more in output than they did in employment, (for
small firms primarily because the workforce was already small, and reduction in employment
would be akin to exiting). Large firms on the other hand have demonstrated strong output growth
in the midst of job shedding.

Figure 3.11: Evolution of employment and value added growth of SMEs and large
establishments 2009-2012




                                                 38
Figure 3.11: Evolution of employment and value added growth of SMEs and large
establishments 2009-2012

                  Small and medium firms: Employment                    Small and medium firms: Value
                                                                                   Added
                  100
      Thousands


                                                                       15
                   80




                                                            Millions
                   60                                                  10
                   40
                                                                        5
                   20
                    0                                                   0
                             2009            2012                                2009            2012
                                                                       -5
                          Became large
                                                                               Became large
                          Stayed Small/Medium
                                                                               Stayed Small/Medium
                          Became micro
                                                                               Became micro
                          Exited
                                                                               Exited




                        Large firms: Employment                             Large firms: Value Added
              100                                                      25
                                                            Millions
  Thousands




                  80                                                   20
                                                                       15
                  60
                                                                       10
                  40
                                                                        5
                  20                                                    0
                                                                       -5        2009            2012
                   0
                            2009                2012
                                                                               Stayed large
          Exited                     Became micro                              Became small/medium
          Became small/medium        Stayed large                              Became micro
                                                                               Exited
Source: Staff estimates from KER data.



3.23     Significantly higher regulatory requirements and payments make growth beyond
smallness cost-ineffective. Many sources point to a regulatory environment which particularly
discourages the growth of small and medium firms. Based on a range of business and regulatory
costs (financial and other), Investment Climate Assessments suggest that medium sized firms face
the largest regulatory burden among firm size types. As a result, the incentives to remain small
(and revert to smallness) are large (see Figure 3.12). Among the challenges for firm-size expansion
are the complex and burdensome regulatory environment, especially in tax administration,
corruption, and political stability. The Kyrgyz Republic has a special tax regime, including the
patent system, which incentives small-sized firms to stay small instead of scaling up and expanding
beyond the tax incentive threshold. Another way around these regulatory burdens is through
underreporting employment (to social security) and sales (to tax authorities), and it is common


                                                       39
across countries that smaller firms underreport more than larger firms. Thus, small firms may be
growing, but underreporting their growth

3.24     Alternatively, small firms may be circumventing some of these regulations and
procedures by hiring contract workers, who would not encounter the same labor and other
requirements as employees. The KER data indicates use of contract labor peaks for smaller to
small-medium firms, and reduces to no use of contract workers for firms with more than 50
employees (Figure 3.13). Because employment size is determined based on all categories of labor
(including contract workers), firms in the category of 11-15 workers, for example, can include firms
with 10 employees, with supplementary employment from contractors. This would be consistent
with the low job creation rates among growing small establishments.


      Figure 3.12: De facto regulations and                 Figure 3.13: Ratio of contract
      from firms, by firm size 2013                         workers to overall employment, 2012

                                                     2.5%
       100

        80                                           2.0%

        60
                                                     1.5%
        40

        20
                                                     1.0%
         0

                                                     0.5%


                                                     0.0%



                                                                    Size of firm (total employment)
                 Small    Medium    Large

 Source: IFC, 2013. Enterprise Survey for the        Source: Staff estimates from KER data.
 Kyrgyz Republic.

3.25     While large firms have a low elasticity of employment to growth, growing firms have
expanded employment. While employment elasticities are low, there is a fairly close association
between economic growth and hiring. Firms that have grown (in real output) have in general
expanded employment (Figure 3.14). On average, expanding establishments (in terms of value
added) have seen employment grow by about 13 percent a year (5 percent a year excluding
entrants). This compares with job losses averaging 14 percent a year among establishments which
experienced negative value added growth (and job growth of about 2 percent a year among non-
profit establishments).

3.26    …but growth is concentrated in a few firms which don’t create jobs. A very small
number of firms are responsible for a large portion of overall output, and these establishments on
average have very low employment creation rates. Little more than forty firms account for half of
the output growth generated by growing establishments over the 2009-2012 period, and while they
did expand employment (by around 17 percent in aggregate), job growth paled in comparison to
output growth, which expanded 10 fold.


                                                40
Figure 3.14: Growth and Labor Expansion by Sector, 2009-2012
     % of establishments that expanded jobs   100%


                                              80%
                                                                 Education     Wholesale trade
                                                                                  Business svcs
                                                 Community
                                              60%


                                              40%                                                         Transport manuf

                                                                                                  Elec goods manuf
                                              20%
                                                                                    Wood manuf
                                                                    Telecom
                                               0%
     -20%                                            0%       20%             40%         60%              80%          100%

                                              -20%
                                                             % of establishments that grew (VA)

Source: KER.


3.27     Part of the low employment elasticity of large firms reflects a rebound in growth in
loss-making establishments. Many of Kyrgyz’s large establishments were in significant loss-
making positions in 2009, and their financial turnaround contributed much to the overall growth
that as exhibited by large establishments, in aggregate (Figure 3.15). However, there was little job
creation associated with this turnaround. This is potentially because there was limited labor
shedding with the economic downturn (and thus limited adjustment with the upswing). Large firms
have greater capacity to weather economic storms, and the necessity for adjusting workers on the
margin may be significantly lower.

3.28    …but in general, large firms grow with limited labor adjustment. As a group, large
value-producing firms (i.e., excluding non-profits) experienced value added growth averaging 9
percent a year, while shedding labor at a rate of about 6 percent a year.

3.29     Several features suggest the bulk of these large growing firms face limited competitive
pressure. A closer examination of the large established firms that have contributed the most to
value added17 (compared with other large establishments and other non-large value-producing
establishments) provides evidence of limited competitive pressures, significant market power,
strong economies of scale which allow for growth without job creation, and access to resources that
are not shared by even other large firms (Figure 3.16).




17
  Limited to large established firms (more than 60 workers in 2009) which are among the top 5% of firms in
growth of value added over the period. The total firms in this sample is 142, out of 445 large establishments.


                                                                                    41
         Figure 3.15: Decomposition of employment and value added growth in formal
         establishments, 2009-2012
                                                                    Non-profits, exits

                                                                    Non-profits, established

                                                                    Non-profit, entrants

                                                                    Revenue generating, exits

                                                                    Revenue generating, prior
                                                                    loss makers (2009)
                                                                    Revenue generating,
                                                                    shrinking established
                                                                    Revenue generating,
                                                                    growing established
     Growth in employment       Growth in Value added
                                                                    Revenue generating,
             ('000)                     (ml)
                                                                    entrants

         Source: Staff estimates from KER data.

3.30     The large establishments which have overwhelmingly contributed to growth (but not
employment) over the period have significantly higher average market share, even compared
with other large establishments. They have about twice the access to bank lending as other large
establishments (and more than 10 times the access to bank lending as non-large companies). While
the access to budget loans (government lending) among establishments is low in general, about 3
percent of the largest growing firms have access to budgetary credit – 5 times the rate of other large
firms and 30 times the rate of non-large firms. The composition of growth, in terms of tradeables
to non-tradeables, is not significantly different between the largest growing establishments and
other establishments (with about 35 percent of value added growth coming from tradeables), but a
matching of the product groups to UN Comtrade data on imports suggests that a very low proportion
of the tradeables production is imported in the largest growing establishments18, suggesting a level
of implicit or explicit protection. In some sectors, the geography itself may create import
protection, with significantly higher freight costs impeding greater imports. Of the top growing
large mining and manufacturing establishments, more than 30 percent of value added growth came
from heavy goods, such as concrete, bricks, and motor vehicle parts. In the same manner that the
Kyrgyz geography creates disadvantages for exports, it likewise creates similar disadvantages for
cost-effective imports, creating natural levels of protection for domestic producers.

3.31    These companies also demonstrate stronger economies of scale. A production process
exhibits economies of scale when the marginal return from a unit of input exceeds the average
returns. While we are only able to assess the average returns, we can compare the initial ratio of
output/inputs to the growth of output/inputs over the period. Thus, we compute an economies of
scale index calculated as the share of the growth of outputs to the growth of inputs over the share
of the original output to the original inputs. The inputs used for the calculation represent the



18
   The correspondence between import data and the production data is hardly exact, but a rough
correspondence using SITC revision 2 product classifications at the 4 digit level to NACE codes suggests
under any circumstance significantly greater import value to production among non-large or large but not
high growth establishments.


                                                  42
establishment’s intermediate inputs into production as well as the depreciation of fixed assets. For
ease of exhibiting in the same chart with other indicators, that index was divided by 10.

 Figure 3.16: Characteristics of Top Growing Large Firms versus Other Large, Other
 Firms
  1.0




  0.6




  0.2


        Average firm Access to bank  Access to Share of growth                Of which     Economies of
 -0.2      share         loans      budget loans from tradables              imported       scale index

                                    Top growers      Other large     Other


 Sources: Staff calculation from KER data, COMTRADE data. Economies of scale index calculated as
 average returns to additional inputs (intermediate + depreciation of fixed assets) over the average returns
 of original inputs. To graph with other indicators, that index value has been divided by 10. Access to
 bank/budget loans calculated as the share of establishments in sample with reported bank or budget loan.
 Top growers represent large establishments (with 60+ workers) in the top 5% of establishments with regard
 to value added growth. Average firm share = the share of overall value added in the sector (3 digit NACE)
 held by the establishment on average over the 2009-2012 period.


3.32     Overall, the core jobs challenge in the formal sector is a growth challenge. For small
and medium sized firms, while rates of entry are high, there are constraints to survival and growth
which prevent establishments from growing to create sustainable employment. There are also
constraints to job creation, even accounting for growth, which may suggest additional incentives to
remain small for regulatory reasons. Even among growing small and medium firms (except for the
very small), net job creation was negative over the period. For large firms, the growth problem is
not related to the size of growth but the pattern of growth. Very large firms account for most of
the growth in value added among formal establishments, and increased market power has allowed
them to increase earnings without an expansion in costs (including labor).

    D. IMPLICATIONS OF THE JOBS AND GROWTH DYNAMICS IN THE FORMAL
       SECTOR

Productivity growth has been captured by a few firms, with limited spillovers and
employment growth

3.33    Strong productivity growth in the formal sector points to declining productivity in
the informal sector. At the aggregate level, with strong overall growth and job shedding,
aggregate productivity growth in the formal sector has been strong, averaging 6.7 percent a year
for value-creating firms. National accounts data suggests that economy wide, productivity growth
averaged less than 1 percent a year, which would hint at significant productivity declines in the


                                                     43
informal sector (Figure 3.17). National accounts also points to productivity declines in both
manufacturing and construction, but the KER data suggests that productivity growth has been
strongly positive in the formal industrial sector, save utilities. Indeed, productivity growth in
manufacturing and construction (which had the highest productivity declines at the national level)
have been positive and even exceeded productivity growth in formal services. With the formal
sector accounting for only 25 percent of manufacturing employment and 10 percent of construction
employment, the productivity dynamics identified at the macroeconomic level may suggest that
rising informality is significantly impacting overall productivity in the sector.

  Figure 3.17: Productivity growth by sector: Full economy versus formal
  establishments 2009-2012
      30.0%
      20.0%
      10.0%
       0.0%
     -10.0%
     -20.0%
     -30.0%
                                                                                         Construction
                                         Mining


                                                   Manufacturing




                                                                                                        Services


                                                                                                                   WR trade




                                                                                                                                                        TOTAL
                                                                                                                              Transport, comm
                              Industry




                                                                                                                                                Other
                Agriculture




                                                                   Elec, gas, water




                                              Full Economy                            Formal establishments



  Source: Staff estimates from KER data (formal establishments); National accounts/Kyrgyz
  LFS (full economy productivity).

3.34     Productivity growth in formal enterprises has been strong, but it is concentrated
among large firms. Overall productivity per worker rose in value producing firms by around 6.7
percent a year (from about $3,200 per worker to $3,931) (Figure 3.18 and Figure 3.19). Large
established enterprises and large entrants together contributed more than 145 percent to the
increase, but established firms which were not large dragged productivity growth down. Outside
of large entrants, other entrants contributed only a small portion to productivity growth, though
they accounted for almost all of the entrants. The productivity decomposition is further evidence
of the very strong role that large firms play in overall growth and productivity outcomes in the
Kyrgyz formal sector. Moving beyond large firms, however, productivity growth has been
negative, with output per worker declining from around 213 thousand som to 164 thousand som
(or a decline of about 9 percent a year).

3.35    The lack of productivity growth outside large firms limits technological spillovers.
There is substantial evidence that sustained growth happens in when less-productive firms adopt
technology and business practices of frontier firms. As a result, as countries develop, productivity
per worker differences between firms in an industry decline. The concentration of productivity in
the Kyrgyz Republic suggests a lack of technological spillovers from large established firms to
entrants/small firms, which has implications for long run growth. Sustained growth involves new




                                                                                      44
and smaller firms capturing the spillover of technological and management knowledge from
frontier firms. Without that spillover, growth becomes an enclave activity, benefitting few.

 Figure 3.18: Productivity Growth of                        Figure 3.19: Contribution to
 Entrants and Established Firms; Large                      Productivity Growth by Size and Age of
 Firms vs. Others                                           Firm, 2009-2012

              500

              400                                           80%

                                                            60%
   '000 som




              300
                                                            40%
              200
                                                            20%

              100                                            0%

                                                           -20%
                0
                       Large     Large      Other     Other -40%
                    established entrants established entrants      Large established   Large entrants
              VA per worker 2009      VA per worker 2012           Other established   Other entrants


 Source: Staff estimates from KER data.                     Source: Staff estimates from KER data

3.36     Labor reallocation to more productive activities has taken place, primarily the result
of labor shedding from less productive firms (rather than growth of new productive
establishments) One of the key indicators of better jobs is productivity growth, which can come
from productivity growth within firms/industries/locations, or movement of labor to more
productive firms/industries/locations. Over the 2009 to 2012 period, employment has shifted from
less productive firms to more productive firms. The shift is less a reflection of employment creation
in productive establishments than by labor shedding in less productive establishments. Ranking
establishments by their average productivity (real value added per worker), it is possible to see how
overall employment has grown among establishments by their productivity levels in 2009 versus
2012. From that, there has been marginal growth in employment among the top two quintiles, and
a shrinking of employment at the lower end of the productivity spectrum (Figure 3.21).

3.37    The concentration of both growth and productivity growth has meant that
employment has not been pulled. Strong output growth has resulted in productivity growth
primarily carried by large firms, which has resulted in limited relationship between productivity
gains and employment creation. Economy wide, output growth of 6.6 percent a year was
accompanied by job growth -0.1 percent a year, resulting in productivity growth of 6.7 percent a
year. The same phenomenon of growth without jobs is true across sectors, and only a few sectors
have actually created employment (while almost all sectors have demonstrated strong productivity
growth) (Figure 3.20).




                                                           45
 Figure 3.20: Decomposing growth in value                                                           Figure 3.21: Employment by Productivity
 added: productivity versus employment                                                              Quintile, 2009-2012

                                 1                                                                                 60,000
   Growth in value added (%)


                               0.5
                                                                                                                   45,000




                                                                                                      Employment
                                 0
                               -0.5                                                                                30,000
                                -1                                       Employment growth
                                                                         Productivity growth                       15,000
                               -1.5
                                                  Elec/gas


                                                    Hotels




                                               W&R trade
                                                Education




                                               Real estate
                                             Construction


                                                   Finance




                                              Community
                                                   Mining
                                                    Health

                                            Manufacturing
                                               Agriculture




                                        Transport/commun
                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                            High   Upper    Mid                        Lower Bottom
                                                                                                                            Productivity quintile, 2009 versus 2012

                                                                                                                                   2009    2012

 Source: Staff estimates from KER data.                                                             Source: Staff estimates from KER data.



Wage growth does not relate strongly to productivity growth

3.38    …nor have wages been pulled. In 58 percent of establishments which demonstrated
productivity growth there was accompanying wage growth – the corollary of which is that in 42
percent of productivity growing establishments, average wages did not increase despite
productivity. The employment weighted results are broadly similar. At the sectoral level, while
there appears to be some relationship between wages and productivity, the relationship if far from
consistent (Figure 3.22).

                                 Figure 3.22: Large Differences in Productivity Reflected in Wage Differences
                                                            800                                                                             150   Avg labor compensation (som)
                                      VA per worker (som)




                                                            600                                                                             120
                                                            400                                                                             90
                                                            200                                                                             60
                                                              0                                                                             30
                                                            -200                                                                            0




                                                                                          Axis Title

                                                              Average output per worker        Average labor compensation per worker

                                 Source: Staff estimates from KER data.

3.39    Wages and productivity growth are particularly out of alignment for public
enterprises. Although the KER data does not include public administration employment, it does
include state-owned enterprises (and further allows for distinguishing between revenue-generating



                                                                                                 46
establishments and non-revenue-generating organizations). From that, there is evidence of
significant differences in wage growth between the public and private sector. Over the 2009-2012
period, the average level of labor compensation increased by less than a percent a year in revenue-
generating establishments, compared with more than 5 percent a year in non-revenue generating
establishments. A similar picture emerges when looking at compensation by the ownership
structure of firms, where state-owned enterprises saw compensation levels increase by about 3.3
percent over the 2009-2012 period, compared with less than 2 percent in private establishments.
Overall, the KER data suggests that the average compensation in state-owned, non-profit
establishments increased by 6 percent a year compared with about 1 percent a year growth in
private, revenue generating establishments (see Figure 3.23)19.

 Figure 3.23: Real Average Annual Wage Growth versus Productivity Growth 2009-2012,
 by ownership and revenue-generation status

       8.0%
       6.0%
       4.0%
       2.0%
       0.0%
      -2.0%
      -4.0%
      -6.0%
      -8.0%
     -10.0%
     -12.0%
              State owned       Private    State owned       Private      State owned       Private
                        Total                  Revenue generating           Non revenue generating
                                           Wage      Productivity

 Source: Staff estimates from KER data.



Low rates of growth or firm entry in some sectors have weakened job creation
3.40     Export-oriented manufacturing is particularly impeded from stronger growth. Export
oriented manufacturing, which has a strong job-creation capacity has significantly lower rates of
entry than other sectors. While some of the growth and hiring differences among firms is the result
of factors highlighted earlier – the age of the establishment, its size, its ownership, its level of
investment, and the like, a part is also directly related to the activities undertaken. Some sectors
display much higher rates of labor adjustment (hiring) in the presence of growth, beyond what can
be attributed to size/age differences. And some activities simply have higher growth potential.
Understanding these differences provides a better understanding of the landscape for job creation
in the formal sector. To disentangle the effects, Table 3.5 presents the differences in sectoral hiring
rates (relative to the sample mean), broken down between the portion attributable to higher



19
   Based on establishment reports samples (which do not include public administration, nor do they include
a large portion of public employment in education and health). Wage information from household data does
not permit identification of ownership structure of the place of employment, nor whether the establishment
is revenue-generating.


                                                   47
     probability of growth versus and the portion attributable to stronger hiring rates, given growth
     (employing simple OLS regression analysis).20

     Table 3.5: Sectoral Differences in Hiring rates 2009-2012: Estimate of Portion Attributable
     to Differences in Growth versus Portion Attributable to Differences in Employment
     Elasticities
                                                                                         Portion of
                                                                                            hiring              Portion
                                                                                         difference         attributable to
                                                Difference in                          attributable to          higher
                                               probability of       Difference in          higher           probability of
                            Probability of     hiring, relative   prob. of growth,     probability of        hiring, given
                               hiring              to mean        relative to mean        growing              growing
Agriculture                      68%                 27%                 26%                 14%                    14%
Mining                           49%                  8%                  6%                  3%                    5%
Manufacturing                    37%                 -3%                 -1%                 -1%                    -3%
Electricity/gas/water            39%                 -2%                  6%                  3%                    -5%
Construction                     41%                  0%                 -2%                 -1%                    1%
Wholesale/retail trade           41%                  0%                 -2%                 -1%                    1%
Hotels/restaurants               38%                 -3%                 -2%                 -1%                    -1%
Transport/storage/
communication                    40%                 -1%                  0%                  0%                    -1%
Finance                          25%                 -15%               -17%                 -9%                    -6%
Real estate/business             39%                 -2%                  0%                  0%                    -2%
Education                        56%                 15%                 10%                  5%                    10%
Health/social                    36%                 -4%                 -1%                  0%                    -4%
Community                        36%                 -4%                 -6%                 -3%                    -1%
Source: Staff estimates from KER data. Estimated relationship Pr(hiring) = .53*Pr(growing)+sector dummies; Adj R2=0.58.

     3.41     Agriculture stands out in terms of hiring, driven equally between higher probability
     of growth and greater hiring inclination, given growth. A large number of new farming
     activities began operation over the period, which, combined with strong expansion of several
     existing establishments, resulted in a large number of establishments exhibiting growth over the
     period. But about half of the stronger hiring rates is attributable to higher probability of hiring,
     given growth. On average, agriculture establishments are 15 percent more likely to hire than
     establishments in other sectors, given growth.

     3.42     The hiring probability attached to growth is a slightly different issue from the
     employment creation capacity of growth. The stronger hiring rates in agriculture, relative to
     other growing sectors, relates to its inclination to adjust labor on the margin – regardless of what
     the level of growth is. The agriculture sector exhibits a much stronger relationship between the
     presence of growth and the inclination to expand employment. It may relate to a greater flexibility
     in hiring and firing workers (and thus easier adjustment), or it may relate to the lower direct labor


     20
       Although the dependent variable is binary and OLS will not produce the best linear unbiased estimator,
     regression analysis was used for easier interpretation of marginal effects (see Beck, 2011 for discussion of
     the conditions under which OLS regressions of binary dependent variable with fixed effects can be
     employed).


                                                         48
adjustment costs associated with the sector. The average compensation in these jobs is significantly
lower: even in the formal sector, the average compensation in agriculture is only about a third of
the average level of compensation in the formal sector, overall.

3.43     Despite being capital intensive, mining also exhibits higher than average propensity
to hire, given positive growth. About half of all mining establishments expanded employment
over the period, relative to about 41 percent economy wide. With a large number of entrants to
the sector (29 percent), growth accounted for much of the increased hiring rates in the sector, but
not all. On average, mining establishments were 5 percent more likely to expand employment than
other sectors, given the presence of growth. Mining is not traditionally seen as a labor-intensive
sector, so it may be all the more surprising that the sector has demonstrated a more robust
growth/hiring relationship than other sectors.

3.44     Underlying these differences in hiring are large differences in growth related to firm
entry. While sectors may have similar probabilities for growth (similar proportions of growing
firms), entrants by definition must create employment to grow. Thus, it is not surprising that the
highest rates of hiring (given growth) occur in the sectors where entrants make up a large portion
of the “growers”. Sectors like manufacturing, utilities and finance all exhibited very low rates of
entry, while education and agriculture have had very high rates of entry into the sector (Figure
3.24). Indeed, sectoral growth is largely related to the degree to which establishments can enter
the market. Taking into account this difference, Annex table A.5 outlines the sectoral differences
in hiring over the period by entrants versus established firms.

 Figure 3.24: Sectoral differences in entry rates and hiring probabilities, given growth
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%
 -10%




                   Higher probability of hiring, given growth    Entry rate to sector

 Source: Staff estimates from Kyrgyz KER data.

3.45     Manufacturing jobs reflect the most net jobs “lost” to low levels of firm entry. What
would net job creation look like with higher rates of firm entry? At the economy wide level, the
rate of entry of establishments is about 22 percent. To get a rough estimate of the jobs and value
impacts of increasing that rate to 30 percent (holding survival rates constant), we modeled at the
sector level the increase in firms that would imply for each sector, and used the average number of
jobs created by entrants in the sector (over the 2009-2012 period) and the average VA per worker
for entrants to obtain sector-specific jobs impacts (Table 3.6). For sectors like agriculture, which
are already more open than that level (rate of entry 32 percent), we imposed no changes. For sectors


                                                  49
with very low rates of entry, like manufacturing, utilities and finance, this would imply very large
changes in the rates of entry (the number of new firms, however, would also depend on the current
number of establishments). But entering firms have different capacities to create jobs and value,
depending upon the economic activity. Entrants in manufacturing, for example, on average create
29 jobs, where in utilities, the number is only 9 jobs (and in finance only 7). If new entrants on
average created the same number of jobs and average value added as in the past 4 years, it is clear
that the bulk of job creation and value creation from increased entry would come from
manufacturing, not only because it is a large sector, but because its current rates of entry are well
below average (13.5 percent versus 22 percent economy-wide).

Table 3.6: Estimated Job Growth with Increase in Rate of Firm Entry to 30%, at the
Sectoral Level

                                     Model: increase in rate of entry in sector
                                     to 30%
                    Current
                    number     of                                                  Share of    Share of
                    establishmen     Number    of       Number of     VA           job         VA
                    ts               new firms          new jobs      increase     growth      growth
 Agriculture        328
 Mining             144              8                  180           136,437      2%          2%
 Manufacturing      1481             228                6,535         2,408,163    55%         44%
 Electricity/gas/
 water              293              48                 441           20,993       4%          0%
 Construction       988              82                 627           238,250      5%          4%
 Wholesale/retail
 trade              2766             123                750           1,431,191    6%          26%
 Hotels/restauran
 ts                 193              10                 94            11,799       1%          0%
 Transport/storag
 e/commun           1035             40                 260           64,361       2%          1%
 Finance            63               9                  62            32,565       1%          1%
 Real
 estate/business    2625             234                1,763         835,223      15%         15%
 Education          243                                                            0%          0%
 Health/social      237              21                 131           21,204       1%          0%
 Community            279             26                983             292,425     8%          5%
 Source: Staff estimates from KER data. Job growth of entrants estimated based on prior average
 employment creation (jobs) by entrants over the 2009-2012 period. Number of new firms = (30% - current
 rate of entry) * current number of establishments in sector. Number of new jobs estimated as number of
 new firms * average jobs created per firm by entrants to the sector, 2009-2012 (entering any year during
 that period). VA increase estimated as estimated number of new jobs * avg. VA per worker for entrants
 to the sector over the 2009-2012 period.


3.46    The overall picture of the formal sector is one of lack of the kind of dynamism that
creates jobs. Although there has been growth, it has been severely concentrated among a few large
conglomerates that face limited competition and exhibit and growth without jobs. Small and
medium sized firms demonstrate low rates of survival, as well as lower growth and low levels of
job creation. Firm entry, while relatively high at the aggregate level, is low in the sectors that create
most jobs (including manufacturing).


                                                   50
3.47    Within this broad picture of the formal sector, there are a few dynamic sectors, but
they account for very small shares of overall employment (even among the value-creating
firms), and are reliant upon the continuing inflow of remittances to fuel domestic demand.
Few are in export oriented industries. Among the top quintile of establishments with regard to job
growth in which value added growth was positive21, only about 15 percent of the value added came
from tradeables goods (whether traded or not). Most of the job-generating establishments (even
ones that grow) are dominated by the services sector. While that growth has been dynamic in the
presence of strong remittance flows, it is less resistant to a sudden stop or drop in remittance flows.

3.48     Surveys of establishments suggest a variety of obstacles to the survival and growth of
small and medium sized businesses. Low rates of survival and low growth among smaller
establishments are indicative of both a lack of technological spillovers from large establishments
and impediments to doing business. Surveys of establishments suggest a variety of potential
barriers to doing business, from burdensome regulations in product markets, in the form of
procedures for starting a business, registering property, and dealing with construction permits, as
well as difficulties in the credit market (such as availability and affordability of financial services),
and difficulties with contract enforcement. While medium sized establishments complain they face
the largest costs of business, global comparisons of the processes for doing business in Kyrgyz
Republic suggest a business environment that is challenging for most firms. The Kyrgyz Republic
ranks far from the frontier of good practice relative across a broad range of areas, and over the past
four years, it has not made progress on improving their distance to the frontier (and indeed have
lost distance on several areas).

3.49     There is also evidence to suggest large firms face significantly less competitive
pressures and have substantially greater access to operational buffers that aid in survival.
The largest growing firms, responsible for half of the growth exhibited in the formal sector, are
significantly more protected from market competition either domestically or through imports.
Moreover, they are greater access to both bank finance and budgetary finance, allowing them to
better weather downturns and maintain operations.

3.50     Hiring differences among firms also relate to differences at the sectoral level in firm
entry, and the employment creation capacity of different activities. While firm size plays a
large roll in growth, sectoral growth is heavily determined by firm entry, with new firms by
definition in periods of expansion. Some sectors, like manufacturing, demonstrate much greater
capacity to create jobs, when they are expanding, but the levels of firm entry are relatively low.




21
   There are a sizeable amount of establishments which demonstrated job growth in the face of value added
declines, but we consider only establishments that are growing, which is likely the more sustainable source
of job growth.


                                                    51
           CHAPTER 4. ASSESSING JOBS CHALLENGES AND
                LEARNING FROM COMPARATORS

4.1     The most visible evidence of constraints to better jobs in the Kyrgyz Republic has
been the migration of workers themselves. And it has also been the most effective in relieving
these constraints. The current model has worked well from the point of view of individuals. It has
provided jobs where there have been jobs deficits, particularly for young male workers. It has
provided substantially higher wages. It has brought greater incomes to economically
disenfranchised sections of the country. It has created the possibility of self-employment
domestically through the flow of worker remittances boosting consumer demand.

4.2      One of the fundamental jobs dilemmas for the Kyrgyz Republic relates not to the jobs
outcomes experienced in the past decade, but to the sustainability of its development model
for the future. Based on any reasonable projections of employment growth, migration will
continue to play an important role in Kyrgyzstan’s employment solutions for the next decade, at a
minimum. But the reliance on the current model for employment carries with it risks, which if not
effectively managed, can undermine the ability to create good jobs going forward. Many of these
risks may have already materialized and may be constraints to better jobs outcomes today. One of
the symptoms of the non-sustainability of the current development model could be seen for instance
in the stagnation in poverty reduction observed since 2009. In this respect, recent analyses22 on the
drivers of economic mobility suggest a significant link between poverty persistence and different
types of jobs in terms of quality of occupation as well as specific sectors of employment (see Box
4-1 below for further details).

           First, there is the challenge of Dutch Disease. These are the difficulties that relate not to
            the migration experience, but to the impacts of remittance flows into the country, in
            particular to the reduced competitiveness of the manufacturing sector.
           Second, there is the challenge of a disabling business environment. They relate to low
            and concentrated levels of growth and job creation in the business sector. They involve
            constraints to business entry, survival, growth and innovation, and beyond what is
            suggested in Enterprise Surveys and Doing Business are evidenced by the lack of foreign
            direct investment and business entry, survival, and expansion.
           Third, there is the challenge of geography. These are the challenges to growth and jobs
            opportunities, given location and terrain. These are challenges exacerbated by the Dutch
            Disease.
           Fourth there is the challenge of migration’s effects on labor markets. It relates to the set
            of challenges created by workers physically moving abroad or inter-regionally, and
            involves the impacts of these movements both for workers themselves and for longer-term
            growth and job creation.
           Finally, there is the challenge of the ‘migration trap’. Separate from concerns about the
            business and regulatory environment in which firms operate, there is the additional
            challenge of migration’s success to date, which lowers the urgency for addressing all of
            the constraints to strong and sustained domestic job creation.



22
     Guelfi and Sattar, 2015.


                                                    52
             Box 4-1: Poverty dynamics and the role of jobs in the Kyrgyz Republic
 After a decade of uninterrupted achievements in poverty reduction, starting from 2009 poverty eradication started
 to stagnate in a context of still sustained but rather unstable growth in the total economy.
 In the attempt to shed some light on what has happened and why, an analysis of economic mobility was carried out
 resorting to a “truly” panel data set: the ‘Life in Kyrgyzstan Survey’ made available from the DIW in Berlin.
 Mobility analysis can indeed help to unveil what happened below the surface of poverty stagnation by highlighting
 who did transition in and out of poverty over time, as well as who persisted into the poverty status, also suggesting
 some of the key determinants of the movements observed.
 Among other things this study was particularly interested in investigating the role eventually played by jobs and
 labor market outcomes in moving people (or preventing them from moving) out of poverty. In this respect, results
 have shown that (see Chart 1 below):
         -   Being employed (as opposed to be either unemployed or inactive) as well as increasing the employment
             rate of the members of a household does not seem to influence neither the probability to leave poverty
             nor that of being stuck into it over time. However:
         -   Systematic differences appear instead to emerge with respect to specific sectors of employment as well
             as the specific types – in terms of intrinsic quality - of occupation.
         -   The evidence suggests indeed that working in the mining and agricultural sectors enhances the
             probability of persisting in poverty.
         -   At the same time, being employed in a high quality type of occupation, which usually requires a
             relatively higher level of education, significantly increases the chance of leaving the poverty status over
             time.
         -   Education was indeed confirmed as one of the key drivers of economic mobility in the country.
 Chart 1 - Correlates of economic mobility: household members’ individual characteristics and probability of being
 stuck in poverty in 2010-11


   0.8                                                                                                                       0.8
   0.6                                                                                                                       0.6
   0.4                                                                                                                       0.4
   0.2                                                                                                                       0.2
     0                                                                                                                       0.0
  -0.2                                                                                                                       -0.2
  -0.4                                                                                                                       -0.4
  -0.6                                                                                                                       -0.6
  -0.8                                                                                                                       -0.8
                                         Tertiary educ
               Women



                           Members 65+




                                                                            Mining




                                                                                                           Low-skilled job
                                                                                     Employed
                                                         Agriculture




                                                                                                Employer




 Source: Own computations on DIW, “Life in Kyrgyzstan Survey”.


 Based on Guelfi and Sattar, 2015.


4.3     The Kyrgyz Republic faces several ongoing challenges to improving jobs outcomes
and creating dynamic sources of good jobs domestically. Some of these challenges cannot be
“fixed” quickly. Rather, they relate to country conditions and require consistent efforts on multiple
fronts. Comparator countries – countries with similar country conditions – can provide lessons for
overcoming these challenges to better employment:


                                                                       53
     A.   DUTCH DISEASE

4.4      Just as a natural resource dependent economy can experience negative impacts from
the windfall revenues from natural resource extraction, a migration-reliant country can
experience many of the same symptoms of “Dutch Disease.” The original phenomenon reflects
the experience of the Netherlands after the discovery of natural gas exports, where large windfall
gains increased domestic demand, raised the price of non-tradable goods leading to an appreciation
of the Dutch currency, and ultimately led to a fall in exports and employment in trade-oriented
sectors.

4.5      The fundamentals are similar for emigration-prone economies. The inflow of
remittances leads to an increase in the supply of foreign exchange in the domestic currency market
and causes the domestic currency to appreciate. This appreciation draws resources out of the traded
goods sector through upward pressure on wages. Higher non-tradable prices lead to higher wages
in that sector, causing an expansion of the non-tradable sector. The increase in production costs
leads to a contraction in the tradable sector, making exports substantially less competitive. Oomes
and Kalcheva23 offered four main symptoms of Dutch Disease: (1) real appreciation; (2) a
slowdown in manufacturing growth; (3) an acceleration in service sector growth; and, (4) an
increase in the overall wage level.

4.6     As demonstrated in Chapter 2, all four of these symptoms have been present in the
Kyrgyz Republic to some degree. It is possible that several of these symptoms, including the
slowdown in manufacturing growth and the boom in service sector growth, are transition effects
and not related to remittances,24 and thus the strict categorization of the cause being Dutch Disease
cannot be authenticated. However, the macroeconomic management of remittance flows remains
important for long term sustainability of jobs and wage growth. The main risk of Dutch Disease,
from the standpoint of jobs, is the greater difficulty of creating jobs in tradeables (manufacturing
and agriculture, but also tradable services), because of declining competitiveness. On the other
hand, and as already evidenced in the Kyrgyz Republic, the wealth effect of the remittance boom
has helped the development of non-tradable service sector.

4.7      Then the question becomes: why is Dutch Disease of concern if jobs can continue to
be created in a booming services sector? There are at least three reasons why this is a concern.
First, there is the issue of the vulnerability of the service sector growth model, not only to migration
policy abroad, but also to migrant jobs prospects and remittance behavior. Unlike commodity
booms, which are under the control of affected resource-receiving countries, migration is both a
private decision and governed in part by economic conditions and political arrangements abroad.
The recent collapse of the ruble at the end of 2014 and start of mass exodus of migrants, including
from the Kyrgyz Republic, is testimony to the risks involved with migration-led jobs. While
remittances tend to be countercyclical to home country conditions (people sending more when
conditions are poor), they are also very cyclical to host country conditions. Moreover the impact
of return on labor markets is compounded: not only does a returned migrant require an additional
job from the domestic labor market, the remittances that have been funding the service sector
growth (and jobs) have been reduced.

4.8     Second, there is the issue of the quality of the jobs that can be created in the services
sector. The Kyrgyz data confirms that manufacturing sector jobs are more productive and pay
higher wages than the services sector. Even controlling for the level of education of the worker,

23
     Oomes and Kalcheva. 2007.
24
     Ibid


                                                  54
the average labor income of workers is higher in manufacturing than in all other sectors but mining.
On average, workers in manufacturing can expect to earn a premium ranging from only 2 percent
over jobs in construction to almost 20 percent in real estate and business services: this despite the
fact that manufacturing sector itself has become highly informal and the premium has reduced.

4.9     Thirdly, manufacturing is the source of innovation. Based on the experience of other
countries, manufacturing firms are more likely to introduce new products or new business
processes25. More importantly, the innovation that takes place in manufacturing leads to
productivity improvements that spill over into agriculture and services. Thus, maintaining and
growing a manufacturing base is important for sustaining more productive jobs in all sectors.

4.10    What can be learned from other migration prone countries? Migration prone countries
face particular challenges with Dutch Disease. Traditional resource-based countries suffering from
Dutch Disease have managed to contain the exchange rate appreciation of natural resource revenue
windfalls by paying down foreign debt or establishing a wealth fund that can be invested abroad.
By investing resource revenues in foreign assets, they are able to avoid huge increases in public
spending and the inflow of foreign exchange. Migration prone countries however have the
additional challenge of the windfall wealth being private.

4.11    Migration prone countries have adopted various policies to offset the effects of
remittance flows on the equilibrium real exchange rate, or compensate the economy’s traded
goods sector for the loss of competitiveness that it suffers from real exchange rate
appreciation. If remittances could be invested in the export sector, for example, the resulting
increase in productivity and drop in costs for the sector could help to compensate for the effects of
Dutch Disease. Maintaining a flexible exchange rate policy can also help to counterbalance
negative impacts from shocks and maintain competitiveness.

4.12     Improving the development impact of remittances can also be fostered through
strengthened financial intermediation of remittances. Improving the ability of the economy to
mobilize savings and direct savings to high-return projects, to improve the access of formal
remittance recipients to other financial products (thereby reducing risks), and to enable policy
makers to monitor and react more effectively to changes in remittance flows are effective ways to
facilitate job-creating investments and poverty reduction. These are the examples that can be
explored as part of the Kyrgyz Republic’s jobs policy agenda, particularly as migration is likely to
be a phenomenon with which it must contend over the medium to long term.

     B.   BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT

4.13     The business environment is not a constraint but an outcome of a variety of
constraints. The prior highlighted some core constraints to job creation in the formal business
sector related to overall low levels of employment creation given growth, and particularly for small
and medium sized firms (but also for some large firms) challenges with entry, survival and growth.
The evidence points to a lack of competitive pressures for a number of very large establishments,
which grow but do not expand employment, balanced with small and medium firms that create jobs
as they enter but do not expand further (or exit).

4.14    Understanding the core constraints to growth in the formal sector requires a fuller
assessment of the regulatory and structural impediments among establishments. The
Enterprise Surveys can be useful in pointing to some of the problems most often mentioned, and

25
     Helper, Krueger, and Wial. 2012.


                                                 55
some of these top complaints have been highlighted in, particularly with a view to understanding
difficulties with growing to medium sized or surviving. However, what the firm analysis can point
to problems with growth, survival, technology spillovers and lack of competitive pressures among
large established firms. It cannot tell us why.

4.15    One area that is very high on the list of complaints of established firms, small or large
(but particularly small and medium) is the widespread perception of corruption. The Kyrgyz
Republic ranks high on a number of corruption indicators, including graft, bribes in paying taxes,
and bribes in getting licenses or permits (Figure 4.1,Figure 4.2, and Figure 4.3). The Kyrgyz
Republic ranks significantly higher than other ECA developing countries, and even higher than the
average of low income countries.

Figure 4.1: Bribe Tax                                            Figure 4.2: Graft Index
                                                                     80
                                                                     70
 Kyrgyz Republic                                                     60
                                                                     50
                                                                     40
           Large                                                     30
                                                                     20
                                                                     10
                                                                      0
         Medium

           Small

            ECA
                                                                       % of firms expected to give gifts in meetings
     Low income                                                        with tax inspectors
                                                                       % of firms expected to give gifts to secure a
                                                                       govt. contract
                   0     20       40        60        80
Source: International Finance Corporation, 2013.

 Figure 4.3: Bribes in Licenses and Permits
  100
   80
   60
   40
   20
    0
          Kyrgyz          Small         Medium           Large                             ECA     Low income
          Republic

                           % of firms expected to give gifts to get a construction permit
                           % of firms expected to give gifts to get an import license
                           % of firms expected to give gifts to get an operating license

 Source: International Finance Corporation, 2013.

4.16     The issue of corruption, from a jobs standpoint, is important for the potential
implications on public sector hiring and wages. An area of some discussion is the level of wages
of public servants. The Public Expenditure Review for the Kyrgyz Republic suggests the wage bill
as a share of GDP is in line with ECA norms, but there are many sources which suggest that public
sector wages in the Kyrgyz Republic are problematically low, creating increased incentives for
corruption. As noted by Bekbolotov (2007):


                                                      56
                 “Unrealistically low wages in the public sector invite corruption. There are
                 widespread perceptions that government officials, who had to more or less purchase
                 their positions, then work to recoup their investments by taking bribes ….The
                 unofficial income generated as a result of abuse of their position remains the major
                 incentive for people to work for the government26”

4.17    An additional issue particularly for the Kyrgyz Republic’s business environment
concerns the informal sector. The informal sector (accounting for 70 percent of employment) has
the potential to impact the formal sector competitiveness (and indeed one of the biggest business
complaints concerns competition from the informal sector), but it is a large employment sector in
its own right, and improving productivity and incomes within the informal sector must be
considered an important aspect of the jobs agenda.

4.18    The jobs agenda for the informal sector depends in large part on how it links to the
formal sector. Because the formal sector employs a significantly smaller share of the domestic
labor force (and a significantly smaller share of the poor), understanding the relationship between
formal, informal and farm employment is important for prioritization of jobs strategies, including
for shared prosperity. From Section 2, it is evident that formal sector jobs in the Kyrgyz Republic
are more productive, better paying jobs, but they also employ a significantly smaller share the labor
force including the poor and vulnerable. Creating policies for jobs for the poor, in particular, must
involve job and productivity growth that can most effectively and sustainably benefit the bottom
40 percent of the population. Shared prosperity through jobs could be achieved through relatively
strong growth in formal sector jobs that can benefit the poor (either within the formal sector or
through strong links to the informal sector), or through a rise in productivity in the informal
economy.

4.19    Appropriate policies for poverty reduction in the Kyrgyz Republic through jobs will
depend in large part on the evidence about the nature of the informal sector and how it relates
to the overall economy. Ultimately, raising incomes for the majority of workers (and particularly
the poor) requires increasing productivity of workers. But raising productivity in the informal
sector requires both an understanding of the nature of informality, but also how activities in the
formal sector spillover to informal activities and jobs. Without informal sector surveys, a
comprehensive understanding of productivity impediments cannot be undertaken. However, it is
nonetheless useful to understand how the informal economy relates to the formal sector, as it
provides a better sense of the strategy for reaching the poor.

4.20     The policies for improving jobs will differ depending on the nature of the informal
sector. If the informal sector is predominantly composed of entrepreneurs escaping the high costs
of formality, improving the conditions of employment implies lowering the costs and raising the
benefits of formality (such as through reducing taxes including social security contributions, right-
sizing labor regulation, improving the business regulatory environment, and increasing sanctions
for non-compliance). In that way, dynamic entrepreneurs are able to better access finance and
capital which are less available in the informal activities, and thereby grow and expand
employment. If however, the informal sector is composed primarily of refuge unemployment –
workers unable to obtain formal sector employment, either because of low demand, or because they
are inherently different from workers in formal establishments (and in some sense have structural
‘employability’ challenges), then improving the conditions of informal workers might more
appropriately focus on poverty reduction measures (and alternatively, on improving the conditions
under which these lower productivity activities can flourish). Because the informal sector more

26
     Bekbolotov, 2007.


                                                  57
       reasonably represents a mix of informal activities, with some held back from formalization by
       excessive regulatory costs, while others comprise subsistence employment, then the strategies for
       better jobs will need to focus on both separately.

       4.21    Each theory of informality will imply a different relationships between formal sector
       job creation and wage growth and informal job creation and wage growth. Under the dualistic
       model, formal sector conditions will tend to be countercyclical to informality. As conditions for
       employment improve in the modern sector, informality declines. Under the alternative model,
       however, informal sector growth (in wages, employment) tends to cycle with broader economic
       growth. However, caution needs to be applied in interpreting these relationships, and a variety of
       evidence is helpful to get a better picture of the informal sector.

       4.22     The evidence in the Kyrgyz Republic suggests the informal sector sops up agricultural
       job shedding. Using the LFS figures on employment , regression analysis of job growth outside
       farms and establishments to growth of jobs in establishments and growth of jobs in farms (with
       regional effects) suggests that informality is related to job shedding from farms, but there is not a
       statistically significant relationship between establishments jobs and ‘informal’ jobs (Figures Figure
       4.4Figure 4.5). This suggests that rather than being driven by entrepreneurs, it is primarily a haven
       for the otherwise unemployed farmers.

Figure 4.4:Relationship of informal employment to                 Figure 4.5: Relationship of informal
establishment employment, 2003-2013                               employment to farm employment, 2003-2012



                                      60%
                                                                                          100%
   Establishments job growth




                                                                                           80%
                                      40%
                                                                                           60%
                                                                   Farm job growth




                                                                                           40%
                                      20%                                                  20%
                                                                                            0%
                          0%                                       -40%              -20% -20% 0%        20%    40%
       -40% -30% -20% -10% 0%                   10%   20%   30%                           -40%
                        -20%                                                              -60%
                                                                                          -80%
                                     -40%                                                -100%
                               Informal jobs growth
                                                                                         Informal job growth
Source: Staff estimates of KER data.

       4.23      The relationship between formal job growth as reported by establishments and
       informal job creation is negative. However, another source of evidence on the informal sector
       comes from the KER formal establishment data, from which we can compare dynamics with
       informal job growth. Over the 2009-2012 period, informal job creation was inversely related to
       job growth in formal establishments (Figure 4.6), again suggestive of a dualistic labor market, but
       with informality being the sponge that soaks up workers unable to access better formal sector work.
       When formal job creation expands, informality declines, and when the formal sector shrinks,
       informality increases, at least in aggregate. The evidence provides further support for aiding the
       formal sector to create jobs as a primary vehicle for improving the productivity of currently
       informal workers.



                                                            58
     Figure 4.6: Informal employment growth and growth of employment in
     registered establishments, 2009-2012


         Job growth: registered                        20%
             establishments                            15%
                                                       10%
                                                        5%
                                                        0%
                  -20%            -15%   -10%    -5%          0%        5%   10%   15%
                                                       -5%
                                                       -10%
                                         Informal employment growth

Source: Staff estimates of KER data.



                                          C.    THE CHALLENGES OF GEOGRAPHY

4.24    One of the challenges to creating greater jobs in the Kyrgyz Republic relates to its
challenging geography, which creates natural disadvantages to its ability to be competitive
exporters. The Kyrgyz Republic contends with natural disadvantages to merchandise trade. Not
only is it geographically remote, its landlocked status also heightens its dependence upon trade
passage through sovereign border countries, further increasing the risks and costs.

4.25    The Kyrgyz Republic has taken advantage of its geography to date through cross-
border trading. Cross border trading has become one of the fastest growing services in the Kyrgyz
Republic, and it optimizes the country’s geographic location. Small enterprises/individuals import
goods from China, taking advantage of the simplified tax regime for cross-border trade, and re-
export those items using the CIS preferential tariff. Markets like Dordoi – which employs some
60,000 workers – and Karasuu stock up on cheap manufactured goods from China and Turkey to
re-export to other CIS countries and beyond. Since 2000, re-exports have grown from comprising
a negligible portion of gross exports to accounting for almost 15 percent by 2013. As a shared of
manufactured exports, meanwhile, they have grown to account for almost 40 percent.

4.26     Going forward, the Kyrgyz Republic will also need to improve the environment for
merchandise trade. Beyond being an engine of growth that can be sustained over time, trade is
good for jobs. Importantly, it requires particular skills specialized to the trade process. The KER
data provides a specific window into the job/trade relationship for the Kyrgyz Republic. While the
tally of exporters is incomplete (see Chapter 4 data box), it is possible to identify exporters and
assess differences in performance and employment outcomes with other producers27 Even KER
data shows that the job-creation capacity of exporting is higher than for domestic-bound
production.




27
  It cannot be assumed that all of the “other” group are non-exporters, but reasonably the other group will
include a significantly larger portion of non-exporters, given they have not reported any accounts receivable
rom outside the country.


                                                                   59
4.27    Like other landlocked countries, the Kyrgyz Republic exhibits limited export
diversification in both export markets and products. At aggregate level, Kyrgyz trades more
than expected, a consequence of its superlative exports in gold. Outside of gold, however,
merchandise exports have been lackluster, growing from only 23 percent of GDP in 2000 to 26
percent in 2012. Product space analysis of the export basket of the Kyrgyz Republic indicates that
the diversity of exports is low, and there has been limited movement up the value chain. Products
have remained largely resource-based, and remain low value.

4.28     The Kyrgyz Republic ranks poorly on a number of key indicators for trade logistics
and transport, even relative to other landlocked countries. The Kyrgyz Republic remains one
of the most logistics disadvantaged countries of even landlocked economies, and it has failed to
make substantial progress in improving logistics in the last 7 years (Figure 4.7). One of the greatest
disadvantages the Kyrgyz Republic faces with regard to trade is the distance from production
centers to seaports. While other landlocked countries average between 1,500 and 2,000 km to the
closest seaport, for Kyrgyzstan the distance is between 4,500 and 5,200 km.28


 Figure 4.7: Logistics performance of landlocked countries, 2007 and 2014




Source: World Bank 2014c.

4.29      There are significant job opportunities that come with incremental movements up
the value chain. Food production in the Kyrgyz Republic consists mostly of food sold in raw,
unprocessed states (see Table 4.1). Food processing requires significant financial investment
(processing equipment, machinery, storage, transport, etc.), as well as staff with specialized skills
(making connections between suppliers and agro-industry. The current Kyrgyz trade strategy
targets the development of four food processing sectors (in addition to tourism and clothing): fruits
and vegetables, dairy products, meat products, and bottled water. The strategy also targets four
cross-sectors – access to finance, trade information and promotion, quality management and trade
facilitation – to improve export competitiveness beyond the selected priority sectors.




28
     From World Bank 2014c.


                                                 60
 Table 4.1: Main Merchandise Exports 2009-2012 by Revealed Comparative Advantage
 Dynamics
 Classics                       Emerging Champions              Disappearances

 Gold,         non-             Fresh or       dried            Radioactive       chemical
 monetary             6%        fruit n.e.s.            8%      elements                     11%

                                Knitted
                                undergarments of
 Electric current     6%        synthetic fibers        1%      Dried or shelled legumes     4%

 Other non-ferrous              Bovine         and
 base metals          4%        equine leather          1%      Grapes and raisins           2%

                                Incandescent and
 Blouses              4%        fluorescent bulbs       1%      Men's trousers               2%

 Raw cotton           3%        Skirts                  1%      Fresh milk and cream         2%

                                Knitted clothing
 Other fresh or                 accessories     of
 chilled vegetables   3%        textile fabrics         1%      Fresh or chilled tomatoes    2%

 Other     women                Ores and precious               Fresh or chilled potatoes,
 outerwear            3%        metals                  1%      excluding sweet potatoes     1%

                                Knitted jerseys,
 Other     knitted              pullovers   and
 outerwear            3%        cardigans               1%      Iron and steel waste         1%

 Dresses              2%        Fresh apples            1%      Materials of rubber          0%

 Unstripped                     Women's coats
 tobacco              2%        and jackets             1%      Metal articles n.e.s.        0%

 Raw sugar beet                 Television     and              Other         condensation
 and cane             2%        radio transmitters      0%      products                     0%

 Source: Staff estimates from COMTRADE trade data. Classics defined as exports in which the Kyrgyz
 Republic exhibited revealed comparative advantage (RCA) (Belassa method) over the 1997-2009 period
 as well as the 2009-2012 period. Emerging champions are defined as products in which the Kyrgyz
 Republic did not exhibit RCA over the 1997-2009 period, but has exhibited RCA over the 2009-2012
 period. Disappearances reflect products in which the Kyrgyz Republic demonstrated RCA over the 1997-
 2009 period, but currently does not.


4.30    Other mountainous, landlocked countries provide some insights into overcoming
geographic challenges, even ones at completely different stages in development.               These
insights revolve around investments in transport and infrastructure to reduce the actual costs of
trade and increase cross border connectivity, encouraging production close to trading partner
borders, and specializing in exports that either capitalize on geography (such as mineral exports)
or are physically neutral (not being disadvantaged by their geography). Switzerland and
Liechtenstein, for example, both positioned themselves as “hubs” for activities that don’t require a
physical presence (for Switzerland, in banking, and for Liechtenstein in holding companies, where


                                                   61
companies establish registered offices primarily for tax purposes). Both also have developed highly
specialized niche industrial activities. Making trade work for jobs must consider this and a range
of other issues particular to the geographic context of the Kyrgyz Republic.

 D.     MIGRATION RELATED CHALLENGES

4.31     In addition to the indirect impacts of emigration on the economy and jobs through
remittances, migration has direct impacts on labor supply (emigration, by definition, reduces
the labor supply), as well as on the labor supply decisions of those left behind. Depending
upon the characteristics of migrants (or those who exit the labor force in response to migration
decisions at the household level), the economy could experience skills (or muscle) shortfalls, as
workers are drained from domestic markets. It is possible that the private sector is constrained by
skills shortages, which ultimately limit the ability for growth and further employment expansion.

4.32    The evidence does not suggest skills are currently a major constraint to growth and
jobs creation in the formal sector or otherwise. First, the evidence on the characteristics of
migrants suggests that the bulk of migrants abroad are general secondary-skilled workers (Figure
4.8). Compared to the overall Kyrgyz population, migrants are younger, more likely to be male,
and are only moderately more skilled than the general population. The Kyrgyz migration
phenomenon is not occurring in higher skills, which is an important advantage for the Kyrgyz
Republic.

      Figure 4.8: Educational distribution of migrants and domestic workers, 2008 and
      2013
        100%
         90%
         80%
         70%         0.4                                               0.5
                                       0.5           0.5
         60%                                                                           0.6
                                                                                                         0.8
         50%
         40%
         30%         0.3                                               0.3
                                       0.2           0.2
         20%                                                                           0.2
         10%         0.2               0.2                             0.2                               0.1
                                                     0.2                               0.1               0.1
          0%
                    2008               2013          2008             2013            2008              2013
                            Domestic                    Internal Migrant                    Migrant Abroad

                           None    Primary    General Secondary     Specialized Secondary      Higher

      Source: Yang, et al. 2015.

4.33    Moreover there is little evidence to suggest that secondary skills are in deficit.
Evidence on the stock of labor by education and employment status suggests that the bulk of
unemployment hits secondary educated workers (who also represent the large majority of Kyrgyz
workers). Tertiary workers comprise only about 20 percent of the labor force, and their
unemployment rates are significantly lower. While the low rates of tertiary unemployed could
suggest skills deficiencies, the rate of unemployment among tertiary educated workers has not
moved significantly over time (Figure 4.9).

4.34    Returns to education estimates are neither suggestive of increasing skills gaps.
Relative to illiteracy, relative returns have risen and fallen for all workers, with relatively wide
variation (rising in 2007, falling subsequently with the global economic downturn, -and rising again



                                                       62
                    in 2010) (Figure 4.10). The variation is not explained by migration patterns: between 2003 and
                    2012, migration grew continuously at a rapid pace. Sectors intensive in tertiary education have
                    exhibited similar patterns of growth and employment creation and those intensive in secondary
                    education. Finally, surveys of enterprises do not suggest skills to be a significant factor affecting
                    firm expansion.

                    4.35    While skills constraints do not appear to be a significant factor at present in the
                    Kyrgyz jobs challenge (whether caused by migration or otherwise), longer term decisions on
                    education could lead to a skills constraint to future growth. The evidence on migration patterns
                    suggests that increasingly, migrants are opting for work abroad to staying in school, which is
                    concerning for future skills needs. Combatting this trend will require concerted efforts to
                    understand the decision making process of younger migrants, as well as a better environment for
                    jobs domestically.

                    Figure 4.9: Employment and Unemployment by Education Level
80,000                                                    1,750,000                                         500,000
70,000                                                    1,700,000
                                                          1,650,000                                         400,000
60,000
                                                          1,600,000
50,000                                                                                                      300,000
                                                          1,550,000
40,000                                                    1,500,000                                         200,000
                                                          1,450,000
30,000
                                                          1,400,000                                         100,000
20,000                                                    1,350,000
10,000                                                    1,300,000                                              0
                                                                      2003
                                                                      2004
                                                                      2005
                                                                      2006
                                                                      2007
                                                                      2008
                                                                      2009
                                                                      2010
                                                                      2011
                                                                      2012
    0
                                                                                                                      2003 2005 2007 2009 2011

                                                                      Secondary unemployed                             Tertiary unemployed
         Primary employed       Primary unemployed                    Secondary employed                               Tertiary employed

                    Source:      Kyrgyz     Republic
                    LFS.

                     Figure 4.10: Returns to Education Dynamics, by Major Education Levels
                        1.2

                            1

                        0.8

                        0.6

                        0.4

                        0.2

                            0

                       -0.2
                                 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

                                      Higher           Secondary         Elementary          Professional



                                                                             63
    E. THE MIGRATION SUCCESS STORY “TRAP”

4.36     A final element that is a challenge for the Kyrgyz jobs agenda is the migration trap.
Finally, the Kyrgyz Republic faces perhaps its greatest challenge in overcoming the migration trap.
The migration driven model has allowed for both jobs abroad but also improved jobs outcomes
(while low value) domestically, through the booming service sector. The gains that the migration
model has brought are large.

4.37     The challenge is to break free from a model that has raised wages and created
employment in low-wage service activities. Because of its success, there is a potential
indifference of government authorities to changing the environment for a different model.
Remittances have driven up tax revenues in Kyrgyz from 16 percent of GDP in 2000 to 28 percent
in 2013, and allowed the government to move the deficit from 10 percent of GDP to 4 percent,
without undertaking capital investments into the infrastructure that would support greater
investment in the country. Both direct taxes and indirect taxes (on imported goods) have risen with
increased demand due to remittance income.

4.38    Overcoming the inertia of a model that has been successful will require a new way of
looking at jobs. For the private sector, the rules of the game for operating must encourage
innovation, expansion, and job creation over captive markets and rents. For the public sector, the
hiring and payment system must encourage qualified and dedicated career public servants over
opportunists. For the informal sector, the rules of the game must be changed to encourage formality
and access to knowledge, services and assets that improve income potential. The range of
challenges for the Kyrgyz Republic are large, and the stakes are large too.




                                                64
                                      APPENDICES


      A.    NOTES ON DATA AND ANALYSIS AT THE FIRM
                            LEVEL
1.       Chapter 3 explores firm growth and employment dynamics in the formal sector using
firm panel data. Among the data sources used in this section, the Kyrgyz National Statistics
Committee collects several different reports on quarterly and annual bases from all establishments,
regardless of size, ownership structure, or activity (including, for example financial organizations,
public administration and non-profit organizations). Together, the financial reports submitted by
enterprises represent the complete set of registered establishments in operation. The reports contain
detailed information on inter alia: sales and expenses from which to calculate value added, profit,
and the like; investment; and employment, man-hours and labor compensation. Information is also
collected by which it is possible to determine each establishment’s ownership structure, geographic
location, main economic activity and, to some degree, age. The NSC itself utilizes this information
from establishments in its national accounts estimates, and it publishes various information about
establishments in a series of reports. It is from the NSC reports on establishments that the full
account of employment in registered establishments by economic sector is available. An almost
complete sample of the establishment data for the 2009-2012 period was made available to World
Bank staff for the purposes of this analysis. The data from these various financial reports can be
integrated by virtue of a unique firm ID common across reports, a task which was undertaken for
the purpose of this diagnostic (see for description of the Kyrgyz Establishment Reporting dataset,
referred to throughout this report as the KER). With more than 16,000 operational establishments,
the KER provides a unique opportunity to examine the dynamics of establishments in the Kyrgyz
Republic, and to assess the nature of firm entry, survival, growth, productivity, and job creation
within the formal sector.

2.       The chapter also highlights the differences between the formal and informal sector
and the links between them. Utilizing the Kyrgyz LFS data (2003-2012), it is possible to provide
a characterization of formal versus informal workers, based on whether they reported working in
establishments or outside of establishments. As will be discussed, the number of workers who
report working in establishments from the LFS differs from the number of workers reported by
establishments to the NSC, but the aggregate figures are not far off, and for the purpose of
differentiating “formal” (establishment) from “informal” (outside establishments or farming), it
provides a reasonable if not exact gauge of differences in worker characteristics. Moreover, the
LFS allows for more granularity in the picture of informal (and formal) workers by economic sector
and oblast, which allows for a link from the formal sector production data from the KER to the
types of workers employed within (and without).




                                                 65
          Table A 1: Characteristics of the Labor Force, Kyrgyz Republic: 2003 and
          2013


                                                2003                      2013
                                                Urban        Rural        Urban       Rural
Total population                                1,728,267    3,285,022    1,900,293   3,762,840
Total adult population (15 +)                   1,273,341    2,092,027    1,374,950   2,544,362
Total labor force                               776,136      1,385,062    829,961     1,624,886
  Domestically employed                         662,799      1,243,844    722,901     1,337,840
       Agriculture                              43,357       822,879      34,154      686,054
       Industry                                 124,171      56,222       108,007     89,347
       Construction                             47,488       32,132       68,387      106,883
       Public Admin/health/education            156,781      179,636      148,482     194,390
       Services                                 291,003      152,975      363,870     261,166
       At organization                          345,431      295,996      318,935     306,435
       At farm                                  13,814       556,538      24,582      565,708
       Individually                             303,555      391,311      379,384     465,698
       Owner                                    13,104       293,173      14,112      290,799
       Hired                                    342,602      294,780      318,079     299,293
       Other                                    307,094      655,892      390,710     747,748
       Male                                     347,328      700,563      410,197     795,441
       Female                                   315,471      543,282      312,704     542,400
       15-19                                    20,130       118,865      15,184      91,230
       20-29                                    179,469      367,995      204,196     386,263
       30-39                                    211,486      318,420      199,476     318,269
       40-49                                    157,930      280,353      168,237     302,422
       50-59                                    70,621       98,521       110,340     200,583
       60+                                      23,164       59,690       25,468      39,073
       Higher                                   216,664      149,890      233,857     192,005
       Secondary prof                           123,432      166,457      94,882      114,563
       Primary prof                             54,043       52,315       60,314      100,935
       Complete secondary                       238,582      741,329      298,818     815,212
       Incomplete secondary                     22,753       87,356       29,118      93,706
       Primary and below                        7,326        46,497       5,911       21,420
  Employed abroad                               10,924       34,349       31,297      159,613
  Unemployed                                    102,413      106,869      75,763      127,433

          Source: Estimates based on data of the Kyrgyz Labor Force Survey.




                                               66
                Table A 2: Sectoral differences in hiring rates 2009-2012: Estimate of portion attributable to
                differences in growth versus portion attributable to differences in employment elasticities
                                                                                          Portion of                    Portion
                                                Difference    Difference                  hiring         Portion of     attributable
                                                in            in     avg    Difference    difference     hiring         to    higher
                                                probability   prob.         in rate of    attributable   difference     probability
                                                of hiring,    growth,       entry,        to    higher   attributable   of hiring,
                                  Probability   relative to   relative to   relative to   probability    to    higher   given
                                  of hiring     mean          mean          mean          of growing     entry rate     growing
Agriculture                       68%           27%           26%           10%           13%            4%             10%
Mining                            49%           8%            6%            2%            3%             1%             4%
Manufacturing                     37%           -3%           -1%           -8%           -1%            -3%            1%
Electricity/gas/water             39%           -2%           6%            -9%           3%             -4%            -1%
Construction                      41%           0%            -2%           -1%           -1%            0%             2%
Wholesale/retail trade            41%           0%            -2%           3%            -1%            1%             0%
Hotels/restaurants                38%           -3%           -2%           3%            -1%            1%             -3%
Transport/storage/communication   40%           -1%           0%            4%            0%             2%             -2%
Finance                           25%           -15%          -17%          -6%           -9%            -3%            -4%
Real estate/business              39%           -2%           0%            -1%           0%             -1%            -1%
Education                         56%           15%           10%           10%           5%             4%             6%
Health/social                     36%           -4%           -1%           -1%           0%             -1%            -3%
Community                        36%          -4%            -6%          -2%         -3%            -1%            -1%
Source: Staff estimates from KER data. Estimated relationship Pr(hiring) = .52*Pr(growing)+.44*(rate of entry) +sector dummies;
Adj R2=0.59.




                                                              67
     B.   REGRESSION ANALYSIS OF NET JOB GROWTH IN
                  FORMAL ESTABLISHMENTS

1.      With the importance placed on encouraging productive job creation in almost all countries,
a considerable literature is devoted to understanding the mechanisms by which firms expand and
create jobs. This literature focuses both on understanding the key sources of net employment
creation in the economy (which firms are primarily responsible for job growth in the economy), as
well as understanding the characteristics of that job growth (particularly, for example, in terms of
firm performance).

2.       In order to understand the mechanisms by which formal establishments create jobs, as well
as the characteristics of net job creation in Kyrgyz Republic, we undertake regression analysis
utilizing the KER establishment data. The advantage of the KER dataset is that it is broadly
representative of the productive formal sector, excluding known sectors (gold production, railroads,
public administration, and financial intermediation). The data also covers a period of four years,
and includes about 15,000 establishments present during one or multiple years, from which it is
possible to examine employment growth dynamics including entry and exit.

3.      First, to determine the main source of net job creation, we replicate the econometric
strategy in Rijkers, et al (2014)29 and estimate employment-weighted firm-level regressions of net
employment growth, using as the measure of firm-level employment growth,  the change in
employment from year t-1 to year t, divided by average size:




where  denotes employment in firm i of type s at year t. This measure is symmetric, bounded
by -2 and 2, and accommodates both entry and exit. By virtue of employment weighting30, the
mean of the dependent variable is equal to the appropriate employment weighted mean, and
coefficient estimates can be interpreted as employment weighted conditional means.

4.       We consider several types of explanatory variables. To assess to what extent the observed
relationship between employment growth is due to starting firm size (for established firms), we
include dummies which categorize firms based on their original firm size, with the exception of
entrants who are universally categorized simply as entrants. Thus in one set of firm size/age
dummies we have 5 categories (of which 4 are included in estimations) for micro established firms
(1 employee in 2009), small established firms (less than 10 employees in 2009), medium
established (11-60 employees in 2009) and large established (more than 60 employees in 2009), as
well as entrants.

5.      We also examine the impact of productivity and profitability, with both measured by a
ranking of firms within a distribution of 1-20 on total average profits/output per worker. These

29
  Rijkers, et al. 2014.
30
  We employ two sets of weights. First, we weight according to base year employment. Because entrants
will, naturally, not have a base year employment, we weight by the first year of employment data (entry year
employment). In another set of estimates, we weight be average employment over the period.


                                                    68
variables are included with the goal of understanding whether the relationships between firm size
and age and employment growth reflect performance differences associated with scale and across
the life cycle of the establishment. The use of the profitability and productivity ranks, as opposed
to levels, helps reduce the impact of extreme observations and thus measurement error while
allowing for both negative and positive values.

6.        To examine the issue of smallness and potential obstacles to expansion beyond small status
(in this case beyond 9-10 workers), we also run the regression with a more elaborate breakdown of
size of firm. In particular, we break down with greater precision small and medium firms by the
number of workers in 2009 (for established operations) to determine how net job creation changes
by firm size. The particular interest is in understanding whether small firms (less than 10
employees) face a specific barrier to further job creation that other firms (firms which have
graduated beyond smallness) do not.

7.       To assess whether firms decide between hiring labor versus capital (investment), we also
include a measure of investment (constructed as the average accumulated investment over the
period). Because investment information has only been completed by a small group of
establishments, we only include this variable in one set of estimations.

8.       In one set of estimations we examine the impact of ownership structure (state-owned or
not) on employment growth. But in all cases, we restrict the analysis to value generating firms. In
all estimations, we include sectoral dummies

9.       While we undertake the estimations for all firms, we also perform the estimations for a
restricted sample of growing firms, in order to better understand how firm size influences job
growth. If the relationship between net job growth and firm size is increasing in firm size for all
firms, but decreasing when the sample is restricted to growing firms, then we know that small firms
have lower job rates of job growth because they are less likely to grow, not because they are less
likely to expand.

10.     Table B 1-Table B 4 present the results of our regressions. Table B 1 Table B 3 reflect the
sample of value creating firms only, while Table B 4 has two estimations including the whole
sample of establishments (including non-profits). For ease of understanding, the coefficients on
firm size are presented not relative to 0 but to the unconditional average of the omitted variable
(firms greater than 200 persons). The results from Table B 1-Table B 2 are displayed graphically
in Figure B 1Figure B 2. Several findings are worth highlighting.

11.      First, it should be observed that for the full sample of establishments (not just growing
firms) the coefficients on firm size are all negative but for entrants. No firms created employment
(in net terms). Thus, the assessment of the contribution to net job growth in Kyrgyz is an
assessment of job loss, and which establishments contributed the least to that loss.

12.     Second, in our full sample of value generating firms, and using the base size classification
of establishment size, job growth is positively related to the size of the firm. This remains true
when controlling for profitability or productivity. From Figure B 1, net job growth is lowest for
small firms and remains flat until around 10 workers, at which point the rate of net job growth
increases more sharply.

13.      When the sample is restricted to growing firms only (firms in which value added grew over
the period, including entrants), the relationship between employment creation and firm size changes
considerably. First, the coefficients are positive, as growing firms as a group contribute positively


                                                 69
to net job growth. Secondly, net job creation is highest for very small firms, and declines to
negative values after firms reach over 4 workers. Small firms which are growing have a much
higher rate of net job creation than larger firms (which shed workers, even growing firms). Thus,
the job creation/firm size relationship, at least for smaller firms, is really a job creation growth
relationship. Small firms in aggregate have much lower contribution to job creation in aggregate
because they have a much lower probability of growth (separate from their actual rates of growth,
which are also lower).

14.     We cannot observe the age of the firm (other than entrants), but the sample of small firms
is obviously diverse and potentially includes a large number of young firms. Some of these younger
firms would be in the process of growing (and expanding employment, contributing like entrants
to job creation), but some of the would be either subject to the extreme churning process that
characterizes small firms (where survival rates are low) or at the level of small stagnation, no longer
expanding. On net, small firms do not contribute to job growth, but they contribute significantly
when they are in their growth period (presumably when young).

15.      The results from the full sample of value-producing firms also suggests that job shedding
by small firms remains relatively similar across firm size until about 10 workers, at which point the
degree of job shedding declines (the relationship becomes more steeply positive). This suggests
that the ability to grow is most constrained for smaller firms, but once small firms graduate past
smallness, the growth job growth potential improves. The financial reporting of establishments
explicitly considers firms with fewer than 9 workers as “small”, and the reporting (and other)
requirements change for firms based on this graduation. Thus, the improvement in the capacity to
create jobs at the border of “medium sized” is suggestive of regulatory constraints that impede
expansion beyond 10 workers (or at least impede the reporting of employment beyond 10 workers).

16.      When average size is used as the classification of employment size (full sample), the
relationship is everywhere upward sloping for all firm categories past 2, indicating that, in general,
large firms contribute more to employment growth than small firms (Figure B 2).

17.      In our regressions which include measures of investment, there is no evidence to indicate
that establishments substitute hiring for capital investment. Rather the relationship is positive and
significant. This suggests that labor expansion is complementary to other investment in capacity.
In Figure B 3, it is also clear that the reporting of investment is highly similar to the relationship
for growing establishments, but in fact, the sample of firms that report investment is not
significantly different from the full sample of firms, in terms of growth (that is, the sample is not
biased toward growing firms). About 55 percent of investing firms are growing (versus the full
sample where about 51 percent are growing).

18.     Finally, when measures of state-ownership are included, meanwhile, the relationship is
always positive and significant. While this is true in the case of including non-profits, it is
especially the case in value-generating establishments, where state-owned firms have a 25 percent
higher probability of creating jobs for any given size of firm and sector (Table B 3Table B 4).




                                                  70
                Table B 1: Determinants of net job creation in the formal sector, 2009-2012


Net job creation in formal establishments, 2009-2012
Dependent variable: Net Job growth 2009-2012
Base size classification of employment
                              (1)         (2)                           (3)                (4)               (5)             (6)
Productivity/profitability
 Avg profits, rank*           -0.032                                    -0.042                                               -0.022
 Avg productivity rank*                   -0.027

Age/size
  Entrant                                                               1.958              1.802             1.954           2.038
  1                                                                     -0.631             -0.802            0.502           0.593
  2                                                                     -0.577             -0.743            0.157           0.244
  [3,4]                                                                 -0.647             -0.816            -0.042          0.042
  [5,6]                                                                 -0.618             -0.789            -0.166          -0.076
  [7,9]                                                                 -0.604             -0.756            -0.183          -0.098
  [10,11]                                                               -0.517             -0.673            -0.171          -0.089
  [12,15]                                                               -0.464             -0.619            -0.131          -0.044
  [16,19]                                                               -0.471             -0.625            -0.189          -0.103
  [20,25]                                                               -0.472             -0.623            -0.196          -0.124
  [26,60]                                                               -0.401             -0.548            -0.197          -0.115
  [61-200]                                                              -0.433             -0.583            -0.167          -0.088
  More than 200 (omitted): unconditional average                        -0.226             -0.226            -0.026          -0.026
                                 Value               Value              Value              Value                             Growing
                                 producing           producing          producing          producing         Growing         firms
Sample                           firms               firms              firms              firms             firms only      only
N                                11,448              11,448             11,448             11,448            5,936           5,936
Adjusted R2                      0.112               0.141              0.641              0.611             0.841           0.841
 Dependent variable Davis-Haltiwanger-Schuh growth rate. Regression weighted by base year (2009) firm size.
* rankings from 1 (highest profits, highest VA, etc.) to 20 (lowest profits, etc.); thus a negative coefficient on profits/productivity
  indicates a higher (smaller) profitability rank is associated with higher job growth.




                                                                  71
       Table B 2: Determinants of net job creation in the formal sector, 2009-2012
Net job creation in formal establishments, 2009-2012
Dependent variable: Net Job growth 2009-2012
Average size classification of employment
                              (1)         (2)                            (3)               (4)               (5)             (6)
Productivity/profitability
 Avg profits, rank*           -0.006                                     -0.018                                              -0.001
 Avg productivity rank*                   -0.010

Age/size
  Entrant                                                                2.029             1.960             2.118           2.123
  1                                                                      -1.036            -1.112            0.083           0.088
  2                                                                      -0.739            -0.817            0.140           0.145
  [3,4]                                                                  -0.510            -0.589            0.180           0.185
  [5,6]                                                                  -0.380            -0.452            0.301           0.306
  [7,9]                                                                  -0.268            -0.340            0.231           0.235
  [10,11]                                                                -0.202            -0.270            0.290           0.295
  [12,15]                                                                -0.228            -0.296            0.178           0.183
  [16,19]                                                                -0.159            -0.231            0.107           0.112
  [20,25]                                                                -0.247            -0.306            0.049           0.053
  [26,60]                                                                -0.163            -0.229            0.162           0.166
  [61-200]                                                               -0.088            -0.151            0.259           0.262
  More than 200 (omitted): Unconditional average                         -0.009            -0.009            0.193           0.193
Sector dummies              Yes             Yes                          Yes               Yes               Yes             Yes
                                 All      value       All     value      All     value     All    value                      Growing
                                 producing            producing          producing         producing    Growing              firms
Sample                           firms                firms              firms             firms        firms only           only
N                                11,448               11,448             11,448            11,448       5,936                5,936
Adjusted R2                      0.115             0.120            0.628           0.622           0.816                    0.816
All coefficients statistically significant at the 1% confidence interval, unless highlighted in grey.
 Dependent variable Davis-Haltiwanger-Schuh growth rate. Regression weighted by average firm size (2009-2012).
* rankings from 1 (highest profits, highest VA, etc.) to 20 (lowest profits, etc.); thus a negative coefficient on profits/productivity
  indicates a higher (smaller) profitability rank is associated with higher job growth.




                                                                72
         Table B 3: Determinants of net job creation in the formal sector, 2009-2012
Net job creation in formal establishments, 2009-2012
Dependent variable: Net Job growth 2009-2012
Base size classification of employment
                                           (1)                                (2)                 (3)                  (4)
Productivity/profitability
 Avg productivity, rank*                   -0.043                             -0.023              -0.040               -0.025
 Avg investment                                                                                   0.000                0.000

Age/size
  0                                                    1.960                  2.041               2.050                2.029
  1                                                    -0.605                 0.605               1.440                1.243
  2                                                    -0.552                 0.256               1.007                1.051
  [3,4]                                                -0.627                 0.052               0.281                0.256
  [5,6]                                                -0.601                 -0.067              0.165                0.039
  [7,9]                                                -0.590                 -0.093              0.059                0.060
  [10,11]                                              -0.512                 -0.087              -0.014               -0.008
  [12,15]                                              -0.463                 -0.045              -0.042               -0.028
  [16,19]                                              -0.472                 -0.100              -0.029               -0.029
  [20,25]                                              -0.477                 -0.125              -0.125               -0.133
  [26,60]                                              -0.412                 -0.119              -0.151               -0.093
  [61-200]                                             -0.455                 -0.097              -0.200               -0.091

  More than 200 (omitted): Unconditional
average                                  -0.226                               -0.026              -0.232               -0.035
  Stateowned                             0.242                                0.097               0.219                0.100
                                                       Value producing Growing firms Value                             Growing
Sample                                                 firms           only          producing firms                   firms only
N                                                      11,448          5,936         2,766                             1,541
Adjusted R2                                         0.645               0.858             0.700                        0.829
All coefficients statistically significant at the 1% confidence interval, unless highlighted in grey.
 Dependent variable Davis-Haltiwanger-Schuh growth rate. Regression weighted by base year (2009) firm size.
* rankings from 1 (highest profits, highest VA, etc.) to 20 (lowest profits, etc.); thus a negative coefficient on profits/productivity
  indicates a higher (smaller) profitability rank is associated with higher job growth.




                                                                  73
         Table B 4: Determinants of Net Job Creation in the Formal Sector
Net job creation in formal establishments, 2009-2012
Dependent variable: Net Job growth 2009-2012
Base size classification of employment
                                 (1)                                   (2)                         (3)                 (4)
Productivity growth/profitability
 Average productivity rank*                                                                                            -0.038



Age/size
  Entrant                           1.770                              1.786                       1.759               1.993
   Micro established                -0.649                             -0.598                      -0.807              -0.504
   Small established                -0.776                             -0.734                      -0.806              -0.504
   Medium established               -0.712                             -0.696                      -0.643              -0.344

State owned                                                            0.148                       0.125               0.246

                                                                                  Value                                Value
                                    All firms (not just value All firms (not just generating                           generating
Sample                              generating)               value generating)   firms                                firms
N                                   15884                     15884               11448                                11448
Adjusted R2                        0.555                          0.557                            0.594               0.674
All coefficients statistically significant at the 1% confidence interval.
 Dependent variable Davis-Haltiwanger-Schuh growth rate. Regression weighted by base year (2009) firm size.
* rankings from 1 (highest profits, highest VA, etc.) to 20 (lowest profits, etc.); thus a negative coefficient on profits/productivity
  indicates a higher (smaller) profitability rank is associated with higher job growth.




                                                                  74
       Figure B 1: Net job creation for established firms 2009-2012

                       Base employment classification
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
              Value producing, controlling for productivity
              Growing firms, controlling for productivity
              Value producing, controlling for productivity and investment
              Growing, controlling for productivity and investment




       Figure B 2: Net job creation for established firms 2009-2012

                 Average employment size classification

 2.5
 2.0
 1.5
 1.0
 0.5
 0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
                   Value producing firms: controlling for profitability
                   Value producing firms: uncontrolled
                   Growing firms: uncontrolled
                   Growing firms: controlling for profitability




                                     75
       Figure B 3: Net job creation for established firms 2009-2012

                       Base employment classification
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
             Value producing, controlling for productivity
             Growing firms, controlling for productivity
             Value producing, controlling for productivity and investment
             Growing, controlling for productivity and investment




                                       76
                                     REFERENCES
Bayramov, Gubad. 2012. The Shadow Economy in Azerbaijan: Size and Causes. Norwegian
Institute of International Affairs (NUPI).
Bino, et al. 2009. India Labour Market Report. Tata Institute of Social Sciences.
Fryer, Paul, Emil Nasritdinov, Elmira Satvbaldieva; 2014. Moving Toward the Brink? Migration
in the Kyrgyz Republic. Central Asia Affairs, Vol. 1 (2014).
Guelfi, Anita and Sarosh Sattar, 2015. Poverty and Economic Mobility in the Kyrgyz Republic:
Some Insights from the ‘Life in Kyrgyzstan’ Panel Survey. The World Bank
Helper, Susan, Timothy Krueger, and Howard Wial. 2012. Why Does Manufacturing Matter?
Which Manufacturing Matters? Brookings working paper. February.
International Finance Corporation. 2013. Kyrgyz Country Profile 2013. International Finance
Corporation, World Bank Group.
International Labor Organization, 2012. Statistical update on employment in the informal economy;
ILO department of statistics. June.
International Labor Organization, 2011. A Comparative Overview of Informal Employment in
Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Moldova and Montenegro.
International Labor Organization, 2009. Labour Migration and Productive Utilization of Human
Resources: Kyrgyz Republic.

Institute for the Study of Labor, 2011. How large in the private sector in Africa? Evidence from
National Accounts and Labor Markets, IZA DP 6267 (Botswana)

Liebert, Saltanat. 2013. Challenges of Reforming the Civil Service in the Post-Soviet Era: The Case
of Kyrgyzstan. Review of Public Personnel Administration 2014 34:403.

Kapalova, Altyn. 2014. Small and Medium Enterprise Development in Kyrgyzstan: Informal
Communications and the Role of Women. University of Central Asia Working Paper No. 25.

Kyzy, Akylai Muktarbek. 2012. Remittances and Real Exchange Rates in CIS Countries. Central
European University Economics Department.

Mogilevsky, Roman and Aziz Atamanov. 2009. Remittances and Their Impact on the
Macroeconomic Situation of and Financial Sector Development in the Kyrgyz Republic. Spatial
Disparities in Development Policy. Berlin Workshop Series 2009. The World Bank.

Nasritdinov, Emil. 2010. Informal Economy and Social Vulnerability in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan.
American University of Central Asia, Social Research Center.

OECD, 2012. Human Resources Management Country Profile: Mexico, December 2012.
Rijkers, Bob, Hassan Arouri, Caroline Freund, Antonio Nucifora. 2014. Which Firms Create the
Most Jobs in Developing Countries? Evidence from Tunisia. World Bank Policy Research Working
Paper 7068.


                                                77
Tynaliev, Urmat. 2010. Labor Migration from Post-Soviet Kyrgyzstan to Russia and Its
Developmental Impact in the Context of National Human Resource Development. University of
Central Asia.

World Bank, 2014a. Armenia Public Expenditure Review: Expanding the Fiscal Envelope. The
World Bank.

World Bank, 2014b. Doing Business 2015: Going Beyond Efficiency. Economy Profile 2015.
Kyrgyz Republic. International Bank for Research and Development.

World Bank 2014c. Improving Trade and Transport for Landlocked Developing Countries: A Ten
Year Review. World Bank-United Nations report in preparation for the 2nd United Nations
Conference on Landlocked Developing Countries (LLDCs)

World Bank, 2014d. Kyrgyz Republic: Growth Rebounds, Risks Remain. Kyrgyz Republic
Economic Report No. 5. The World Bank.

World Bank, 2014e. Kyrgyz Republic Public Expenditure Review Notes: Public Wage Bill. Poverty
Reduction and Economic Management Unit. Europe and Central Asia Region.

Yang, Judy, Aibek Uulu and Sarosh Sattar, 2015. Labor Migration and Household Welfare in
Kyrgyzstan. The World Bank.




                                             78
