                                99892
COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT
MECHANISMS

FIELD
EXPERIMENT
IN PAKISTAN


SALMAN ASIM • ALI ABBAS • MARIAM ADIL
Table of Contents
Dedication......................................................................................................................................... 2
Acknowledgments.............................................................................................................................. 2
Glossary............................................................................................................................................. 3
Executive Summary............................................................................................................................ 4
Introduction....................................................................................................................................... 9
Section 1: Design Phase................................................................................................................... 15
Chapter 1: Context and Project Design............................................................................................ 16
Chapter 2: Meeting Materials, Testing and Field Pilots..................................................................... 20
Section 2: Implementation Phase..................................................................................................... 31
Chapter 3: Community Mobilization and Village Meetings............................................................. 32
Chapter 4: Post-Meeting Engagement.............................................................................................. 37
Chapter 5: Elections and Capacity-Building Support....................................................................... 47
Section 3: Analysis............................................................................................................................ 55
Chapter 6: Treatment Receipt Analysis............................................................................................. 56
Chapter 7: Analysis of Text Messages................................................................................................ 61
Chapter 8: Analysis of Capacity-Building Support........................................................................... 66
Conclusion....................................................................................................................................... 71
Bibliography..................................................................................................................................... 72
Annexure.......................................................................................................................................... 74
   Annex 1: Snapshots of Select Project Tools................................................................................... 75
   Annex 2: Technical Design of the Community Dialogue Platform............................................... 76
   Annex 3: Content of Informational Messages and Interactive Voice Response Calls..................... 81
   Annex 3a: Informational SMS Messages – Round 1 (Translated).................................................. 81
   Annex 3b: Informational SMS Messages – Round 2 (Translated)................................................. 83
   Annex 3c: Interactive Voice Response Calls – Round 1 (Translated)............................................. 84
   Annex 3d: Interactive Voice Response Calls – Round 2 (Translated)............................................. 86
   Annex 4a: Workflow Diagram – Intervention 1 (School Management Committee)...................... 88
   Annex 4b: Workflow Diagram – Intervention 2 (Community Dialogue Platform)....................... 89
   Annex 5: Timeline of the Intervention......................................................................................... 90
   Annex 6: Material from Executive Body Meetings........................................................................ 91
   Annex 7: Sorting Algorithm......................................................................................................... 93
   Annex 8: Project Cost Estimates................................................................................................... 95
   Annex 9: Data on Interactive Voice Response Calls...................................................................... 98
   Annex 10: List of Databases....................................................................................................... 105
2   DEDICATION



Dedication

                       This project is dedicated to the memory of Mr. Muhammad Nouman Bashir,
                       who died after contracting the Hepatitis E virus during implementation of the
                       project in Sindh province, Pakistan. Mr. Bashir was the project lead for the
                       Weitek Group, a private firm contracted by the World Bank to help with this
                       project. Mr. Bashir will be remembered for his honesty, integrity, professional
                       commitment, and spontaneity, as well as for the warmth with which he in-
                       teracted with his colleagues. Mr. Bashir was a source of inspiration for every
                       member of the project team. He faced challenges with courage, responded to
                       disappointments with patience, and injected immense energy into the project at
                       critical stages. He stood for, and deeply cared about the cause of disadvantaged
                       children in Sindh.

The project team plans to raise funds to support the higher education of Mr. Bashir’s children. Those
who would like to contribute should contact the corresponding author at: sasim@worldbank.org.


Acknowledgments
We thank the Government of Sindh’s Education and Literacy Department and the Reform Support
Unit, in particular, Saba Mushtaq, Dr. Fazlullah Pechoho, Faisal Ahmed Muhammad, Dr. Hamzo
Khan Tagar, Muhammad Nasim Qureshi and Sania Khursheed, for extensive collaboration and assis-
tance; the World Bank’s intervention design team, in particular Priyanka Pandey, Lorenza De Icaza,
Dr. Fazlullah Pechoho, and Faisal Ahmed; the Weitek Group, Dr. Hamzo Khan Tagar for field imple-
mentation; Amar Fateen and Saindad Joyo for implementation support; Rachid Benmessaoud, Amit
Dar, Dhushyanth Raju, Margo Hoftijzer and Umbreen Arif for their encouragement and support for
this project.

We thank our partners, M3 Technologies Private Ltd. for the design and customization of the Communi-
ty Dialogue Platform; the Weitek Group for the design, testing and implementation of village-level meet­
ings and training of School Management Committees’ Executive Body members; J. Walter Thompson
for the development of audio clips for village meetings; and the Social Policy and Development Centre
for third-party monitoring of the intervention. In particular, we would like to thank Mr. Inam Fareed;
Mr. Imran H. Naqvi of Weitek Group; Mr. Adnan Lotia; Ms. Farnaz Shama and Ms. Sana Nasim of
M3 Technologies; Mr. Omar Murad of JWT; and Mr. Nadeem Ahmed and Mr. Manzoor Memon of the
Social Policy and Development Centre for their commitment, dedication and hard work.

We gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided for this project by the Strategic Impact Eval-
uation Fund, the Education Sector Development Program, and the World Bank.




September, 2015
                                                                     GLOSSARY   3



Glossary

CDP		      Community Dialogue Platform
CO		       Country Office
EB		       Executive Body
ELD		      Education and Literacy Department
FMP		      Field Mobilization Plan
GoSindh	   Government of Sindh
HIES		     Household Integrated Economic Survey
HQ		       Headquarters (World Bank)
ICT		      Information and Communications Technology
IFS		      International Financial Statistics
IVR		      Interactive Voice Response
JWT		      J. Walter Thompson
M3Tech		   M3 Technologies
PKR		      Pakistani Rupee
PSLM		     Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement Survey
RSU		      Reform Support Unit
SBM		      School-based Management Reforms
SBP		      State Bank of Pakistan
SERP		     Sindh Education Sector Reform Program
SIP		      School Improvement Plan
SMC		      School Management Committee
SPDC		     Social Policy and Development Centre
UC		       Union Council
USD		      U.S. Dollar
WDR		      World Development Report
WB		       World Bank
WG		       Weitek Group
4   DEDICATION




Executive
Summary
                                                                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                 5



Community engagement and direct beneficiary feedback can improve project outcomes under
the right conditions. Community-focused projects in developing countries in Asia, Africa and South
America have shown that such projects can create both successes and failures. Successes include in-
tensive participation by the community, such as in Ghana, where the Community Secondary Schools
Construction Project led to district assemblies effectively handling procurement for civil works. In
Indonesia, development of links between school committees and local governing bodies, such as village
councils, empowered school committees to hold school management accountable, leading to the estab-
lishment of village study hours and increased parental satisfaction with the committees’ performance.
On the other hand, the domination of school development and monitoring committees by the political
elite, and misuse of power by elected representatives in Karnataka, India, led to favoritism in the hiring of
teachers, and adversely affected the move towards greater community participation in public education.
The World Development Report (2004) highlighted the role of client power and “voice” to in-
crease accountability and improve delivery of service. Over the years, the World Bank has supported
interventions to improve citizen participation and social accountability in education. In 2013, the Pres-
ident’s Delivery Unit1 agreed to incorporate beneficiary feedback in all operational World Bank projects
within the next five years. The objective of this report is to contribute to the ongoing dialogue on how
to harness citizen engagement to have an impact. The report documents the design, implementation
and results of a pilot project aimed at building closer relations between schools and their local com-
munities. The project was implemented in three districts in rural Sindh, Pakistan, as part of the Sindh
Education Sector Reform Program (SERP-I & II).
The Sindh Education Sector Reform Program supported the provision of annual grants to schools,
with the aim of increasing the involvement of parents and communities in local schools. This engage-
ment was expected to lead to a diffusion of school management powers to parents and other members of
the community over time, resulting in better management of schools and improved educational outcomes.
At the end of the first phase of the program, the Government of Sindh successfully ensured timely transfers
of these grants to more than 80% of functional government schools. However, these grants did not result in
sustained community participation in school management. Funds remained underutilized and, in certain
cases, were misappropriated. To address this problem, two interventions were designed to empower parents
and communities to actively and directly participate in the improvement of education at the local level.
The issuance of school grants alone generally failed to bring about greater community involve-
ment in the school improvement process. This was primarily due to two reasons. First, only a select
group of individuals in the community had access to information about the amount and delivery date
of the grant. There was no mechanism in place to inform or rally parents, so that they could monitor
the use of the funds. Second, even if community members were aware of the grant, they had limited
knowledge about how to engage with the school to improve utilization of these grants. Essentially, the
program lacked an interface to connect the community with schools. Such an interface could provide
the government with a channel to issue information on school inputs, while giving parents a platform
to lobby for school improvement and hold service providers accountable.
The interventions were designed, taking into account the theoretical, practical and contextual
understanding of rural Sindh. First, villagers were provided with the opportunity to interface with
other community members through an externally administered and moderated community meeting,

1
 	 President’s Delivery Unit.” “Established in January 2014, the President’s Delivery Unit (PDU) 			
monitors the World Bank Group’s performance and provides a forum to identify planning or implementation issues related 		
to institutional priorities.
6    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



with parents and other community members convening at the community’s main school. They learned
about the activities of the school, about grants made available to the school, and about ways to engage
with government schools through school committees. These meetings provided community members
with a space to discuss issues related to school performance.
The design limitations of this intervention are straightforward. In a feudal society like rural Sindh,
socio-economic power tends to be concentrated among the community’s elite, so that many communi-
ty members may not feel comfortable engaging in an open dialogue with school administrators during a
public meeting. This is particularly true in communities where teachers are patronized by village leaders
and politicians, and where community members generally acquiesce to the existing power elite in the
village. In addition, villagers might be less willing to attend meetings that take place during working
hours and that could cut into their earnings. Another potential obstacle is the direct cost of organizing
public meetings. The costs associated with helping village residents organize an initial community-level
meeting could be expected to drop with subsequent meetings, when villagers have more experience, but
there could still be some intervention costs.
The project addressed some of these limitations by leveraging information communication tech-
nology. Taking advantage of high mobile phone penetration rates in rural Sindh,2 we developed a sup-
plementary, cell phone-based interface, called the Community Dialogue Platform, to link community
members to schools. The Platform opened an anonymous, two-way communication channel between
the two sides, allowing for an open exchange of information within the community on school-related
issues at low cost.
The project introduced multiple ‘nudges’ through the Community Dialogue Platform to maintain
community focus on local education. Comments, opinions and complaints received from community
members were summarized on a weekly basis and sent to all participants registered on the database. The
campaign also provided to registered users the names and phone numbers of members of the Executive
Body, an elected group of representatives leading the School Management Committee. The Executive
Body is an elected group of representatives comprising a subset of the School Management Committee.
The Executive Body is tasked with leading the effort to develop the School Improvement Plan and to
implement it. Midway through the campaign, the project team obtained feedback from the community
through a round of automated calls requesting keypad responses. The team transferred airtime credits
to all registered users, to allow those who did not have pre-paid balances on their phones to participate
in the conversation. It followed up by sending a series of informational text messages to reinvigorate the
dialogue, refocus it on the role of school committees, and prevent drift from the core messages of the
project. Twenty eight percent of those who registered for the Platform were active users. But even those
who did not send messages directly to the portal found the campaign to be useful.
The dialogue generated by the Community Dialogue Platform gives us micro-level insights into the
nature, scope and extent of education-related problems faced by local communities in rural Sindh.
One of the common themes in the dialogue was the need for regular maintenance of buildings, classrooms
and toilets. In addition, communities expressed concern over the shortage of teachers and non-teaching
staff, as well as the state of basic facilities, including drinking water supply, boundary walls, furniture, fans
and electricity. Numerous villages expressed concern about low-quality teaching and sought better teach-
ers for English, Sindhi and Islamic studies. Users also raised concerns about a lack of textbooks at schools;
schools’ practice of charging students for textbooks that were supposed to be provided by the government
for free; and the failure by district and sub-district officials to regularly monitor schools.
2
 	 Project census data from 2012 indicates that on average, 74 percent of households at the village-level and 78% of households 		
	 at the main settlement-level have access to a mobile phone.
                                                                                EXECUTIVE SUMMARY                7



The project encouraged the community to use school grants for school maintenance and repairs.
Some communities said that school funds from the government were not reaching the schools. Oth-
ers said that resources provided were not sufficient to pay for school improvement projects. In some
villages, communities complained that appointed individuals misused or misappropriated funds. On
the positive side, numerous villages reported that since the initiation of the Community Dialogue
Platform, school committee meetings were being held regularly at schools, with some villages also indi-
cating that teacher absenteeism had fallen with proactive monitoring by the community.
The design of both intervention arms – community meetings and the Community Dialogue Platform
– depended on a functioning, appropriately constituted School Management Committee that had the
capacity to introduce improvements to the school. One potential scenario would have been to focus
solely on bolstering citizen voice. The hope would be that over time, villagers’ increased knowledge of
the Committee’s procedural rules and mandate, and their monitoring of school fund usage would lead
to the dismissal of weak Committee members and the election of more informed community leaders –
strengthening the School Management Committee as an institution. Another possible scenario would
be to intervene and accelerate this process by conducting fresh elections, inducting new members and
building their capacity to undertake school improvement activities. Both of these approaches have their
merits and demerits. We tested both separately, as well as together through a crossover design. Almost half
the villages in each intervention were crossed over or complemented by elections and capacity support for
the Executive Body members of the school committees.
Democratic elections and special training can help to strengthen the capacity of School Management
Committees and their Executive Bodies. Facilitators in the field worked with crossover villages to conduct
democratic elections of school committees following official guidelines. The newly elected members received
hands-on training through three highly structured Executive Body meetings. These meetings familiarized the
elected Executive Body members with the functions of the school committee and provided training on how
to develop a School Improvement Plan. The members received assistance on how to finalize the Plan and
secure ratification at a village-level meeting. Critically, they also received training on the key functions of the
Executive Body – withdrawing funds, navigating the procurement process, bookkeeping, and monitoring
the implementation of the School Improvement Plan.
The development of the School Improvement Plan through community-wide discussions brought
interesting facts to the fore, such as the underutilization of existing funds. Improvement Plans are
supposed to be prepared by the executive body members in line with the funds available to the school
committees. Though a typical school in these districts had approximately PKR 22,000 in funds avail-
able at the time of the meeting, a large proportion of schools reported they had accumulated more
funds over a number of years. For instance, the schools that fell in the 90th percentile in terms of avail-
able funds in district Mirpurkhas and district Mitiari had PKR 77,500 and PKR 62,000, respectively,
each equivalent to at least three years of unutilized funds.
School Improvement Plans highlighted schools’ most urgent needs. Analysis of data on various line
items appearing in these Plans showed that common expenditures across villages included spending on
the repairs of ceilings, boundary walls, gates, and toilets, and on the repair and purchase of furniture
and other classroom facilities for students.
The ability of field teams to canvass and mobilize a sufficiently large section of the target com-
munities was critical for the success of the project. On average, participation rates for village-level
meetings exceeded the initial threshold of 60 percent across the two treatments. However, there were
variations across communities, with participation rates ranging from 21 percent to 100 percent, for 10th
8      EXECUTIVE SUMMARY



and 90th percentile villages, respectively. Community meetings were reorganized in 28 villages where
participation rates in the first attempt ended up to be less than 20% of the households. A large majority
of participants in these meetings had access to at least one cell phone number at the household level.
Overall, the average registration rate of 63 percent on the Community Dialogue Platform was consis-
tent with estimates of mobile phone penetration rates reported for rural Sindh.
Sustaining the community’s interest in the project through a series of activities was key to kin-
dling and sustaining the interest of the community to participate in the Community Dialogue
Platform initiative. Equally important were the hands-on support and guidance provided by an inter-
mediary firm to introduce the community to the Community Dialogue Platform; the identification of
local champions (community volunteers and School Management Committee members) to support,
spread and encourage the use of this Platform; and the availability of multilingual text support that
allowed for the inclusion of the dominant local languages spoken in rural Sindh.
The successful implementation of the project interventions entailed two key elements. First, the
facilitators in the field must have the capacity to implement the designed intervention. Second, a large
number of target participants must be exposed to the intervention as intended. To ensure the former, the
project team hired two specialized private firms with demonstrated prior experience to support the design
of materials and community mobilization efforts. Multiple safeguards were put in place to discourage the
firms from shirking their responsibilities in an effort to reduce costs. For the village-level meeting to be
considered successful, at least 40% of the households in the target community had to attend; otherwise,
another meeting had to be scheduled.3 In addition, the team introduced measures to ensure that the field
facilitators could execute the treatment and convey the message to the community as intended. These
measures included standardized intervention protocols and delivery methods, along with intensive in-class
and field-based training of facilitators. Periodic feedback from a third-party monitoring firm and regular
supervision by the project team played a critical role in keeping implementation on track.
The interventions discussed in this report sought to repair the broken feedback loop between
local communities and schools via School Management Committees. The novel element of the
project was to link citizen-voice mechanisms to grassroots institutions such as School Management
Committees, as well as to empower and enable citizens to effect positive change in service delivery. We
followed a 360-degree design approach for this project, targeting the issue of a lack of community par-
ticipation from different angles. Mobilization efforts, village-level meetings, and dialogue initiated on
the Community Dialogue Platform all sought to raise awareness and process knowledge among com-
munity members, so that they could engage effectively with the school. The dialogue relayed commu-
nity-identified needs to the elected representatives of school committees. The project also encouraged
the community to proactively monitor the use of school funds. We deliberately designed interventions
to create a self-sustaining, community-managed loop to identify, manage and monitor school improve-
ment activities with little dependence on government departments. Further, since the design of the
Platform created a feedback mechanism enabling communities to receive information and engage with
schools via school committees, this intervention fell within the broader class of citizen-feedback models
that combine information technology with grassroots institutions (school committees) for improved
service delivery. During the intervention rollout, the project team collected process data, which it sub-
sequently analyzed to produce the results reported in this study.

3
    This benchmark was later relaxed to 20%, due to the high average participation rates achieved by the firms.
          DEDICATION   9




Introduction
10     INTRODUCTION



Most governments around the world have been successful in getting children into schools, but not all of
them have been able to impart education to those enrolled (Pritchett, 2014). This large-scale government
failure to provide quality education at the point of delivery is the result of weak public sector management,
governance and capacity (World Bank, Project Document SERP-II). Providing high-quality teacher-child
experiences in schools daily calls for an active role by communities and parents in their schools, such as
promoted through school-based management reforms. Such reforms primarily seek to shift administra-
tive responsibilities and authority to the level of schools. The hope is that such a move would increase
accountability and transparency in the education system, and make education services more responsive to
the need of end users. The development of a strong local “voice” is thought to have the power to reshape
education outcomes by affecting the level and mix of education inputs that reach the school, as well as by
improving the efficiency with which these resources are used (Bruns et al. 2011). Giving a voice to local
stakeholders, should therefore lead to better learning outcomes for children enrolled in school.
Projects aimed at enhancing the voice of the community in developing countries have revealed new op-
portunities for these communities. In Ghana, the World Bank collaborated with the Government to
provide matching grants for 140 local communities that were ready to implement development projects.
The communities received two-thirds of funding for local projects if they could cover the remaining cost
in cash, building material or labor. Under this program, called the Community Secondary Schools Con-
struction Project, district assemblies effectively handled procurement for civil works. It was later found
that local leadership played a key role in social mobilization, though initial field surveys did not capture
data on the degree of leadership availability in a particular community.4
Other projects aimed at boosting community voice produced mixed results. In Indonesia, a phased-in
field experiment provided grants and training, along with the holding of elections and the establish-
ment of links with local government bodies. The provision of grants and training appeared to have little
or no effect on education indicators. But the elections and the creation of linkages with local political
stakeholders positively affected education outcomes in the target area, which comprised 520 rural pub-
lic schools in six districts in Central Java and Yogyakarta, Indonesia.5
Structural constraints have also affected the ability of school bodies to actualize their potential. After the
creation of School Development and Monitoring Committees in Karnataka, India, members of the Leg-
islative Assembly pressured the government to give significant powers to the assembly so that they could
affect the workings of the school committees. The legislators secured authority to nominate the president
of the School Development and Monitoring Committees, and the nine parent members of the body.6
Such political interference in community-based organizations is prevalent across the border in Pakistan
as well, where feudal tendencies have adversely affected the power dynamic across communities. A key
manifestation is the use of influence by local power holders to get their favorites hired as head teachers,
reducing the “voice” of the community and politicizing the school hiring process.7

4
 	 Uemura, Mitsue. 1999. Community participation in education: what do we know?. Washington, DC: World Bank. 		
	<http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/1999/01/1989001/community-participation-education-know>.
5
 	 Pradhan, M., Suryadarma, D., Beatty A., Wong, M., Alishjabana, A., Gaduh, A., & Artha, R.. Improving Educational 		
	 Quality through Enhancing Community Participation: Results from a Randomized Field Experiment in Indonesia. Policy 	
	 Research Working Papers. The World Bank. September 2011.
6
 	 Oxfam India. (2014). Community Participation and Institutional Experiences in School Education: School Development 	
	 and Monitoring Committees in Karnataka. New Delhi. <http://www.oxfamindia.org/sites/default/files/wp-community- 		
	participation-and-institutional-experience-in-school-education_0.pdf>.
7	
  Ali, S. (2006). Why does policy fail? Understanding the problems of policy implementation in Pakistan - a neuro-cognitive 		
	 perspective. International Studies in Educational Administration, 34(1). < http://ecommons.aku.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?
	article=1009&context=pakistan_ied_pdck>.
                                                                               INTRODUCTION          11



More recently, development agencies have encouraged and supported governments to implement re-
forms aimed at empowering local stakeholders in school-based management. This has led to the emer-
gence – or in some instances, revitalization – of School Management Committees comprised of par-
ents, community members and teachers. However, emerging evidence from developing countries has
not been very promising; even after several years of de jure existence, school committees have remained
largely non-functional. In some cases, Committee members were not even aware of the existence of
such Committees, let alone understanding their expected participation in these bodies. In other in-
stances, when these Committees have been found to be functional, community participation in these
organizations has remained low (Pandey et al., 2009, and Banerjee et al., 2010).
The situation is not much different in rural Sindh, Pakistan. Under the Sindh Education Sector Reform
Program undertaken by the Government of Sindh, School Management Committees were re-acti-
vated as a formal channel through which local communities could engage with government schools.
Each Committee receives an annual grant from the Government worth PKR 22,000 to pay for school
improvement projects. The Committees have total control over these funds and may withdraw them
as needed without seeking authorization from line authorities. With more than 80% of functional
schools in the province receiving grants, the Committees are institutionally established and receive
funds from the Government every year. However, there is little evidence to suggest that these funds are
properly utilized – if they are used at all.
To find a cost-effective solution to this problem and to strengthen the link between communities
and schools, we designed and implemented two complementary community-engagement inter-
ventions. The first intervention sought to mobilize the community through an externally admin-
istered, large village-level meeting to provide information on the rights, roles and responsibilities
of parents and the community. It also provided these stakeholders with options for engaging with
Government-run primary schools via School Management Committees. The second intervention
consisted of a mobile phone-based interface, called the Community Dialogue Platform, that har-
nessed text messaging services to build an anonymous, two-way communication channel between
villagers and their schools.
Both approaches provided communities with a platform to receive school-related information, to ex-
change views on education issues and to ensure that chosen representatives on the School Management
Committee followed up on the community’s recommendations for school improvement. To address
any capacity constraints at the Committee level, we used a crossover design to layer these two interven-
tions with transparent elections of Committee members and participatory training to help members
develop a School Improvement Plan. These interventions are currently being evaluated.
This project built upon a new wave of progress that tapped information and communications tech-
nology solutions to empower citizens, strengthen accountability and improve service delivery. It is
widely acknowledged that information provision and effective communication with beneficiaries
play an instrumental role in improving governance (Coffey, 2007). In this project, we extended
this thinking by designing mechanisms in which “voice” and accountability were central; we created
an inclusive public space for dialogue and debate between communities and schools. In doing so,
we facilitated a freer flow of information among the Government, schools and communities, and
opened up opportunities for local stakeholders to participate directly in decisions that affect them.
The creation of this feedback mechanism among key stakeholders in the education sector places this
intervention in the larger category of citizen-feedback models that combine elements of technology
solutions with local institutions – in this case, School Management Committees – to improve the
provision of social services.
12    INTRODUCTION



We expect to see improvements in underlying accountability relationships resulting from stronger link-
ages between communities and schools. The teacher is the main instrument for learning in any school,
so any changes in underlying accountability relationships have the power to affect teachers’ effort in
schools, as measured by attendance, time devoted to preparing lesson plans and other teacher on-task
measures. This, in turn, can impact student achievement as measured by performance on standard
cognitive tests.
These interventions are of particular importance in the context of rural Sindh. Community members
find it difficult to alter their relationship with power elites and the Government in the context of the
public education system, leaving them with the sole option of voicing their discontent, in the hope that
the Government will consequently improve its performance.8
Several factors have traditionally limited community members’ ability to implement change. Private
schools are virtually non-existent, making it harder, if not impossible, for parents to withdraw their
children from public schools and send them to private schools. In the absence of market-based ac-
countability, the only option for discontented parents is to directly raise any concerns they may have
with educators. The interventions sought to create an interface that connected school administrators
with parents, opening up opportunities for parents and other community members to take part in the
school improvement process. This was done through a traditional, face-to-face meeting between the
community and teachers.
However, we were cognizant of the limitations of such meetings in a feudal society such as Sindh. Citi-
zens here can easily feel intimidated and may find it easier to acquiesce to the status quo.To address this
issue, the project team created a Community Dialogue Platform to positively disrupt the system. The
Platform virtually connected community members with each other and with school administrators. It
provided them with a medium to receive education-related information, anonymously exchange views,
and ensure that their chosen representatives in school committees worked on their suggestions for
school improvement.
The overall objective was to elicit and sustain meaningful participation by the community in the man-
agement of schools. This could only be possible if the interface was integrated with local institutions.
For this reason, School Management Committees in approximately half of the sample villages were
strengthened through elections and capacity-building support to enable Committee members to effec-
tively respond to community-identified needs.
The primary purpose of this report is to record the rationale and motivations behind the decisions
taken by the project team during the project’s design and implementation, and to catalyze a candid
discussion about the challenges faced during implementation. The report is divided into three sections.
The first section deals with the design phase of the project. There are two chapters in this section. The
first lays out the framework and context for project design; the second discusses the design and testing
of instruments, the portal, manuals and training of field facilitators. Section Two focuses on the imple-
mentation phase of the project. The first chapter in this section reviews village mobilization efforts and
the convening of village-level meetings. The second chapter documents the post-meeting engagement
process through the Community Dialogue Platform, while the third chapter reviews capacity-building
support for newly constituted School Management Committees.


8
 	 Hirschman, Albert O. Exit, Voice and Loyalty: Responses to the Decline in Firms, Organizations and State. Cambridge: 		
	 Harvard UP, 1978. Print.
                                                                                  INTRODUCTION          13



The third and the final section reports the key findings from collation, synthesis and analysis of the
process data collected for all interventions in this project. The first chapter in this section reports sta-
tistics on measures of participation and other indicators to measure treatment fidelity – strategies that
measure accuracy and consistency of interventions. The second chapter analyzes text messaging traffic
generated on the portal for the duration of the campaign, while the final chapter gives detailed expen-
ditures analysis of School Improvement Plans developed by the School Management Committees.
Section 1:
Design Phase
Were the interventions designed to include
ingredients from theory and practice?
16    CONTEXT AND PROJECT DESIGN




Chapter 1: Context and Project Design
This field experiment was designed and implemented to accelerate the revitalization of School Management Com-
mittees in rural Sindh – an important sub-program for improving the quality and performance of government
schools supported under the Sindh Education Sector Reform Program (SERP-I and SERP-II). The experiment is
currently undergoing rigorous evaluation. Lack of awareness among local communities about their roles and respon-
sibilities in managing School Management Committees, as well as communities’ lack of capacity in executing these
responsibilities, have contributed to less-than-optimal utilization of Committee funds. To address these gaps, the
project team designed two interventions to inform, enable and empower communities to become more engaged
in the school improvement process. The first treatment arm used community-level meetings to provide informa-
tion on roles, responsibilities, rights, and options for recourse in engaging with government schools via School
Management Committees. The second arm provided similar information and a forum for community discussion
through a mobile phone-based Community Dialogue Platform. An additional crossover element introduced
elections and capacity support into the School Management Committee’s leadership group, called the Executive
Body, to ensure its members had the capability to carry out their responsibilities. Encouraged by this field ex-
periment, the Government of Sindh has started developing similar citizen-engagement mechanisms under the
Information and Communications subcomponent of the Sindh Global Partnership for Education project.


Sindh Education Sector
Sindh province has a population of approximately 42.4 million,9 accounting for roughly one-quarter
of Pakistan’s total population. The province has a net enrollment rate at the primary level of 53%, with
large differentials between urban areas (63%) and rural areas (45%). This is lower than the national
average of 57%.10 There are 46,724 government schools in Sindh, 40,517 of which are functional.
Among the total, 42,342 are primary schools, 2,336 are middle/elementary schools,11 1,752 are sec-
ondary schools and 294 are higher secondary schools.12 In total, the schools have approximately 4.08
million students and 145,438 working teachers, including 100,322 male teachers and 45,116 female
teachers. 141,320 of these are government teachers.13
As is the case with other countries in South Asia, the public education system in Sindh, Pakistan, is rid-
dled with problems of teacher absenteeism, high dropout rates and poor maintenance of school facilities.
Under the Sindh Education Sector Reform Program undertaken by the Government, School Manage-
ment Committees were reactivated as a formal channel for local communities to engage with government
schools and to address some of these problems. School Management Committees in primary schools re-
ceive annual grants from the Government worth PKR 22,000 each to finance school improvements. The
administrative performance and financial management of the Committees are subject to review by parents
and the wider local community. Communities vet and approve the School Improvement Plan prepared by
the Committees in a village-level meeting, and monitor the plan’s implementation.

9
 	 Population Welfare Department, Sindh < http://www.pwdsindh.gov.pk/>.
10	
     Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement Survey (PSLM) 2012-13 Provincial / 		
	 District. Government of Pakistan. 2013.
11
   	 Schools covering grades 6, 7 and 8 are known as middle/elementary in Pakistan.
12
   	 Secondary schools cover grades 9 and 10, while higher secondary schools cover grades 11 and 12.
13
   	 Reform Support Unit. Annual Schools Census 2013-14. Education and Literacy Department, Government of Sindh. 		
	 2014. <http://www.sindheducation.gov.pk/Contents/Menu/Sindh%20Education%20Profile%202013-14.pdf>.
                                                             CONTEXT AND PROJECT DESIGN                 17



Design of Interventions
This pilot project is part of an ongoing World Bank program to provide technical and advisory support
to the Government of Sindh and is aimed at improving the quality and performance of government pri-
mary schools under the multi-pronged Sindh Education Sector Reform Program (SERP-II). The Bank
worked with the Reform Support Unit, the implementation arm of the Sindh Government’s Education
and Literacy Department, to design the interventions, which were piloted in select districts of rural
Sindh. The aim of these interventions was to explore concrete ways to elicit meaningful and sustained
local community engagement to improve education outcomes. More importantly, the interventions
were to serve as a first experimental evaluation of a class of redressal systems, promoted by the World
Bank to incorporate beneficiary feedback in operational projects.
The World Bank hired consultancy firms J. Walter Thompson (JWT), Weitek Group and M3 Tech-
nologies (M3Tech) to assist with the design and implementation of the project. An intervention team
comprised of international and local consultants closely supervised the effort, working closely with the
Reform Support Unit to develop materials for village-level mobilization and large-scale meetings at the
village level. JWT, an advertising, marketing and communications firm, converted the content of the
meetings into standardized audio clips – distinct for each intervention – that were played at all commu-
nity meetings. Weitek Group’s social mobilization and media wing created posters, banners, flip charts
and mosque announcements, as well as the field strategy for mobilizing the community to attend these
meetings. M3 Technologies, a technology firm that specializes in text messaging services, developed
and provided “back-end” support for implementing the Community Dialogue Platform that virtually
connected community members in each village.


Fidelity to Theory and Practice
The pilot interventions were designed to elicit meaningful and sustained participation by communities
in helping to manage local schools. The Sindh Education Sector Reform Program (SERP-I) stream-
lined the process for issuing annual school grants to schools in a timely manner. However, substantive
weaknesses in school management systems at the community level resulted in the underutilization
and misappropriation of these funds. These interventions were designed to address this challenge by
enabling and empowering the community to actively participate in the school improvement process.
Communities had to be informed of their rights, roles and responsibilities, and they were provided
with options for engaging with government schools. The Government of Sindh had prepared and dis-
tributed School Management Guidelines to communities to facilitate their involvement, but its effort
had limited success in rural Sindh, where a large majority of villagers are illiterate. Further, mechanisms
to strengthen linkages between communities and schools were not functional on the ground. Take
School Management Committees, which are supposed to serve as an official channel of communication
between communities and local schools. Such committees are comprised of a General Body, made up
of parents, and a five-member Executive Body, made up of the head teacher and community represen-
tatives. In theory, with the exception of the head teacher, the members of the Executive Body should
be democratically elected and meet regularly to oversee school improvements, while the General Body
should meet at least biannually. In practice, at a large majority of schools, head teachers and community
elites tended to choose the Executive Body members and the Committees rarely held General Body
meetings. When School Management Committees were functional, their Executive Body members
often lacked training and capacity to act on community-identified needs for school improvement.
18    CONTEXT AND PROJECT DESIGN



Selection of Study Districts
Three districts in rural Sindh were selected for the implementation of these interventions: Mitiari, Mir-
purkhas, and Sanghar. We used the Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement Survey to rank
the districts based on two basic education indicators: the proportion of adults who have ever attended
school, and school participation rates of primary age children (5-12 years). Using administrative school
census data, we ranked districts according to size, measured by the number of schools and villages in
each district. Out of a total 28 districts in the province, Mitiari was ranked the third-smallest, Mir-
purkhas was ranked 12th and Sanghar was ranked 18th. In terms of education indicators, Mirpurkhas
had one of the lowest levels of education outcomes, followed by Mitiari (close to the median), while
Sanghar ranked among the highest. Overall, these three districts are a relatively representative sample
of rural Sindh and were deemed relatively safe for the field teams to operate in. In these three districts,
a total of 287 sample villages were targeted for the interventions.


Impact Evaluation Design
The project team randomly assigned the 287 villages to one of five groups that were part of the project:
     T1 – Control: No information or capacity-building intervention was undertaken.

     T2 – INFO-MEET: A face-to-face meeting was organized for all stakeholders (parents, teachers,
     village leaders and council members). Participants received information packages, including scripts
     for recording audio clips, posters and pamphlets that had been designed to explain the roles and
     responsibilities of parents and community members, and to encourage participation in school-level
     management and decision-making. The participants were encouraged and given time to discuss
     school-related issues during these meetings.

     T3 – INFO-SMS: A face-to-face meeting was organized for all stakeholders (parents, teachers, vil-
     lage leaders and council members) to introduce the community to an information and communi-
     cations technology-enabled text messaging platform. This platform creates a virtual network of all
     stakeholders in the community. It allowed for the sharing of key messages derived from the content
     of the information package that was disseminated during the face-to-face meeting, and framed
     similarly to tweets on Twitter. This reinforced key messages shared during the initial meeting.
     Participants were encouraged to provide comments and feedback in response to messages shared
     through the virtual platform. The platform also sent periodic summary messages compiled from
     the comments received from all registered users. Automated Interactive Voice Response calls were
     used to gather feedback from the community regarding the dialogue platform.

     T4 – INFO-MEET-SUPPORT:14 In addition to information exchange (T2), under this inter-
     vention, school committees were reconstituted through elections according to official guidelines.
     Once elected, the newly constituted Executive Body had three meetings, totaling three hours each.
     During these meetings, newly elected members received capacity-building support and resources
     that they needed to perform their expected roles and responsibilities.

14
   	 INFO-MEET is interchangeably used with “SMC Intervention” in the report. INFO-MEET-SUPPORT is also referred 		
	 to as SMC Intervention with Elections and Capacity Support.
                                                                  CONTEXT AND PROJECT DESIGN                     19



    T5 – INFO-SMS-SUPPORT15: In addition to information exchange (T3), under this interven-
    tion, school committees were reconstituted through elections according to official guidelines.
    Once elected, the new Executive Body held three meetings, totaling three hours each. During
    these meetings, newly elected members received capacity-building support and resources that
    they needed to perform their expected roles and responsibilities.




15
   	INFO-SMS is interchangeably used with “SMS Intervention” or “CDP Intervention” in the report. INFO-SMS-SUPPORT 		
	 is also referred to as SMS Intervention with Elections and Capacity Support.
20    MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS




Chapter 2: Meeting Materials, Testing
and Field Pilots

The interventions were designed meticulously so that different arms of the project not only included relevant “active
ingredients” based on theory and practice, but also applied international best practices to rural Sindh. This was
essential for ensuring successful project implementation. The design was aligned with multiple international best
practices that attempt to improve transparency and accountability at the local level. These included projects such
as Check My School Program, a citizen-feedback platform in the Philippines; On Track, a citizen-feedback system
that allows residents in marginalized communities in Bolivia to report problems related to public services; Daraja, a
citizen-monitoring and -feedback initiative on water services in rural Tanzania; and Map Tandale, an interactive
map used to provide detailed information on education, health, water, accessibility and security needs to commu-
nities in Tanzania. Using this rich knowledge base and an innovative design, the project team attempted to address
limitations that had derailed earlier attempts to affect change in educational governance in rural Sindh.



Introduction to Project Design
Designing all elements of the project, calibrating its different components and finalizing all instruments
for project rollout took a significant amount of time. Initial design activities began in July 2011, con-
tinuing until the end of December 2012. This 18-month period allowed for different stakeholders to
come together, contribute towards the development of project tools, and refine the project process to
ensure successful implementation. The task that took the longest was the development of the Com-
munity Dialogue Platform, the key technology-based solution for initiating two-way communication
among community members, raising their awareness and strengthening accountability at the local level.
The design attempted to tackle multiple constraints faced by villagers, including skewed power dynam-
ics at the local level, lack of transparency and accountability, low informational awareness and high op-
portunity costs in terms of time spent away from earning livelihoods. The project team generally – and
the facilitators, specifically – sought to ensure that the village meetings held as part of the project were
inclusive, with every individual given an equal opportunity to participate, irrespective of gender, caste
or creed. Project tools such as the Community Dialogue Platform were designed to be inexpensive for
villagers to use, to encourage high participation rates. The project team also sought to minimize the
time commitment of participants to encourage greater engagement with schools.
This chapter documents the design of project instruments and details the progressive development of
project design. The first part of the chapter discusses the design, content and testing of the instruments.
The second section provides insights into the process for developing the Community Dialogue Plat-
form and its testing. The third section delves into how the project team trained field facilitators. The
chapter closes with a brief discussion about the costs of different elements of the design phase.
                                       MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS                    21



Design, Content and Testing of Instruments for Village Mobilization
and General Body Meetings

Design and Content
The intervention team worked with the Reform Support Unit of the Sindh Government, implement-
ing partner Weitek Group, and JWT to develop materials used during village meetings. Standardized
meeting materials designed for the intervention included: 1) an information package; 2) audio clips;
3) flip charts; 4) facilitator scripts; and 5) a field mobilization plan. These materials were produced
through a process which ensured gradual design improvements, undergoing multiple rounds of testing
and refinement. The final version incorporated changes based on feedback received from partner firms
and the World Bank project team. The project team used a range of meeting materials in hopes that
the messages could be delivered consistently across villages in an interactive way, with reinforcement of
critical information.

Information Package: At this stage, the design team, in consultation with local stakeholders, devel-
oped a set of information messages that were to be delivered to communities through all the interven-
tions. This information package had three key goals:
        o	
         Inform the community about School Management Committee grants and give suggestions
         on how to monitor use of these funds;
        o	
         Introduce the idea of the Community Dialogue Platform by explaining its purpose and uses; and
        o	
         Explain to community members their roles and responsibilities in terms of maintaining the
         transparent functioning of the School Management Committee. and how they could help to
         improve education outcomes for the community.
Audio Clips: The three components of the information package were converted into audio clips.
These were: 1) basic information on School Management Committees; 2) demonstration of the
Community Dialogue Platform; and 3) detailed information on the school committees. A main goal
was to control the quality of delivery of these messages and to ensure that the key messages were de-
livered consistently across treatment villages. Two audio clips were produced. The first provided in-
formation on the structure, funding sources, rules and regulations, as well as benefits, of a functional
School Management Committee. The second focused exclusively on the Community Dialogue Plat-
form, explaining its purpose, process and uses. Based on a feedback cycle, the audio clips were re-
vised multiple times, from the original, poem-based format, and finally to an audio drama. The two
principles for the development of the audio clips were that they had to provide relevant information
succinctly, and they had to be catchy and appealing to the audience. An international marketing and
communication firm, JWT Worldwide, was engaged to develop the story plot in drama format. The
design team also sought to make the language of the audio clips easy to understand, and to adapt the
clip to the context of rural Sindh.
Flip Charts: The design team used flip charts to recap the content of the audio clips during vil-
lage meetings, to make sure that the audience didn’t miss any important points. The information
in the flip charts was precise and easy to understand, covering all the major ideas discussed in the
audio clips.
22     MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS



Facilitator Script: The key motivation behind developing a detailed facilitator script was to standardize
the structure of the village-level meeting. The village meeting was divided into eight, timed parts. For
each part, the facilitator used a prepared script to engage with the audience. The design team sought to
keep the scripts clear and concise, with the aim of lending more structure to the meeting and expediting
the facilitator’s job. Since most of the target audience spoke Sindhi, the script was translated into Sindhi
to make it easier to understand. The team tailored the content of the scripts for the School Management
Committee and the SMS interventions so that the scripts were aligned with each intervention’s objectives.
Field Mobilization Plan: The project team developed an exhaustive guide for how to hold village
meetings, to serve as the go-to document for project implementers in the field. While tool development
and training were necessary to prepare implementation teams for project rollout, organizers felt there
was also a need for a comprehensive manual that field teams could consult when rolling out different
aspects of the project. The Field Mobilization Plan incorporated feedback from all the stakeholders,
including the World Bank team and partner organizations. Once the Plan was finalized, it was given to
field facilitators and their supervisory staff. This document guided all field activities over the course of
the project, and was critical to its successful implementation. The Plan reduced the team’s reliance on
training refreshers, decreasing potential project costs.
The Field Mobilization Plan also provided instructions on activities that field teams were expected to
implement to mobilize communities for village-level meetings. It provided specific details on when
field facilitators should arrive in the treatment villages, how they should undertake the final round of
mobilization prior to the meeting, and what precise tools and instruments (such as audio equipment
and flip charts) they were expected to check and set up before the start of the meeting. The Plan also
provided suggestions on the sequence of actions that were to be taken from the beginning of the meeting
until the end. These included do’s and don’ts for the meeting; for example, field facilitators should ensure
that the scripts were in their hands during the meeting. For example, the field facilitators should not say
more than they were expected to, or accept gifts from participants. They should prevent disruption and
drift during the meeting. The Plan provided details on how to take attendance, how to transfer data to
back-end Community Dialogue Platform operators,16 and how to moderate the post-meeting discussion.
Annex 1 provides photos of select instruments that were designed for the project.


Testing of Instruments
Central to the success of the implementation of this intervention was the ability of the field teams to
mobilize the community to attend the meetings. The teams made significant efforts to identify and test
the most effective materials and activities for attracting community members to the village-level meet-
ing. Implementation partner Weitek Group helped to design banners, flyers and balloons. All of these
materials had the name of the campaign, “Bachon Sai Pyaar Ilm ki pukaar” (literally translated as “The
call to education is love for children”), as well as the venue and time of the meeting printed on them.
The team also tested four softer catalysts, or “nudges”, aimed at increasing community participation: 1)
mosque announcements; 2) student performances; 3) a campaign to rally village elders and youth; and
4) a pre-recorded musical jingle that was broadcast via megaphone during door-to-door mobilization.


 	Tech support was provided to the portal at the backend. These project team members summarized the messages received from 		
16

	 the field and blasted them back to the community. They were also responsible for sending informational messages and 		
	 transferring mobile phone credit to communities.
                                              MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS                             23



These materials and activities were tested in three villages in rural Sindh. These three villages, however, were
not part of the overall sample of villages selected for the rollout of the interventions. Three banners were
displayed in each village: one at a key location in the village and the other two in front of schools. Children
in the schools received flyers, with an average of 40 flyers distributed per school. Ten flyers were to be fixed
to the perimeter of each banner (at least four per banner). Ten flyers were displayed with balloons in strategic
locations, such as at the school gate, and in local schools and community gathering areas, known as autaaq.
Different distribution mechanisms were tested across pilot villages. In one village, flyers were distributed to
at least 25 randomly chosen households per settlement in the village, instead of in schools, for a maximum
of 50 flyers. Thirty balloons were strategically placed in the village, with ten put together with flyers in three
strategic locations; ten placed in the main settlement; and ten in the peripheral settlement. One day before
the meeting, mosque announcements were made before each of the two evening calls to prayer. On the day
of the meeting, two announcements were made: one, two hours before the meeting; the second, just before
the meeting. The head teacher was requested to work with a group of students to prepare a performance at
the village meeting. Finally, the field teams contacted village elders, influential community members and
youth to ask them to rally parents and community members to attend these meetings.
The field teams conducted focus group discussions and filled observation questionnaires to get a sense
from villagers about which combination of materials and activities was seen as most effective in ensuring
maximum village participation. The lessons and insights drawn from the focus group discussions were
used to fix the parameters of the strategy for field mobilization. The most effective strategies included
rallying of community members by the head teacher and the students’ performance in the school. Mosque
announcements, door-to-door campaigning with a megaphone, and flyers were perceived to be more
effective by the focus group participants compared to other catalysts. The megaphone announcements
by the field team on the day of the meeting were particularly effective in getting more female villagers to
attend the meeting.


Design and Testing of Community Dialogue Platform

Learning from Best Practices
The project team’s first goal was to document best practices in the sector, especially in the context of in-
formation technology supported development initiatives. Innovative international grassroots programs are
leveraging the power of mobile phones and text messages to make the development process more trans-
parent, effective and inclusive. Such programs include On Track, a citizen-feedback system that allows
residents in marginalized communities in Bolivia to report problems related to public services; Daraja, an
innovative platform in Tanzania that seeks to bring water problems to the attention of local governments
and media organizations; Check My Schools, a participatory monitoring platform in the Philippines that
allows users to upload information on schools through a number of social media platforms; and Map
Tandale, an interactive map used to provide detailed information on education, health, water, accessibility
and security needs to communities in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. The design of the Community Dialogue
Platform builds upon the experiences and lessons drawn from these interventions and was carefully vetted
and reduced to feasible elements that were most relevant and amenable to the technology infrastructure
and socio-economic context of rural Sindh. The team also consulted academics and practitioners who had
experience in implementing technology-based interventions locally.17

17
   	Many of these discussions and ideas generated from them are provided at the following blog: http://edupolicydialogue.		
	wordpress.com/.
24     MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS



Following this process, the project team decided that the design of the virtual portal should provide
information to local community members; engage them and foster dialogue among them; be easy and
relatively inexpensive to use; provide multilingual support; and more broadly, assist in improving edu-
cational outcomes at the school level in treatment villages.

The development of the text messaging-based Platform began in January 2012. Over the next year, the
portal went through multiple developmental iterations. During this period, field testing assessed the portal’s
response to user-generated text messages at the village level. The next section provides details on the origins
of the portal, the multiple iterations that it went through and the formal pilot tests that were conducted.



The Community Dialogue Platform’s Origins and Pre-Pilot Recalibration
The portal’s most basic form borrowed from a previous World Bank project being undertaken under
the Sindh Education Sector Reform Program (SERP-I).18 After testing began, the project team realized
that the existing portal had two fundamental weaknesses in terms of the objectives of the text messaging
intervention. First, it was designed to primarily serve as a mechanism to redress complaints, whereby
participants used the portal to inform the project team about issues involving the state of education at
the local level. Second, the portal collected contact information and other identification details only for
teachers, not for parents, who play the primary role in making decisions about their children’s education.

These weaknesses made it necessary to overhaul the platform. A local firm, M3 Technologies, provided
technical support for this revamp. The portal was reprogrammed to create an outgoing channel for
messages, in addition to accepting incoming messages that contained participant feedback. This gave
the project team the capability to blast text messages to participants, summarizing weekly discussions at
the village level, as well as to send informational messages about School Management Committees and
other education-related issues. The idea was to give community members a platform for discussing and
finding solutions for education-related problems, and not just for registering complaints. The project
team recognized that it needed to ensure that participants understood the portal’s main purpose: that
it was to be used by the local community both to discuss problems and to collectively come up with
solutions.

The informational messages were generally extracted from information in the audiotapes. The
project team broke down the script of the audiotapes into shorter sentences, which were sent to
villages in the form of individual text messages. Each text message contained a sentence or two;
combined, they summed up the information provided in the audiotapes. The project team tested
and calibrated the final set of text messages to ensure clarity. Chapter 4 provides further details on
these informational text messages.

The use of mass social communication platforms such as Facebook, Whatsapp and Twitter is common
in urban centers in Pakistan, and urban citizens are quite familiar with how technology-based social
interaction mechanisms work. However, this is not the case for local communities in rural areas of
Sindh, where the use of social media is highly limited. An average villager does not understand how chatting
18
  	Complaints Management System was established under the World Bank’s partnership with GoSindh.
                                                 MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS                                   25



works, or how a dialogue about social issues can be initiated on a communal, technology-based communication
platform. Further, villagers are not always comfortable sharing their opinions with the entire community on a
public forum.

To make the system user-friendly, communication on the portal was restricted solely to text messaging.
Given the high rate of mobile penetration in Pakistan (approximately 70%; Evans 2013), the use of test
messaging-based communication was the best way to ensure that participants felt technologically com-
fortable while interacting on the portal. To give villagers the confidence to publicly state their opinions
and share feedback, the project team made interaction on the portal anonymous. While the villagers
received incoming messages on their individual phones, the core ideas in these messages were shared
with all community members in a weekly summary sent to all community members. This summary
included key ideas discussed during the weekly conversation, but protected the identity of villagers.
The scope of the portal’s database was also expanded to include other stakeholders besides teachers,
including parents, School Management Committee members, other community members and village
volunteers.19 Thus, the project team made an effort to take the conversation about education from in-
side the school to the community. While teachers are important stakeholders at the school level, parents
have a direct stake in the quality of education that their children receive.


Piloting the Portal
This section provides insights into two major testing phases during the portal’s development.
The first major pilot exercise took place between June 6, 2012 and June 14, 2012. Field-testing of the
portal was tied in with the piloting phase of the entire project, which was rolled out in four villages.
In terms of the portal, the primary aim of the piloting process was to assess its feasibility, as well as
its adaptability to local conditions. During the General Body meeting, the field facilitator introduced
villagers to the Community Dialogue Platform, conducted a demonstration exercise whereby villagers
were invited to send messages to a dedicated mobile phone number – also known as a long code20
– of the Platform and receive summary messages identifying the primary reasons behind lagging edu-
cational outcomes in the village. Finally, they were able to register on the portal.
Ensuring ease of access (through the use of text messaging) and anonymity of users proved key to get-
ting community buy-in for using the portal. Villagers expressed concern during General Body meetings
over the possibility of being identified with their opinions, as they did not wish to antagonize power
holders in the government or in the informal feudal economy. The project team eased these concerns by
emphasizing that the portal did not give any identifying information about participants who had sent
messages, and as a result, participants appeared more enthusiastic about using the Platform. The team
found that villagers were at times more comfortable sending messages in Sindhi instead of English or
Urdu. Thus, adjustments were made for the Community Dialogue Platform to accommodate Sindhi
script, together with English, Urdu and Roman Urdu. Technology partner firm M3Tech worked with
Motorola to develop a script for the portal so that it could identify, store and display all four languages.
Since a significant portion of village members were illiterate, the project team was concerned that many
participants would not be able to use even their mobile phones to participate on the portal. To address

19
   	These included both parent and non-parent School Management Committee members.
20
  	A long code is simply a phone number which people can text or call. Long codes are just like a mobile phone number. The 		
	 only reason why it is called ‘long’ is because it is longer than a short code which is a dedicated number and usually four digits.
26        MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS



this concern, each village selected two literate community volunteers to assist villagers in sending mes-
sages to the portal. The Platform was tweaked so that it would take into account the identifier code of
these volunteers, indicating that they were sending a message on behalf of another participant using the
participant’s mobile phone.
A lack of airtime minutes in their phones21 could hinder participants from sending text messages and
engaging with the portal. To address this issue, the project team added a feature to the Platform so that
team members could directly transfer credit to participants. Transferring credit in real time during Gen-
eral Body meetings proved challenging; when villagers were asked to give their contact information for
credit transfer, people rushed towards the moderator, leading to chaos. This resulted in mistakes, such
as credit being transferred to one number multiple times and not at all to other numbers. The project
team ultimately decided to transfer credit after the meeting, using the database of participants created
during General Body meetings.
The Community Dialogue Platform pilot also tested the response time of the meeting-portal interface.
Demonstration of the portal required accurate information – a long code number – be given to villag-
ers; a quick synthesis of poll responses received by back-end Platform operators; and real-time blasting
of the summary text message to villagers. Further, depending on the quality of the mobile phone sig-
nals, there was sometimes a time lag in the blasting of the summary text and its reception by meeting
participants. Fillers were needed to sustain the interest of participants until they received a message
back from the portal.
Overall, the results of the pilot phases were highly positive. Villagers were enthusiastic about using the
portal, and field facilitators and back-end operators were able to build sufficient confidence around its
use. Once the team had made key changes to the portal in response to the feedback received, all systems
were cleared for rollout, field mobilization tools were developed and tested, field facilitators trained,
and field activities rolled out.


Inclusion through Innovation
Unlike other technology-based platforms that tie together multiple forms of social media with text
messaging, the Community Dialogue Platform focused on the exclusive use of text messaging for devel-
oping momentum in grassroots, education-related governance. For example, in the Check My School
program in the Philippines, text messages were one of many forms of data received from schools. Other
data were delivered via Facebook, Twitter and webpages. While this allows for a larger range of elec-
tronic options to be utilized, it also runs the risk of diluting the intensity in traffic on any one particular
platform. Given low awareness of other platforms in rural Sindh, their use would have resulted in lower
overall activity in this project.
The Community Dialogue Platform sent a clear message to participants that text messaging technology
is a powerful tool that they could use to interact with each other. This minimalistic approach to commu-
nication simplified engagement and enabled participants to take part in the project more conveniently.
An important challenge that the project team had to overcome was the issue of accommodating multi-
ple languages on the portal. Given the high levels of illiteracy in rural Sindh, the use of English as the
portal’s sole language would have excluded a sizeable portion of the population. On the other hand, the
diversity of languages spoken in Sindh made it too difficult to cater to all languages. M3 Technologies,

21
     Airtime minutes or phone balance is commonly referred to as “credit” in Pakistan.
                                          MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS                      27



in consultation with the World Bank team, struck a balance by increasing the languages used to include
Urdu, Roman Urdu and Sindhi. This approach accommodated a larger group of participants and made
it easier for community members to utilize the Platform.
The portal was innovative in its ability to send out bulk messages to users. The project team could reach
a large number of participants in a limited period of time. Because information went to users in different
households of the same village simultaneously, all the users in a particular village received the same informa-
tion, allowing them to participate in formal and informal discussions on education in an equitable manner.
The Community Dialogue Platform is designed to be user-friendly for participants, back-end oper-
ators, and data managers. The final product that was used during the project rollout could be easily
adapted to evolving ground realities. Annex 2 describes various technical design features of the Platform
that gave it this level of flexibility.



Tool Development and Testing for Elections and Capacity-Building
An elections script was developed for Assistant District officers to ensure that they had a precise un-
derstanding of their role during the General Body meeting when elections were conducted. This script
provided specific prompts to the officials and, critically, provided contingency planning on how to re-
spond if there were insufficient interest in the community for elections. The project team held a special
workshop in Hyderbad, Sindh, to train the district education officials. This not only helped prepare
them for the first meeting, but also got them onboard for supervising elections and record-keeping
during the crossover intervention. District officers received an honorarium to cover the travel cost of
participating in election meetings.
As part of the capacity-building measures, the team prepared scripts for the three Executive Body meet-
ings for sample villages in the interventions. For the first Executive Body meeting, a handout was also
developed to complement the script. This was essential for reinforcing the messages given during this
meeting, which would provide a foundation for the future functioning of the group. Scripts for the
second and third Executive Body meetings were translated into Sindhi so that field facilitators could
make the meetings more inclusive and ensure that all members completely understood what was being
discussed.
Besides the broader Field Mobilization Plan which was developed for the entire project, a specialized plan
was created for School Management Committee Executive Body elections. The Plan underlined the re-
sponsibilities of Weitek Group, the implementing partner that facilitated the Executive Body meetings, as
well as the role of district officials in conducting the elections during the first, village-level General Body
meeting. The Field Mobilization Plan also provided detailed information on how to introduce the project
to village participants, as well as information about the Executive Body and election procedures.


Training of Field Facilitators
Field facilitators played a critical part of the project. They mobilized the community to attend the vil-
lage meeting, facilitated General Body meetings, facilitated elections and moderated Executive Body
meetings. Given that they were the face of the project for local communities, it was imperative that they
had a strong command over the project’s modalities, language and objectives, as well as experience in
dealing with shifting field scenarios. Further, it was essential for facilitators moderating Executive Body
28    MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS



meetings in the crossover intervention to possess the skills and the right attitude to moderate discus-
sions for participatory development of School Improvement Plans.
The project team tried to ensure that community members understood that the project was not just about
redressing grievances. Rather, it was about sparking dialogue among community members for the better-
ment of local education. Thus, villagers were requested to focus on issues that could be addressed by the
community itself, rather than on problems that couldn’t be fixed solely through community action. For
example, low-quality teachers is a broader issue related to formal governance; villagers can lodge a com-
plaint against such teachers, but they can’t easily fix this situation on their own. On the other hand, if a
school requires repairs, villagers could initiate a consultative process, include the larger community in the
discussion, come up with suggestions on what should be repaired and which vendors to use, and use the
School Improvement Plan to tap School Management Committee funds and pay for the work.
Since field facilitators were in direct contact with the local communities in the target villages, it was
critical that this point was first impressed upon these facilitators. Thus, every aspect of field facilitator
training included discussions on how villagers could work together to achieve local solutions to ed-
ucation-related problems. This was essential to ensure appropriate use of the portal, which also sent
periodic nudges in the form of text messages aimed at preventing any drift in the conversation from
what was achievable at the local level.
The World Bank team made intensive efforts to train field facilitators so that the project could achieve
what it had set out to achieve: greater intra-community dialogue about education, increased account-
ability of the School Management Committee, and enhanced awareness and concern about the state
of education at the village level. The team of facilitators was initially trained on the materials that were
prepared for General Body meetings, including flip charts and audiotapes.
The training included field and classroom components. In the field, the facilitators received instruc-
tions on how to implement the Field Mobilization Plan and the script devised for General Body meet-
ings. The script included details on where participants should sit, where flip charts should be placed,
who should be turning them, and how best to maintain cultural sensitivity and propriety during the
meeting. Field facilitators needed to understand exactly what their role was during the meeting and
what the expectations for them were.
Classroom trainings had two objectives: 1) to train field facilitators on the specific use and pur-
pose of meeting tools; and 2) to test the ability of field facilitators to implement the project. The
project-tool training involved a mix of lecture and video. Implementing partner Weitek Group
prepared the video, which showed how field facilitators should conduct a General Body meeting.
Master trainers were cognizant of the fact that the group of field facilitators included individuals
from diverse backgrounds. Thus, trainings had to be adjusted to ensure that all field facilitators
were on the same page. Once the lecture and the video had been completed, field facilitators, one
at a time, conducted a mock village meeting for the World Bank supervisors, using the different
instruments provided to them. The Bank team played the role of community participants, raising
challenging questions for the facilitators to answer. Any facilitators who lacked a clear understand-
ing of the process were retrained.
While General Body meetings can be difficult to run because of the large number of participants, Ex-
ecutive Body meetings may prove challenging for other reasons. They are more intensive, with a select
group of community members undertaking the development of the School Improvement Plan and
therefore, facilitators should have a greater command over the subject matter. Facilitators had to ensure
that power was evenly balanced among all five members of the body and to prevent any one member
                                         MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS                      29



– such as the head teacher or the chairperson – from exerting too much influence over the agenda or
decisions. Facilitators did this by encouraging silent members to join in the conversation.
At the beginning of the project’s rollout, more project staff were deployed to target villages. This helped
ensure that field facilitators got the support they needed, while also providing a way to supervise them
during General Body meetings. Observers accompanied the team to assess the performance of field fa-
cilitators. A key benefit of this strategy was that the staff could quickly detect any initial problems in the
project design as well as any facilitator mistakes. The team held a debriefing with the field facilitators
after every meeting, providing feedback on their performance and encouraging them to seek guidance
on challenges they faced in the field.
The World Bank project team invited field facilitators to give suggestions and opinions on the project.
If the feedback applied to the entire suite of interventions, then relevant adjustments were made in
project design. The establishment of such a feedback loop allowed the team to address any residual
design weaknesses at the start of the project rollout. The presence of additional staff helped field facili-
tators learn from their mistakes and improve their performance early on.


Design Costs for each of the Interventions
Project costs associated with the design of instruments for each of the three interventions are shown as
“Total Fixed Development Costs” in Annex 8. The three primary cost items within the design phase
were development of audiotapes, printing of pamphlets and posters, and costs associated with staff time
allocated to each of the three interventions. Partner organization JWT was responsible for the produc-
30    MEETING MATERIALS, TESTING AND FIELD PILOTS




tion of audiotapes; implementing partner Weitek Group was responsible for the printing of pamphlets
and posters; and the World Bank managed and paid all project staff and consultants. Consequent staff
costs included fees for consultants and staff, both in the World Bank headquarters in Washington,
D.C., and in the Pakistan country office.
Since development of project tools for the three interventions happened simultaneously, overall staff
time costs were divided across the three interventions equally. This came out to USD 2,803 per inter-
vention for the Pakistan country office, and USD 22,088 per intervention for headquarters.
Development of audiotapes cost USD $1,037, with two-thirds of the total going towards development
of audiotapes for Intervention 1 and the rest for Intervention 2. The printing of pamphlets and posters
cost USD $1,500 each for the School Management Committee and the text messaging interventions.
Overall, design activities cost USD $27,083 for Intervention 1, USD $26,737 for Intervention 2, and
USD $24,891 for the crossover intervention.
Chapter 3 moves beyond designing and pilot testing and explores project rollout in the context of the
first set of activities: community mobilization and General Body meetings.
Section 2:
Implementation
Phase
Were the treatments implemented
as intended?
32    COMMUNITY MOBILIZATION AND VILLAGE MEETINGS




Chapter 3: Community Mobilization and
Village Meetings

The project employed a three-pronged approach, implementing three interventions that built off each other to try
to improve local educational outcomes in rural Sindh. The first intervention brought the community together
in an open dialogue, and the second created a virtual network to sustain this dialogue. The third intervention
sought to increase the capacity of local communities to successfully manage School Management Committees
and to channel this dialogue to achieve positive results. The initial rollout activity across the three interventions
were village-level General Body meetings. Meticulous project design and piloting ensured that few unexpected
roadblocks appeared during the rollout. This assured the evaluation team that implementation pains – charac-
teristic of numerous pilot projects – did not drive results for the impact evaluation tied to these interventions.
This section provides an overview of the implementation of village meetings across the three interventions, while
also highlighting key differences among them.



Description of Interventions
The core intervention being evaluated is community engagement to revitalize School Management
Committees under two distinct mechanisms: 1) a community-level meeting to engage the community
in a dialogue for school improvement via the Committees; and 2) a virtual network of community
members to engage in a similar dialogue supported through text messages on mobile phones. The first
intervention arm used an existing social platform, enabling community members to participate in
traditional meetings to acquire information and engage in a public dialogue on school-related issues.
The second arm created an innovative virtual platform through which registered community members
received school-related information, anonymously sent text messages about these issues, and received a
summary of key observations and issues twice every month.
By crosscutting these two treatment arms with elections and capacity-building support (training on
how to prepare a School Improvement Plan) for the School Management Committee’s Executive Body,
we can uncover complementarities that might exist between community-level dialogue and the capacity
of the elected Committee members to respond to community-identified needs. These interventions
were implemented within rural communities in treatment villages, following a design that facilitated
rigorous evaluation of interventions of different kinds.


Community Mobilization
Parents of children enrolled in school, teachers and representatives of school committees were the pri-
mary stakeholders targeted in the two interventions. To mobilize a maximum number of community
members, mobilization teams visited target schools and villages two days before the meeting. They used
census data to acquire contact information of head teachers in target schools. The field teams contacted
these head teachers and told them about the objective of the visit in advance. They also sought the
opinion of influential community-level stakeholders on the best day, time and venue for the meeting.
                                     COMMUNITY MOBILIZATION AND VILLAGE MEETINGS                       33



Field teams were instructed to mobilize at
least one member from each household in
the community, and to try to ensure maxi-
mum participation by households with chil-
dren enrolled in government-run primary
schools. Social mobilization efforts aimed
at getting the community to participate in
these meetings were the same across the two
interventions. Two days before the meet-
ing, village mobilizers put up posters in key
spots in the village to announce the meet-
ing time and venue. They also went around
the village playing a catchy jingle and an-
nouncing the time and venue of the meet-
                                              Figure 1: Community Mobilization for Village-Level Meeting
ing using a megaphone. The mobilization
teams made announcements at the mosque
using a script from the intervention design
team. The head teacher was informed five
days in advance and asked to tell children to
bring their parents to the meeting. A group
of students in each school was tasked with
preparing a short performance for the village
meeting.


Village-Level Meetings
(INFO-MEET)
Participation rates in village-level meetings Figure 2: Performance by student group
were largely satisfactory, with attendance
rates upwards of 60% for most of these
meetings. In 17 villages, where attendance
rates were very low or mobilization efforts
were not successful in the first attempt, a
second meeting was scheduled.
A team of two individuals facilitated each
meeting. Participants first filled out an at-
tendance sheet, including household details
and their mobile phone number, if they had
one. Once this process had been completed,
a group of students from the school deliv-
ered a short performance that encouraged
parents to attend these meetings.             Figure 3: Participants Listening to an Audio Clip

Field facilitators then gave a scripted introduction to explain the purpose of the meeting. The script
aimed for a friendly, crisp tone to keep the atmosphere amicable while being sensitive to the time con-
straints faced by participants. The two field facilitators introduced themselves and spoke briefly about
34    COMMUNITY MOBILIZATION AND VILLAGE MEETINGS



the purpose of the meeting. They then played a 10-minute pre-recorded audio clip featuring a story
that highlighted the importance of education. The clip also introduced meeting participants to School
Management Committees, their structure, purpose, and membership, as well as the amount of funds
available to the Committees. A flip chart presentation reinforced and recapped these themes. This in-
troduction was the same across both treatment arms.
The second part of the meeting focused on how the community could engage with and leverage School
Management Committees to improve the local school. For the first intervention, a second audio clip
highlighted in detail specific actions that participants could take to improve educational outcomes.
These included regular participation in the Committee’s General Body meeting to vote on the School
Improvement Plan; involvement in reviewing the performance of teachers and school committee mem-
bers; and participation in community efforts to enroll out-of-school children in school.
The audio clip emphasized the need for parents and the broader community to take an active interest in the
schooling of their children. The clip encouraged them to make regular visits to the school to see whether teach-
ers were present and engaged in teaching. They were also asked to take stock of any facilities needing repairs
and to ensure that their findings would be reflected in the School Improvement Plan. The audio clip encour-
aged parents and the wider community to actively track the progress of activities listed in the school plan.
Further, the clip suggested ways in which community members could contact representatives of the School
Management Committee. Meeting facilitators introduced Committee members who were present, and
a take-home brochure provided members’ contact numbers to participants. A flip chart presentation re-
inforced the messages in the audio clip. A facilitated discussion among community members followed.
At the end of the General Body meeting, the facilitators encouraged community members to organize
a second General Body meeting to take the discussion forward. The staff emphasized that a second
meeting, which was to be conducted by villagers independently, would be crucial for sustaining the
conversation about education at the local level, and for teaching villagers how to conduct broad-based,
transparent and inclusive meetings on their own.


Village-level Meetings (INFO-CDP)
For the second treatment arm, once the first audio clip ended and the flip charts had recapped its con-
tent, the field facilitators introduced the participants to the text messaging-based Community Dialogue
Platform. A second, short audio clip introduced the concept and purpose of the Platform, and a field
facilitator then illustrated the concept using a flip chart.
Participants also received a hands-on demonstration of the virtual platform. For demonstration purposes,
five to 10 participants at the meeting who had a credit balance in their mobile phone were selected to re-
ceive a multiple-choice format question from the portal: “What is the main issue facing your school?” This
question was translated into the local language. The participants were asked to respond in real time from
a menu of options including: lack of facilities at the school, teacher attendance, and quality of learning.
The platform soon after sent a summary message back to the participants, noting the option chosen by the
majority of participants. This message noted the option chosen by the majority of the participants. (See
Annex 2 for details on the technical design of the Platform.) One of the participants read aloud the message
received from the portal, providing attendees with a concrete example of how the Platform worked and its
key features: 1) customized summary messages captured key discussions; 2) summary messages preserved
the anonymity of senders; and 3) participant feedback was summarized and quickly turned around. Reg-
                                     COMMUNITY MOBILIZATION AND VILLAGE MEETINGS                           35



istration of participants on the platform fol-
lowed an opt-out design. Meeting facilitators
requested participants to provide phone num-
bers when recording attendance. After the
demonstration, they had the option to have
their numbers removed, in case they did not
want to register on the portal. Hardly any of
the participants chose to unsubscribe.
The project design included a number of mea-
sures aimed at making sure all villagers had the
ability to use the Platform, even if they did not
have mobile phone airtime credit or if they
had a low-level of mobile phone literacy. A Figure 4: Audio clip summarized with the help of flip charts
nominal credit balance was transferred to par-
ticipants at the start of the project and again,
midway through the campaign. Participants
selected two literate village-level representa-
tives, called “community volunteers,” during
the meeting to help less mobile phone-literate
participants. These volunteers received hands-
on training from the field team so they could
help community members type and send mes-
sages. The field team also encouraged these
volunteers to actively contribute to the discus-
sion on the platform.
Community volunteers were expected to
help community members send messages
                                             Figure 5: Demonstration of CDP
from the members’ own phones. Each vol-
unteer received a unique code that he should
include at the beginning of a facilitated
message, to signal his involvement. This al-
lowed the project team to track the number
of messages expedited by volunteers, and the
number of active and passive volunteers in
each village. Chapter 7 provides an analysis
of these numbers. To incentivize communi-
ty volunteers to perform their duties, they
received mobile phone airtime credit as a
reward in proportion to the number of text
messages they helped generate.
                                                 Figure 6: Selection of Community Volunteers
After the selection of two volunteers, the
two project field facilitators conducted an open discussion with the participants. The aim was to elicit
questions and garner feedback about the meeting. The discussion allowed villagers to hold a facilitated,
open-ended conversation about the state of schools in the area, and to discuss how community mem-
bers could contribute to their betterment.
36    COMMUNITY MOBILIZATION AND VILLAGE MEETINGS



The entire workflow of Intervention 2 (INFO-CDP) is illustrated in “Annex 4b: Workflow Diagram –
Intervention 2 (Community Development Platform).


Capacity-Building: Elections and Support
Exploiting large sample sizes, which were a strength of the study, both treatments were crossed over
with capacity support for School Management Committees. A subset of villages received field-level
facilitation to conduct democratic elections of Committee members, following the protocols stated in
official guidelines. The respective subdistrict Sindh Government official received an honorarium for at-
tending the meeting and for submitting a bank statement indicating the transfer of authority over funds
to the newly elected chairperson – a parent member of the School Management Committee. Most
of the villages in the treatment sample were able to conduct elections. However, in two villages where
subdistrict officials did not show up or where field teams were met with serious political resistance, the
Committee elections were cancelled.
The newly elected members, along with the head teacher who co-chairs the Committee, received
hands-on training on the core principles of the School Management Committee through three struc-
tured meetings conducted over three weeks. The first meeting essentially recapped all the information
that was provided in the village-level Committee meeting, along with familiarizing the elected members
with the functions of the Executive Body.
The second meeting provided training on how to develop a School Improvement Plan, with partici-
pants filling out a school improvement chart. The facilitators guided the discussion by illustrating how
to fill in different fields with the help of a model Plan chart, featuring a representative primary school
in Sindh that was shared with us by the Sindh Government’s School Management Committee team at
the Reform Support Unit. In addition, the elected School Management Committee members received
an overview of their roles and responsibilities.
The third and last meeting focused on finalizing the School Improvement Plan drafted in the second
meeting. This meeting was also used to explain the process of ratifying the Plan in a village-level Gen-
eral Body meeting. Finally, the elected members received training on withdrawing funds, bookkeep-
ing and ways to ensure that implementation of activities outlined in the School Improvement Plan
remained on track. Chapter 5 takes a deeper look at the implementation of the crossover intervention
and its costs. Annex 6 provides snapshots of materials used in the Executive Body meetings.


Project Costs Associated with Community Mobilization and Village Meetings
General Body meetings for the two interventions (INFO-MEET & INFO-CDP) cost a total of USD
40,000. Basic per-unit meeting costs were approximately equal across the two interventions. This was
the actual implementation cost of the General Body meetings, excluding design, monitoring and World
Bank staff costs. These costs included expenses incurred for arranging the logistics of these meetings,
including travel and housing, as well as costs associated with testing and piloting material, and actual
implementation in the form of General Body meetings.
Implementing partner Weitek Group was responsible for the General Body meeting rollout, after the
World Bank trained and prepared its staff. Chapter 2 reviews the training of staff for these meetings.
 CHAPTER 4:             POST-MEETING ENGAGEMENT                                                                     37


 POST-MEETING
Chapter 4: Post-Meeting Engagement
 ENGAGEMENT
    Post-meeting engagement refers to project design features that kicked in after the initial general
    body meeting. These design features ensured that a) the community-level dialogue that was
Post-meeting    engagement refers to project design features that kicked in after the initial General Body meet-
    initiated at the general body meeting was sustained, and b) intra-community conversation was
     These design features
ing.continuously               ensured that:
                         reinvigorated          1) the community-level
                                             through     external nudges,    dialogue  that also
                                                                                   which     was initiated
                                                                                                   prevented  at the  General
                                                                                                                    drift  within the dialogue.
Body  meeting    was   sustained;   and  2) intra-community      conversation   was
    Each of these external catalysts were part of a larger feedback mechanism, which continuously    reinvigorated    throughincorporated
external  nudges,
    citizens’       which also
                 feedback      and prevented
                                       induced      in the dialogue.
                                              driftfurther    community   Each input.    external catalystsengagement
                                                                                of thesePost-meeting           was part of a created a
larger             mechanism,
       feedback channel
    two-way                    for which   incorporated
                                     villagers,   whereby,citizens’
                                                               they     couldand
                                                                     feedback        induced
                                                                                provide         further
                                                                                            their   inputcommunity      input.
                                                                                                            to the community-level
Post-meeting    engagement    created    a two-way    channel   for  villagers to provide  input
    dialogue, receive information on what other community members were saying and be reminded of   as  part  of a  communi-
ty-level dialogue; to receive
    fundamental          processinformation
                                     knowledge on what   other was
                                                      which    community      members
                                                                       necessary        were
                                                                                      for      saying; andthe
                                                                                          navigating        to get  reminders
                                                                                                                  institutional   structures
on how   to  tap  institutional   structures such  as School  Management       Committees     to address
    (such as SMCs) that villagers could utilize for solving education-related problems locally. This      education-related
problems
    chapterlocally. This chapter
                 describes               the how
                                    describes
                                  rstly,           these catalysts
                                              process      through   were  applied,
                                                                        which       as well
                                                                                 these       as the content
                                                                                         instruments          of each
                                                                                                            were       of these
                                                                                                                     used   and secondly, the
catalytic nudges.
    content     of It
                    each     with
                        ends of     a brief
                                 these      discussionnudges.
                                          catalytic     on the costsIt associated
                                                                       ends with  with  these methods.
                                                                                     a brief    discussion on costs associated with
    these external nudges.

    Activating the Feedback Mechanism                                        deployed further for four key nudges in the
Activating the Feedback Mechanism
    Follow-up design features which ensured
    post-meeting engagement were speci c to the
                                                                             post-village meeting duration of the project: 1)
                                                                             credit transfer; 2) informational SMS messages;
Follow-up
    CDP and  design             that sought
                       features only
                  therefore,           applied     ensure
                                                to to      post-meeting engagement
                                                      the second             3) summary  were SMS
                                                                                                specific  to the Com-
                                                                                                       messages;      and 4) follow-up
munity                 Platform and therefore,
         Dialogue (INFO-SMS)
    intervention                                     only applied
                                         and the crossover        to the second
                                                                 of               intervention
                                                                             Interactive     Voice (INFO-SMS)
                                                                                                      Response and   (IVR) calls.
     crossover of
the elections     withelections
                         the CDPwith    the Platform For
                                     intervention.      intervention.
                                                            the        For the School Management Committee
    SMC intervention,
intervention,    follow-up wasfollow    up was
                                   ensured         ensured
                                             through                         A timeline
                                                       the second, non-facilitated   General of Body
                                                                                                 these    external nudges is provided
                                                                                                       meeting.
    through the second, non-facilitated general                              below. Since general body meetings were
Once         village meeting concluded in INFO-SMS and Community
       the meeting.
    body                                                                     phased      acrossPlatform
                                                                                     Dialogue      treatment  crossover
                                                                                                                  villages, while some of
(INFO-SMS-SUPPORT) villages, organizers used the contact information         the nudges        participants
                                                                                           of were            who had
                                                                                                       employed       at speci c dates
registered
    Once the on the    Platform
                   village        to create
                            meeting           a virtualin
                                         concluded       database of community
                                                                             acrossmembers,       parents
                                                                                        all villages       andas
                                                                                                       (such     School
                                                                                                                   for credit transfer),
Management
    INFO-SMS         and CDPmembers
                  Committee      crossover  for each village. The Platformdi   was  deployed
                                                                                  erent          for four
                                                                                          clusters          key nudges
                                                                                                       of villages   followed slightly
after facilitators   conducted    the  village
    (INFO-SMS-SUPPORT) villages, contact        meetings:  1) credit         di erent timelines. The table 3)
                                                                     transfer; 2) informational      text  messages;   below highlights
summary     text  messages;   and   4) follow-up
    information of participants who registered on   Interactive Voice Response   calls.
                                                                             average points in time when these external
    the  CDP     was    used   to  create   a  virtual  database
A timeline of these external nudges is provided below. Since Generalof       catalysts     were activated
                                                                                Body meetings                   in treatment villages
                                                                                                   were not conduct-
ed in all villages at the same time, the table below highlights the average points in time when theseduration.
    community         members,      parents     and   SMC                    over   the   course     of the   project
    members for each village. The CDP was
external  catalysts were activated in treatment villages over the course of the project.
                                        Table 1: Timeline for External Nudges
                                                Table 1: Timeline for External Nudges
                                      Weeks           Weeks            Weeks           Weeks           Weeks
                                       1-2             3-8              9-12           13-16           17-20


    Credit Transfer

    Informational SMS

    Summary SMS

    IVR Calls




   Implementation Phase                                                                                                                    34
38    POST-MEETING ENGAGEMENT



Each of the nudges was tied to the others, collectively contributing towards the final goal of ensuring
sustained community engagement. The initial credit transfer incentivized participation and removed
the hurdle of low mobile credit, allowing villagers to participate in the conversation about education
at the local level. This was followed by a string of informational messages, which provided a context
for the conversation in the aftermath of the General Body meeting and encouraged the initiation of a
dialogue. Once the Community Dialogue Platform began to receive messages from community mem-
bers, the project team started blasting a sustained chain of summary text messages, synthesizing the
conversation at the village level while protecting the anonymity of participants. This created a two-way
channel whereby participants were not only providing feedback and comments, but also conversing
with each other. Further, Interactive Voice Response calls were also made at the start of the project
to provide participants with another mode of providing feedback on the project. This was followed
by a second round of credit transfer, informational messages and Interactive Voice Response calls to
reinvigorate the dialogue and to serve as a refresher on process knowledge. This feedback mechanism
is illustrated in Figure 7.

                   Figure 7: Feedback Mechanism for Sustaining Community Dialogue on Education




             ROUND 1: INITIAL PUSH    INFORMATIONAL                SUMMARY SMS   SYNTHESIZING KEY ELEMENTS
              ROUND 2: REFRESHER       SMS MESSAGES                  MESSAGES    OF WEEKLY COMMUNITY INPUT
                                                                                 FOR OTHER VILLAGERS




                                                       SUSTAINED
                                                      COMMUNITY
                                                       DIALOGUE

                         ROUND 1:
          GATHERING FEEDBACK ON                                                  MULTIPLE ROUNDS: NEGATING LOW
                                                                     CREDIT
          DIALOGUE PARTICIPATION        IVR CALLS                                CREDIT AS REASON FOR LOW
                                                                    TRANSFER
                                                                                 PARTICIPATION
                           ROUND 2:
     UNDERSTANDING CONSTRAINTS
     TO PARTICIPATING IN DIALOGUE


Combining all of these nudges, an iterative feedback mechanism was created and maintained to sustain
the community-level dialogue initiated through the project. The following subsections provide details
on the implementation of each of these external catalysts.


1) Credit Transfer
The project attempted to use innovative ways to increase inclusiveness and participation. The project
team felt that a lack of credit might adversely affect the ability of users to participate in the Community
Dialogue Platform. To address this issue, it transferred free credit to registered participants, with the
aim of encouraging more active, individual participation on the portal. It also issued free credit to two
community volunteers per village who were elected by villagers to assist in usage of the portal, as a way
to incentivize the volunteers. Village participants received a flat PKR 30 each, while the volunteers were
awarded credit based on performance. Volunteers got PKR 50 in credit for helping generate 10 to 20
text messages, PKR 100 for 21 to 50 text messages, and PKR 200 for 51 or more texts.
                                                               POST-MEETING ENGAGEMENT                39



2) Informational Text Messages
The information contained in the second audio clip regarding the Community Dialogue Platform was
broken down into a set of short, comprehensible text messages. Each message was carefully crafted to
contain one complete piece of information. The informational text messages were sent in two rounds
through the Community Dialogue Platform to all registered participants.
The first round took place over two weeks following the village meeting, with one to two messages
being sent every day. Registered participants received a total of 20 short messages. These addressed
different aspects of the School Management Committee, including funding and members’ authority
over financial resources; and inputs, such as books provided to schools by the Sindh Government.
Other topics included the structure of the Committee, including details about the election process;
action planning; rules and purpose of the General Body meetings; and ways in which the Committee’s
Executive Body could be contacted and held accountable.
The second round of texts built on the first. Sixteen messages went to community members in total,
building on the information provided in the first round. The second round of text messages focused on
three central themes: (1) school improvements through the use of the portal; (2) information regarding
the School Management Committee and the School Improvement Plan; and (3) information on the
functionality of the text portal. For further details regarding the content of the text messages in Rounds
1 and 2, please see Annexes 3a and 3b.


3) Summary Text Messages
The primary purpose of the Community Dialogue Platform was to give community members a
“voice” and to facilitate their participation in the decision-making process in the local education
sector. Therefore, it was important that text messages sent by individual community members were
shared with the community at large. However, pilot testing showed that villagers had a strong de-
sire for their postings to remain anonymous. To balance these two factors, the design team blasted
weekly messages to registered participants in a particular village, summarizing comments, opinions
and complaints received from community members in that village – but without identifying who
had made the comments. This weekly blast of summary text messages began in January 2013 and
continued through June 2013.
Summary messages went to participants who were registered on the portal. The messages included
information on how many text messages were received from community members over the last week;
what community members thought was the most critical problem at the local school; what worked in
the school; and how the community members could approach their School Management Committee
to help with school improvements.
These summary messages helped to maintain the momentum of the Community Dialogue Platform,
and allowed villagers to stay connected. Thus, summary messages formed the backbone of the Platform
by keeping the community engaged over the period of the project, strengthening the links between in-
dividuals and the school, and advancing the community’s understanding of, and interest in, the School
Management Committee.
40    POST-MEETING ENGAGEMENT



4) Interactive Voice Response Calls
Midway through the campaign, the design team obtained feedback from the community through In-
teractive Voice Response calls. The purpose of the calls was to complete the feedback loop that had been
started with the initial, informational text messages. The calls not only complemented these messages,
but were also used by the project team to collect data.
Similar to the informational messages, the Interactive Voice Response Calls took place in two rounds.
In the first round, four calls were made to registered participants, seeking information on participation
in the village meeting, preferred language for text messages, village members’ activity on the Commu-
nity Dialogue Platform, and potential increase in village members’ participation in education-related
issues as a result of engagement through the Platform. These four calls were sent on days 1, 2, 9 and 14
following the village-level meeting in every participating village.
Initially, the project team had intended to conduct a solo round of calls. However, analysis of feedback
received from the first round indicated that a second round was required to ensure sustainability of
post-meeting engagement. Round 2 of the follow-up calls comprised four calls made to community
members and two calls made to community volunteers who were elected during the village meeting
to assist villagers in their use of the Community Dialogue Platform. The four calls made to commu-
nity members sought information on their perception of the effectiveness of community volunteers,
their opinion of the most significant change that had been brought about because of the project, any
constraints to participation, and their opinion on the usefulness of informational text messages. The
two calls made to community volunteers gave them information about their roles and the incentives
structure that existed for them.
The Interactive Voice Response calls provided key information to the project team in the days follow-
ing the initial village-level meetings. The specific content of the calls is covered on the following pages,
while Chapter 7 discusses statistics on the calls.



Content for Communication
Informational messages, summary messages and Interactive Voice Response calls from the Community
Dialogue Platform to the villagers promoted interaction among community members, and helped
build trust in the platform. This section deals with the content of these three critical nudges.


7.1 Informational Text Messages: Round 1
The first round took place over 14 days following the village meeting. One to two texts went out to par-
ticipants daily, with 20 informational messages sent in total. These messages sought to break down the
information provided in audio clips played during village meetings. They served both as a refresher, and
as a means to keep participants engaged in the project. Unlike with the audio clips, village participants
could read these messages whenever they wanted, as long as they did not delete them from their mobile
phones. Therefore, the participants could refer to the texts whenever they had any questions about the
School Management Committee.
                                                                 POST-MEETING ENGAGEMENT                  41



Information on the Project
The informational text messages provided key information on the project, including how participants
could express their opinions and how these would be blasted back in the form of summary messages
that protected their anonymity.


School Management Committee Structure and Elections
Information was provided on the structure of the School Management Committee, ensuring that partic-
ipants were aware of the existence of both the organization’s General Body and its Executive Body. It was
important that villagers knew that they were automatically a part of the General Body, so that they did not
feel that they had to be part of the process to be a member. By virtue of being parents or teachers, they had
a vested interest in the functioning of the school and were thus as much a part of the Committee’s General
Body as anyone else in the community. Details were also provided on the constitution of the five-member
Executive Body. The message emphasized that since the chairperson was always one of the parents in the
community, village members had a strong role to play in the administrative success of the Committee.
The messages also provided information on the electoral process of the Executive Body. The communi-
ty’s participation in this process is key for making the functioning of the Committee more transparent.
The texts gave details on the Committee’s different positions and respective responsibilities, and also on
when and how elections should take place.


School Management Committee Resources
Participants received information about mandated annual funds that are provided to the Committees
by the Sindh Government. The texts covered the annual funding amount (PKR 22,000), names of
Executive Body members who are authorized to operate the account (teacher or chairperson), and the
specific areas in which this funding could be used. These messages were crucial for increasing transpar-
ency and accountability of the Committee among community members. Armed with this knowledge,
members could keep track of how resources received by the Committee were being utilized, or in cases
where the government failed to provide the funds, members could seek recourse.


General Body Meeting
The General Body meeting is of critical importance to a functioning School Management Committee.
This is where community members express their opinions regarding various expenditures and plans
for school improvement. Most importantly, once the Executive Body develops a School Improvement
Plan based on the suggestions received in the General Body meeting, it must secure ratification for the
Plan from the General Body. This is the reason why informational text messages covered in detail topics
related to the function, process and benefits of the General Body meeting.
Participants received information about how many of these meetings are conducted annually, how they
should be publicized and what rate of attendance is necessary to reach binding decisions. Participants
were reminded about their role in these meetings and in key areas of discussion. These included issues
related to school facilities, teachers’ involvement, and strategies for enrolling more children at the
school. Participants were encouraged to actively engage in the decision-making process during General
Body meetings, as such meetings are the main venue through which the School Management Commit-
tee can take shape as a robust grassroots institution. The Committee then can provide support to the
school while making the school administration accountable for service delivery.
42    POST-MEETING ENGAGEMENT



Staying Engaged with the School Management Committee
The messages advised community members on how they could remain engaged with the Committee
year-round. One suggestion was for participants to visit the school regularly, to ascertain its condition,
teacher presence, and quality of instruction. Further, they should actively contribute to the Commit-
tee’s planning process – the primary strategizing tool for identifying any problems or shortages facing
the school. The texts encouraged participants to contact Executive Body members without hesitating,
as a way to hold the body accountable for its actions, as well as to provide its members with valuable
input.
Annex 3a provides a translation of the informational text messages sent in Round 1.


Informational Text Messages: Round 2
The second wave of informational messages was sent over the remaining duration of the project. Mul-
tiple informational messages went out, falling under three main themes: SMS Portal – School Improve-
ment; School Management Committee Information; and SMS Portal – Functioning.


SMS Portal – School Improvement
A cluster of messages was dedicated to explaining the purpose of the portal, benefits of its use, and
ways in which it could be leveraged to connect the community to schools. Once again, an emphasis
was placed on the need for participants to engage the Executive Body and teachers at the school level.
Further, participants were reminded that the School Improvement Plan was a critical component of the
functioning of the School Management Committee. Therefore, community members should monitor
its preparation and implementation. It was reiterated that the project team would summarize messages
sent by participants to the portal and blast them back to the community. The system could ensure the
participants’ anonymity, allowing them to express their opinions freely without fear of any negative
repercussions.


School Management Committee Information
This round summarized the messages sent earlier that dealt with the structure, purpose and function-
ing of the School Management Committee. These included messages such as “A primary school’s School
Management Committee is provided with PKR 22,000 annually”, or “School Management Committee
elections and School Improvement Plan approvals are done through voting among Committee members.”
Such messages sought to remind community members about the purpose of the Committee and their
role in its functioning.


SMS Portal – Functioning
A small number of Round 2 informational text messages dealt with the specifics of the text message
portal’s functioning. Participants were reminded of the contact number to which they should send any
messages. Another text provided the name and contact information of their community volunteer, who
could assist them in sending and reading text messages.
Annex 3b provides a translation of the informational text messages sent in Round 2.
                                                                   POST-MEETING ENGAGEMENT                   43



7.2 Summary Messages
Each summary text message sent to a particular village reiterated issues, opinions and suggestions that
were received from members of that village. This section provides a brief overview of recurring issues
and suggestions made by village-level participants.


Infrastructure, Facilities and Amenities
Lack of adequate infrastructure was a major problem facing many schools. The most prevalent among the
many infrastructure-related issues was a lack of maintenance of buildings, classrooms and toilets, which
at times rendered them unusable. A few schools needed major repairs to resume school activities. Also, a
majority of schools suffered from a shortage of basic facilities, such as clean drinking water, fans, electricity
and furniture. Some schools that had access to clean water had no water fountains to drink from. At times,
schools did not have the hand pumps needed for drawing underground water. Thus, a recurring sugges-
tion was for more funds to go to schools for installing hand pumps. Some villages complained about a
shortage of support staff for schools, such as cleaning staff and guards (patewalas in Sindhi). Many of the
villagers expressed dissatisfaction with the number of rooms in their school and the furniture provided.
Villages at times also lacked proper roads or other access to schools, causing a major inconvenience to
students. There were multiple reports of schools not having boundary walls or of the walls being in
need of urgent repair. Respondents frequently cited a lack of main gates as a significant problem. Some
felt that students needed playgrounds to feel motivated to go to school. Schools often did not have
such recreational facilities, and villagers requested funds for their construction. Finally, certain villages
complained about a lack of hygiene and cleanliness in their schools.


Teaching Staff
The primary concern with regards to teachers and headmasters was absenteeism, and many villagers
said they believed that a decrease in absenteeism could significantly improve their village’s educational
outcomes. Another major concern was the low quality of instruction, with villagers specifically de-
manding better English, Sindhi and religious (“deeni”) teachers. Multiple villagers complained that the
number of teachers at their schools was not sufficient with respect to the number of children enrolled.
For example, villagers who were sending their children to the government-run middle school Mah-
mood Thaheem reported that there was one teacher for 200 students, making it difficult for students
to receive an appropriate level of attention and support.
Given the relatively conservative culture of rural Sindh, a few villagers sought female teachers for their
schools so that female students could attend. Villagers cited punctuality of teachers as a major concern, as
teaching staff frequently arrived at school late and left early. Some villages said teachers had an unfriendly
and unenthusiastic attitude, and that even following complaints, schools showed little improvement.
However, certain villages were happy with the way their schools were functioning and satisfied with
the quality of education. Some villagers applauded the Community Dialogue Platform, saying it had
brought positive change to their school by exerting community pressure on teaching staff to show up
for work regularly and improve performance.
44    POST-MEETING ENGAGEMENT



Government Engagement
Many villagers viewed the government either as a hindrance to better schooling or as being indifferent
to the needs of the schools. Many villages said free textbooks had not been provided to their schools, as
promised. At a few schools, teachers had even charged students for the textbooks provided free by the
Sindh Government. Quite a few villages felt that government officials did not make a sufficient number
of visits to schools to monitor their performance. Lastly, a small number of villagers in the treatment
villages raised allegations of corruption by government officials, with the result that School Manage-
ment Committee funds failed to reach schools or were embezzled along the way.


Finances
Scarcity of funds seemed to be a major issue, with participants saying grants provided by the Sindh
Government were insufficient for undertaking required maintenance at schools. Some villages reported
that individuals in the Executive Body had misused the funds, while others said the funds were not
reaching the schools at all.


School Management Committees
According to feedback received from participants, the functioning of the School Management Com-
mittees was substantially affected by the Community Dialogue Program in the treatment villages.
However, a certain number of villages requested an increase in the number of Committee meetings to
discuss issues such as finances, enrollment and quality of education. It was reported that after the be-
ginning of the project, School Management Committee meetings were being held, with some villagers
crediting the portal for this change. Feedback also suggested that community members’ perception of
the rate of teacher absenteeism had changed since the inception of the project, with villagers now more
likely to take an active interest in whether a teacher was present at the local school.
Certain villages failed to conduct Committee elections for the Executive Body, while in others, the
schools were reported as failing to hold any Committee meetings. These reports were usually accompa-
nied by requests from villagers for these meetings to be held for their schools.


Miscellaneous
Some community members reported that schools were being regularly used for community meetings (autaqs)
and for hosting weddings, rather than for educational purposes. Also certain villages reported that school build-
ings had not been used at all for a protracted period. In both cases, villagers wanted the schools to become
operational for educational purposes again. A small fraction of villagers said community volunteers were not
fulfilling their duties of informing people about the project. This issue is tackled further in the next section.


7.3 Interactive Voice Response Calls
Informational text messages and summary messages sent through the portal created a strong feedback
channel among villagers, and between the villagers and the intervention team. The team used another
tool – Interactive Voice Response calls – to get direct feedback from the community about their expe-
rience with the portal. The benefit of these calls was that they also reached individuals who could not
read or write, and whom community volunteers might otherwise not have reached.
                                                              POST-MEETING ENGAGEMENT                45



There were two key constraints that emerged in the use of the interactive call platform: First, the time
duration of the pre-recorded voice message was short, and villagers sometimes did not understand either
the question or the listed response options. Second, many villagers did not have a basic understanding of
the calls and hung up after a few seconds, assuming that the calls were not intended for them. However,
since the calls were a complementary tool, they were only expected to plug gaps in the feedback chain.
There were two rounds of outbound Interactive Voice Response calls. Details are provided below.


Follow-up Interactive Voice Response: Round 1
In Round 1, voice calls were scheduled on days 1, 2, 9 and 14 following the initial village meeting.
An introductory call went out to participants, to alert them that they would receive such automated
calls from the project in the future. The introductory call also collected information on the status of
households’ attendance at the village meeting. This allowed for the project team to fill gaps in their
understanding of the project in a particular village.
The purpose of the second call was to learn about participants’ preferences for the language used in
the text messages sent to them. One of the underlying goals of the project was to enhance inclusivity
in local governance. This is because catalyzing a conversation regarding schooling at the village level
requires the engagement of a wide range of villagers. This call, therefore, targeted those participants
who might have been struggling to participate in the project because of a language barrier. Following
this call, participants received future text messages in the language that they selected.
The third follow-up call sought to gather information about the participation of villagers registered
on the Community Dialogue Platform, and to understand why they might be avoiding being actively
involved.
The last call in the first round sought to gather information on whether the Platform was generating
intra-community engagement, and specifically, between which stakeholders. This call asked villagers
whether they thought the project was achieving its short-term objective of catalyzing a conversation
on education within the community. Annex 3c provides a translation of the Interactive Voice Response
calls made in Round 1.


Follow-Up Interactive Voice Response: Round 2
A second round of calls took place in the Sindhi language. Once again, the project team made four
follow-up calls to participants. However, it also made two calls exclusively to village volunteers.
The calls to village participants were brief, primarily repeating the questions that were posed to them
during the first round of calls. This was done with the dual aim of maintaining their engagement in
the project and collecting data to check if responses to certain questions had changed over time. Par-
ticipants were asked whether they thought the project had brought any changes to the village – a key
question gauging perceptions of the project’s impact. In cases where participants thought that the Com-
munity Dialogue Platform had positively affected the community, the call then asked them to identify
specific areas where they had seen changes. These might include school facilities, teacher absenteeism or
intra-community interaction. The call also asked participants whether they found useful the summary
messages that had been blasted out over the past few months. Their responses provided the project team
with an important measure of the effectiveness of these messages.
46    POST-MEETING ENGAGEMENT



The project team also wanted to know why some villagers declined to participate in the project, es-
pecially at later stages. Participants were again asked about the primary cause of non-participation.
Perceived reasons cited included lack of airtime credit, inability to read and write, and inability to
understand summary messages.
Two brief calls went to community volunteers who had been selected at the village meetings to assist
participants in accessing the Community Dialogue Platform. Unlike the calls made to participants,
these did not seek to obtain – but rather, to provide – information. The first call to community volun-
teers provided procedural information on how to undertake their responsibilities under the portal in-
tervention. The second call provided them with information on the incentive structure for volunteers,
in terms of free credit balance. Annex 3d provides a translation of calls made in Round 2.
The impact of these external nudges on the traffic generated on the Community Dialogue Platform is
analyzed in Chapter 7.


Post-Meeting Engagement Costs
Cumulative costs of post-meeting engagement amounted to USD $22,565. These costs show up in
“Annex 8: Project Costs” under the head Operational Costs of Portal. Major costs associated with
post-meeting engagement were text messaging charges and consultant fees for portal management.
These two categories accounted for approximately 90% of all post-meeting engagement costs related
to the portal. The remaining 10% was divided between credit transfer (7%) and Interactive Voice Re-
sponse calls (3%).
Text messaging costs resulted from the use of long code, details on which are provided in “Annex 2:
Technical Design – Community Dialogue Platform.” The main cost of text messaging was for sending
weekly summary text messages and periodic informational text messages to all treatment villages which
were part of Intervention 2 (INFO-SMS) and its crossover variant (INFO-SMS-SUPPORT). Consul-
tant fees include remuneration for back-end portal operators and managers.
The next chapter takes a closer look at the crossover intervention, which combined elections with ca-
pacity support, with the aim of strengthening the Executive Body. The villages selected for treatment
were already part of Interventions 1 and 2. However, not all villages in these two interventions received
capacity-building support.
                                             ELECTIONS AND CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT                        47




Chapter 5: Elections and
Capacity-Building Support

The elections and capacity-building intervention were rolled out with the aim of ensuring that the School
Management Committee was run in a spirit of democracy and inclusiveness. The crossover intervention
demonstrated the entire process cycle of democratically electing members of the Executive Body, and then
training them so that they had the requisite skills to execute their official duties. Targeting the capabilities
of the Executive Body helped to strengthen the School Management Committee institutionally. This chapter
provides an overview of the processes undertaken in the rollout of this intervention, which included elections
and structured meetings for Executive Body members. The interventions climaxed with the creation and
community ratification of a School Improvement Plan. This completed the 360-degree design approach that
the project team undertook, combining elements of social mobilization, a generation of intra-community
dialogue, and skills transfer for the effective running of School Management Committees.




Rationale
The first two interventions attempted to initiate a deliberative process that sought to give the local com-
munity a “voice”, and community members a platform to engage each other to come up with local solu-
tions to education-related problems. Thus, the School Management Committee campaign immersed
community members into the Committee mechanism that was available to them, but which they had
until then, not utilized to its full potential. By bringing community members on to the Community
Dialogue Platform, the text campaign went further than the School Management Committee cam-
paign, providing a platform for community members to discuss education issues in a sustained manner.
To stop the project activities at this point, the project team would be assuming that the community’s
process knowledge, awareness, and monitoring of funds would, over time, lead to the dismissal of
weak members and the induction of proactive community leaders. This, in turn, would result in the
incremental strengthening of the School Management Committee as an institution. Another possibility
was to accelerate the process by conducting fresh Committee elections, inducting new members and
building their capacity to effectively implement the demands of the community. The field experiment
gave us an opportunity to empirically test the relative effectiveness of these approaches in rural Sindh
through the crossover design.
The aim of the elections and capacity-building intervention was to strengthen the School Management
Committee as an institution through participatory training of elected Committee members. For this,
it was necessary that the Executive Body – the core team leading the Committee – be democratically
elected, inclusive and capable of carrying out its responsibilities. The School Management Committee
and text messaging campaigns attempted to make the Committee inclusive. Using the crossover inter-
vention, the project team tried to ensure that the Executive Body was democratically elected and able
to meet its responsibilities.
48    ELECTIONS AND CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT



Description of Rollout
This capacity-building exercise was a crossover intervention in the sense that it piggybacked on the School
Management Committee and text messaging campaigns, and was not a standalone intervention. Of the
119 treatment villages in the sample chosen for the Committee campaign, 57 were crossed over with the
elections and capacity-building intervention. Of the 111 treatment villages that formed the sample for the
text messaging campaign, 56 villages were crossed over with the elections and capacity-building intervention.


Elections
In the crossover villages, the General Body meeting was followed by elections, which were facilitated by
implementing partner Weitek Group and conducted by district officials. The law requires that a district
official be present during the election, or the elections could not take place. This occurred in two target
villages, and the issue is further discussed in Chapter 8.
The School Management Committee’s Executive Body includes the head teacher, two elected par-
ents (a Chairperson and a parent representative), and two elected non-parent community mem-
bers. While the head teacher is automatically selected to the Executive Body as General Secretary,
elections must be held for the other four positions. Under the intervention, elections were con-
ducted in two phases. In the first phase, participants who were parents of children enrolled at
the local school could nominate themselves to run for the Executive Body positions. After they
addressed the other participants, a round of voting followed. The parent with the highest number
of votes became chairperson, and that with the second-highest number of votes became the parent
representative. Voting was primarily based on a show of hands, with the project team ensuring
that participants did not vote more than once. During the second phase, non-parent community
members nominated themselves and addressed the other participants in a bid to generate support.
The community voted for two non-parent villagers in this phase, with the two who won the high-
est number of votes joining the Executive Body.
Recurring elections not only can help build confidence in individuals to nominate themselves, but also
can help legitimize the general community’s right to exercise its powers and responsibilities. Given that
many of these villages had not previously held School Management Committee elections, the project’s
field facilitators had to guide the participants through every step of the process. Aspects of the elections
that might appear relatively simple, such as nominating a community member for the Executive Body,
proved at times difficult to carry out in the field. Community members required constant, personalized
encouragement from the field facilitators. More importantly, community members needed to see the
benefits of participating in the electoral process. Making them understand that only they could change
the state of education locally was crucial to the successful implementation of the intervention. Field
facilitators were trained to play the role of guides during this phase of the crossover intervention.
The process for transferring School Management Committee responsibilities to the communities
includes elections being conducted under the supervision of the Assistant District Officer (sub-dis-
trict official). Further, a legal document is produced by the officer verifying that the election has
been conducted. This document includes names and contact information for new members of the
Executive Body. Since it was imperative that the elections be transparent, all steps in this process
were strictly followed. This also helped to deter potential pushback from incumbent Executive
Body members who might have resisted elections for fear of being displaced, and to ensure that
the newly elected members had the legitimacy to execute their responsibilities.
                                          ELECTIONS AND CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT                      49



Once elections were successfully held and the new Executive Body had been formed, the Assistant
District Officer drafted an official letter signaling that responsibility for the functioning of the School
Management Committee was being transferred to the new Executive Body members. This legal doc-
ument was primarily used to update the Committee’s bank account details. Three copies of this docu-
ment were prepared, with one given to either the head teacher or the chairperson; the second kept by
implementing partner Weitek Group; and the third retained by the district officer for governmental
record-keeping.


Capacity Building
While elections of the new Executive Body gave its new members technical control of the School Man-
agement Committee, de facto power might still rest with previous members who were not willing to
give up their authority. Further, with no formal transition mechanisms and with a weak capacity to im-
plement their duties, newly elected members would have struggled to lead the Committee effectively.
In the context of these institutional weaknesses, the crossover intervention conducted three intensive
Executive Body meetings to provide newly elected members with the capacity, confidence and legit-
imacy that they needed to run the Committee. These Executive Body meetings were conducted in a
classroom, with one field facilitator moderating.
The first Executive Body meeting was used to educate the new members on the Body’s function-
ing. Members received a handout and two audio clips that provided information on their roles and
responsibilities. Members were also reminded of what was expected of them: engagement with the
community; development of the School Improvement Plan; fulfillment of all procedural require-
ments of the Executive Body; maintenance of organization documentation; and implementation of
the School Improvement Plan. Running the Executive Body is a complex process, so it was import-
ant to give newly elected members an overview of its functions before diving into the specifics. The
meeting stressed the need for members to monitor multiple aspects of the local school’s operations.
These included teacher attendance and quality of instruction, student attendance and learning, and
the school’s physical infrastructure.
The second Executive Body meeting introduced new members to the School Improvement Plan. The
Plan is the most visible aspect of the School Management Committee. This document provides specific
information on what needs to be fixed at the school in a particular year, and what resources will be
required for the repairs. More importantly, it should incorporate feedback received from the commu-
nity, as the product of an inclusive process which seeks to find local solutions to local problems. The
Committee is authorized to include three types of cost items in the improvement plan: school repairs,
labor wages for school cleaning, and transportation for children to and from school.
Executive Body members studied a sample School Improvement Plan, which had been completed cor-
rectly. Before they developed their own Plan, members had to find out how much the Committee had
in its bank account. The cumulative cost estimates provided in the Plan had to be less than the funds
available in the bank account, or if there were none, then less than the annual grant provided by the
Sindh Government, totaling PKR 22,000. For this project, members had to ascertain the Committee’s
bank balance on their own. In the future, the project design could be improved by having field facilita-
tors accompany the members to the bank to get the information.
The sample School Improvement Plan served as a model when Executive Body members developed their own
Plan. The newly elected Executive Body was expected to emulate the sample plan in terms of format, but fill
in requirements specific to the local school. The sample School Improvement Plan appears on the next page.
50    ELECTIONS AND CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT



                             Figure 8: Sample School Improvement Plan




Field facilitators discussed each field in the School Improvement Plan with the Executive Body mem-
bers, and then opened up the floor to questions. Once every member understood the purpose and
format of the Plan, they began the task of developing their own Plan. The field facilitators provided
guidance by steering the conversation towards potential requirements of the local school. More impor-
tantly, they sought to ensure that the power dynamic within the organization was not skewed, and that
no one member had more influence over the proceedings than any other. Head teachers were prone to
dominating discussions, given their traditional status as the power center in schools. Facilitators peri-
odically steered the conversation away from them and to newly elected members, especially parents of
students enrolled at the school.
The development of the School Improvement Plan was a highly participatory process, in line with the
design and objectives of the project. The field facilitators were present during the development of the
Plan, to help guide Executive Body members. They also answered any questions members might have,
such as whether their cost estimates were in line with available funds. They assisted the members in fill-
ing out the template, including making sure that they filled in the right boxes. It must be emphasized,
however, that the facilitators adopted a hands-off approach during this phase and encouraged members
to take ownership of all substantive elements of the plan development process. This included debating
what the needs of the school were, what the expected cost estimates were, and whether the goals of the
School Improvement Plan were realistic. Thus, facilitators ensured that this process provided members
with intensive, hands-on training so that the latter could lead the process independently during the
next round of plan development.
Finalizing the School Improvement Plan and securing approval for it from the community can be a
protracted process, with implementation potentially proving even more challenging. The Executive
Body is expected to remain as transparent to the community as possible. Documentation of its activities
provides a record for community members to refer to if needed. However, the Executive Body is ac-
countable not just to the community, but also to the Sindh Government, which provides annual fund-
ing. Therefore, all of its activities, especially those involving the use of funds, must be fully documented
and publicized. Local community members who serve on the Executive Body tend to have the least
                                            ELECTIONS AND CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT                       51



experience in this area, so it is critical that they receive adequate training to build up their capability to
document the group’s activities.
Procedurally, once the body finalizes the School Improvement Plan, it is introduced on the floor
during a General Body meeting. At this meeting, parents give their feedback on the Plan and introduce
amendments. Once participants have voted on and approved the Plan, it is posted in the school where
the community can see it. Specific rules also govern implementation. If a project costs more than PKR
5,000, the Executive Body must display a tender notice on the outside wall of the school for potential
vendors to see. Based on vendor interest, the Executive Body collects at least three bids and compares
them. It then selects the cheapest vendor providing goods or services of appropriate quality, and draws
up a purchase order. The order goes on public display for 15 days and is sent to the office of the Exec-
utive District Officer (Education). Acquisition of goods and services can begin during this time. Any
payments made to vendors thereafter are established through a payment voucher, with details on each
recorded in a cash book. The cash book provides cumulative information on School Management
Committee funds that have been utilized and the balance that is available. Any goods acquired under
the School Improvement Plan should be recorded in the stock register, a book which contains details of
all inventory and which serves as the Executive Body’s primary inventory management tool. Damage or
theft of goods is also recorded in the stock register.
In this context, the third Executive Body meeting was organized with the aim of: 1) assisting members
in finalizing the School Improvement Plan, and 2) providing them with the capability to implement
the Plan. Members received a sample tender notice, which highlighted examples of goods that could
be purchased.

                                      Figure 9: Sample Tender Notice
52    ELECTIONS AND CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT



Executive Board members received instructions on how to fill out the tender notices, providing details
on the quantity, type and estimated cost of the item that was required (in the case of the sample, the
item was chairs for students). The members also studied a sample bid comparison form. The reason for
getting quotations from several vendors was to create competition among the suppliers and to ensure
a fair selection process that was not based on personal connections, thus theoretically increasing the
accountability of Executive Board members. It also established a system for School Management Com-
mittees to attract the best bidder, as vendors might try to underprice each other. Practically speaking,
however, at the village level, many of the vendors might be villagers who worked as masons, carpenters
or the like, with limited understanding of the competitive bidding process. While the Executive Body
meetings increased the capacity of members to invite and evaluate competitive bids, the problem re-
mained that local vendors might not have the capability to participate appropriately. This is another
example of how processes that appear sound in theory can be difficult to implement on the ground.
The sample quotation comparison form that was used to guide the Executive Body members is pro-
vided below:


                             Figure 10: Sample Quotation Comparison Form




A similar exercise sought to familiarize Executive Body members with payment vouchers and purchase
orders. Members also got practice filling out the cash book and the stock register. The facilitators em-
phasized the need to maintain these documents and they made a strong push to ensure that the mem-
bers had the capability to complete them independently.
However, certain caveats should be noted. The parents in the Executive Body who wished to improve
the poor educational outcomes of the community had graduated from the same, weak educational sys-
tem. For many of them, reading, writing and even simple math, such as addition, subtraction and mul-
tiplication, could be challenging. Thus, it was difficult to ensure that they would follow all the require-
                                          ELECTIONS AND CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT                      53



ments for maintaining these documents. To implement the School Improvement Plan, new Executive
Body members must not only be able to fulfill their commitment to the community and complete any
required documentation, but also be able to balance issues that are endemic to a feudal economy. For
example, some members expressed concern that if they started spending Committee resources, they
might attract the attention of local feudal lords who might want to acquire control of these resources.
Also, spending funds meant more record-keeping. Given the challenging process that implementation
of the School Improvement Plan entailed, there was a risk that Executive Board members might spend
less so as to minimize the amount of formal documentation they would need to complete.
These are some of the issues that local communities must surmount to play an effective role in im-
proving grassroots governance in the education sector in rural Sindh. Designers and implementers of
projects related to improving local educational governance should also be cognizant of these challenges,
so that they can give rural communities the appropriate tools to organize themselves, fulfill official
procedures and deflect local pressures.
Annex 6 provides snapshots of the different sample instruments used during the three Executive Body
meetings.


Elections and Capacity Support Costs
Overall, elections and capacity-building efforts cost USD $49,185. The costs were more or less evenly
divided between total fixed development costs (USD $24,891) and total variable costs (USD $24,294)
of the crossover intervention. Annex 8 provides a breakdown of these costs and other details.
The largest fraction of the cost was attributable to time charged by staff and consultants at the World
Bank headquarters and the Pakistan country office. This amounted to approximately 92% of the cost
of the crossover intervention. Designing the crossover intervention was a time-intensive process, and
this phase of the project cost the most in terms of staff and consultant fees.
Of the remaining USD $3,833, or 8%, USD $513 was spent on organizing a half-day workshop for
Assistant District officers. This workshop was arranged to familiarize district officials with the objec-
tives of the project, and to emphasize the importance of their participation in the crossover interven-
tion. This was especially important given that School Management Committees are legally bound to
conduct elections under the supervision of district officials such as Assistant District officers. An addi-
tional USD $3,320 went to honorariums for the officers, to compensate them for traveling to villages
to supervise and monitor the elections process.
Section 3:
Analysis
A
Were the treatments received by the
participants and acted upon?
56       TREATMENT RECEIPT ANALYSIS




Chapter 6: Treatment Receipt Analysis

Community mobilization and General Body meetings served to involve local community members in the
project. Once initial participation of villagers in the target districts had been achieved, the field team rolled
out progressive pieces of the project with the aim of ensuring that this engagement was sustained. This chapter
fleshes out specifics of this rollout, and provides information on the scope of two of the three interventions:
School Management Committee mobilization and the deployment of the Community Dialogue Platform.
While the first two sections of the chapter answer questions such as “how many?” for both intervention arms
by looking at sample size, participation rates and registration rates, the rest of the chapter focuses on the
platform and how the project team used it to sustain participation through nudges such as credit transfer,
community volunteers and Interactive Voice Response calls. Annex 10 describes the major data sets used for
analysis in this section.



Villages by Treatment Status: General Body Meetings
The final sample of villages for Intervention 1 comprised 119 villages. A total of 15 tehsils (sub-district
administrative unit) and 67 union councils22 were included in the treatment group for this intervention.
Among the 119 villages, cross-cutting capacity-building support (INFO-MEET-SUPPORT) took place
in 57 villages. Intervention 2 included 111 villages in the Community Dialogue Platform intervention.
A total of 15 unique tehsils and 66 union councils were part of this treatment. Among these 111 villages,
cross-cutting elections and capacity-building activities (INFO-SMS-SUPPORT) were undertaken in 56
villages. In the other 55 villages, only the Community Dialogue Platform was rolled out.
For Intervention 1, out of the 119 treatment villages, 47 were in district Mirpurkhas, 17 were in district
Matiari and 55 were in district Sanghar. For Intervention 2, out of the 111 treatment villages, 43 were
in district Mirpurkhas, 20 were in district Matiari and 48 were in district Sanghar.
                                          Table 2: Distribution of Sampled Villages

                                             Intervention 1                                   Intervention 2
     Total Villages                                 119                                              111
     Election                                        57                                               56
     Non-Election                                    62                                               55


     Mirpurkhas                                      47                                               43
     Mitiari                                         17                                               20
     Sanghar                                         55                                               48


22
  	Tehsils and union councils are administrative divisions. A province is divided into districts, which is further divided into 		
	 tehsils. Multiple union councils form a tehsil.
                                                                          TREATMENT RECEIPT ANALYSIS                         57



For Intervention 1, three villages were added to the sample for non-election villages, against the
planned sample of 59 villages, leading to the actual sample comprising 62 villages.23 Conversely, In-
tervention 2 saw an attrition of two villages (one election village and one non-election village).24 The
following table compares planned and actual sample sizes across the four types of interventions, plus
the control group.
                                        Table 3: Planned versus Actual Sample Size

                               COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT
              T1: INFO-MEET                                         T2: INFO-SMS
    (59 villages planned sample, 62 villages           (57 villages planned sample, 55 villages
                 actual sample)                                     actual sample)
                                                                                                            CONTROL
                   COMMUNITY ENGAGEMENT PLUS SUPPORT
       T3: INFO-MEET-SUPPORT                                T4: INFO-SMS-SUPPORT                            (57 villages)

    (57 villages planned sample, 57 villages           (57 villages planned sample, 56 villages
                 actual sample)                                     actual sample)
	

                                  Table 4: Participation Rates by Treatment and District

                                                                      50th
                                                           10th                             90th
                                                Mean                  percentile
                                                           percentile                       percentile
                                                                      (Median)
                     Overall                     63%          21%              63%              100%
                     SMC                                                                            
                     Overall                     62%          17%              60%              100%
                     Election                    58%          17%              57%              100%
                     Non-Election                65%          19%              73%              100%
                     SMS                                                                            
                     Overall                     63%          27%              63%              100%
                     Election                    58%          22%              54%              100%
                     Non-Election                69%          27%              69%              100%
                     Mirpurkhas                  75%          41%              83%              100%
                     Mitiar                      49%          18%              37%              100%
                     Sanghar                     57%          17%              57%              100%


While the initial threshold for participation rates was set at 60%, this threshold was relaxed to 20% af-
ter all the meetings were held, given the difficulty of matching census data with households in the field
and given average participation rates across treatment villages of almost 60%. The project team agreed

23
   	Oversampling occurred in this group because the implementing partner visited additional villages which were situated 		
	 close to certain GPS points in order to prevent the relevant ones from being missed.
24
    The project team faced stiff political resistance in these two villages. After efforts to overcome this problem failed, the 		
	 intervention was called off in these villages.
58    TREATMENT RECEIPT ANALYSIS



to physically revisit any villages for which the participation rate was less than 20%. It is encouraging to
note that participation rate on the 10th percentile was 22%, which was higher than the revised threshold
of participation rates. Thus, participation rates were mostly satisfactory across the two treatment arms.


Registration Rates for Community Dialogue Platform
An estimated 4,981 individuals registered on the Community Dialogue Platform. On average, 45 in-
dividuals per treatment village registered on the portal. However, a caveat is in order. Registration on
the portal was a multistage, multimodal process. The field team primarily signed up contacts during
the initial village meeting. However, in certain villages, the meeting participation rate was below the
threshold of 20% of the number of households in the census. In such cases, the General Body meeting
had to be rescheduled, and the team had to re-collect contact information from these villages and add
them to the portal’s contacts list.
Of the total number of participants registered with the portal, 2,405 were from villages receiving
the election crossover, while 2,576 came from non-election villages. Adjusting for the total number
of villages, averages differed only slightly across treatment types, with an average of 43 contacts
per village received from election villages and an average of 47 contacts per village received from
non-election villages.
The overall average registration rate (fraction of number of unique, registered contacts to the number
of unique households represented at village meetings) stood at 62.8%. However, there was significant
variation across villages in terms of registration rates. The 10th percentile of registration rates was 33%,
compared to 91% for the 90th.
Within districts, Sanghar had the highest average registration rate (68.4%), while Mitiari had the low-
est (53.2%). Mirpurkhas had an average registration rate of 60.8%. This variance was lower when we
consider villages by treatment type. The average registration rate in non-election villages (64.9%) was
only slightly higher than that in election villages (60.6%).

                                        Table 5: Registration Rates on CDP


                                             10th          Median (50th)
                                 Mean                                        90th Percentile
                                             Percentile    Percentile
                  Mirpurkhas      61%           32%             63%               88%
                  Mitiari         53%           34%             51%               80%
                  Sanghar         68%           37%             72%               96%
                                                                                    
                  Election        61%           30%             62%               93%
                  Non-Election    65%           35%             69%               90%


                  Overall         63%           33%             65%               91%

Given that the project sought to use the Community Dialogue Platform as a way of generating internal
conversations around education, these are significant numbers since each participant on the portal was
encouraged and prodded to reach out to other community members to discuss local school-related
                                                                   TREATMENT RECEIPT ANALYSIS           59



issues. This multiplier effect – whereby registered users interacted with non-users – was expected to
help boost the “voice” of the community. The compounding of the community’s voice should increase
upward pressure on the government for greater accountability and transparency in the education sector.



Credit Transfer to Participants
To account for the staggered initiation of the project in the 111 treatment villages (INFO-SMS & IN-
FO-SMS-SUPPORT), the project team transferred airtime credit to participants in different villages at
different times. Credit was transferred on the following dates:
                                         Table 6: Dates for Credit Transfer


                                  19                25                28          19              18
          No. of Villages

     Credit Transfer Date   01/03/13 1        1/03/13           21/03/13 0    2/04/13      05/04/13

The project team staggered credit transfer based on the gradual, cumulative incorporation of different
treatment villages to the portal. However, only individuals who verified that they were registered on
the portal at the time of the credit transfer, received credit. Since registration was phased and the credit
transfer was staggered, some of the participants who were registered on the portal did not receive credit.
Of a total 4,981 unique registered users, 4,788 got free credit and 131 community volunteers received
incentives in the form of free credit.



Participation Rates of Community Volunteers
The role of community volunteers was to expedite local participation in the use of the Community Di-
alogue Platform. Volunteers were charged with generating intra-community discussion around educa-
tion, and to assist villagers in interfacing with the portal, including assisting them in sending messages
to the portal, and sending messages on their behalf.
A total of 212 unique community volunteers were part of the intervention. A fraction of these were
active volunteers, carrying out their responsibilities appropriately, while the others, known as passive
volunteers, did not. Of the total 59 active volunteers, 30 came from election villages, and 29 from
non-election villages. Conversely, there were 153 passive volunteers. These individuals were seen as hav-
ing participated in the broader discussion on education at the village-level, and in many instances, they
sent messages as regular users. But they did not directly assist other participants in sending messages to
the portal. This implies that they did not send messages at the behest of others with the correct village
and community volunteer codes.
It is important to gauge how many villages had a volunteer who was actively engaged in the project.
Of the 111 treatment villages, approximately 48 had active volunteers. Of these, 25 were election
villages and 23 were non-election villages. Therefore, 43% of the treatment villages had at least one
active volunteer.
60    TREATMENT RECEIPT ANALYSIS



                            Table 7: Villages with Active Community Volunteers




                       ELECTION               NON ELECTION                  TOTAL
                       VILLAGES                 VILLAGES                   VILLAGES



                          25                       23                        48

Activity Generated by Interactive Voice Response Calls
Field teams made Interactive Voice Response calls in 96 villages, to 4,427 participants in total. That
resulted in 17,708 calls altogether, or an average of 185 calls per village. Of these, an average of 131 calls
per village were answered overall. Disaggregation of this information reveals that an average of 60 calls
per village were answered during the first round, while an average of 71 calls per village were answered
during the second round. Thus, the success rate of the calls in Round 2 was higher than in Round 1.
Chapter 7 presents further details and an analysis of responses to the calls.
                                                                     ANALYSIS OF TEXT MESSAGES                  61




Chapter 7: Analysis of Text Messages

The Community Dialogue Platform created an open dialogue among community members regarding educa-
tion at the local level. More importantly, it allowed users to seek local solutions to local problems facing schools
at the village level. This chapter delves into activity on the portal, looking at how many individuals actively
used the portal, the extent to which they used it across geographic sub-units and time, and how well par-
ticipants responded to external catalysts, such as community volunteers and Interactive Voice Response calls.



Active and Passive Users
The project defined active users as those registered users who sent at least one non-junk text message
over the course of the project. Passive users referred to individuals who did not engage directly with the
portal, but shared their opinions through active users. In the communal culture of rural Sindh, certain
members of the community are at times entrusted with representing the larger community. As a result,
discussions among a group of individuals might not lead to all group members sending messages indi-
vidually. Instead, a few people in the gathering would be entrusted with synthesizing the information
generated and sending it to the portal.
Of a total 4,981 unique registered users on the portal, 1,399, or 28%, were active users. Treatment villages
had an average of 12 active users per village. While the number of registered users reflected the general
interest that was generated by the portal and the success of the project team in getting villagers to register
with it, the number of active users is a more accurate reflection of sustained interest in the portal.
It is important to understand whether the relatively low ratio of active users to registered users
was an indication of a general lack of interest in the portal, or whether, as suggested earlier, the
opinions of both active and passive users were being synthesized by active users. We define “active
villages” as villages where at least one non-junk text message was sent to the portal. All 56 of the
election villages were active, while 54 of the 55 non-election villages were active. This is an encour-
aging statistic, and shows that there were no systematic issues in terms of a general lack of interest
in the portal across villages.


Analysis of SMS Traffic – Over Time and by District
This section provides an analysis of activity on the portal over time, aggregated at the treatment, district
and tehsil levels.
Project rollout was phased in. The first village meeting was not held in all villages on the same day. Instead,
it took almost 50 days (February 7, 2013 – March 27, 2013) for all of the treatment villages to hold their
first meeting. This part of the analysis puts data in 10-day buckets, with Days 1-10 representing the first
10 days after the initial village meeting in a particular village, and Days 110-120 representing the last 10
days of formal activity on the portal in the same village. After the 10-day buckets were created for each
village, these buckets were simply aggregated.
62    ANALYSIS OF TEXT MESSAGES



The project cycle saw total traffic of 5,336 messages, with approximately one-third of the messages (1,836)
generated in the first 10 days following the village meeting. An average of 16 messages per village were sent
during the first 10 days, compared to an average of two messages per village during the last 10 days. The
initial surge occurred during a period when communities were being mobilized and informational text
messages were being sent to them. This indicates that these efforts had a significant impact on generating
initial activity on the portal. However, following the initial round of informational messages, traffic on the
portal dropped as expected, stabilizing at an average of two to four messages per village per 10 days in the
months following the project initiation.
District-wise analysis showed that the overall trend in text messaging activity on the portal was by and
large similar to individual trends in activity in the treatment districts. This is illustrated in Figure 11.
There were no large differentials across districts in terms of activity on the portal at the launch of the
portal. However, towards the end of the project, there were higher levels of activity in district Sanghar and
lower levels of activity in district Mirpurkhas, as compared to the overall mean. Activity in district Mitiari
matched the overall mean (two messages per village). These trends are illustrated in the graph below:


                                 Figure 11: SMS Traffic per Village: District-wise




Credit Transfer Analysis
The project team transferred airtime credit in two rounds, once initially and then midway through the
project cycle. Credit transfer, together with informational and text messages, acted as catalysts for increas-
ing activity on the portal. While the initial surge could potentially be partially attributed to credit transfer,
there were no systematic jumps in activity in the target districts once the initial surge had eased. Thus, the
second round of credit transfers does not appear to have had an impact on portal activity.
One reason for this could be that access to mobile credit was not a critical determinant of engagement
with the portal. Between February 1, 2013 and June 30, 2013, a total of 74% of the messages sent to
                                                                   ANALYSIS OF TEXT MESSAGES             63



the portal was junk – i.e., messages that were either incomplete or irrelevant. This strengthens the ar-
gument that lack of credit was not a major constraint for a majority of the participants. Intuitively, free
credit should have positive spillovers by acting as an incentive to participate in the project; however,
these effects are not reflected in the existing data.


Activity of Community Volunteers
Adjusting for outliers and community volunteers who sent zero messages to the Community Dialogue
Platform, there were 59 active volunteers out of 212 unique volunteers. In effect, approximately a
quarter of the volunteers who had signed up for the project eventually sent messages to the portal on
behalf of other community members. Volunteers were periodically encouraged through informational
messages to generate intra-community interest in the project.
The 59 active volunteers sent a total of 287 messages, or an average of five messages per volunteer. In
election villages, 30 active volunteers sent a total of 132 messages to the portal, an average of 4.4 mes-
sages per volunteer. In non-election villages, 29 active volunteers sent a total of 155 messages to the
portal, averaging 5.3 messages per volunteer. The data shows that volunteers in non-election villages as-
sisted other villagers more actively than their counterparts in election villages. However, volunteers were
only credited with assisting villagers if the messages received on the portal could be traced back to them.
The messages sent from other villagers’ phones had to contain the identifying code of the volunteer.
The average number of volunteer messages sent for villages that fell in the 10th percentile in this cat-
egory was one, while that for villages in the 90th percentile was 11. Thus, the scope of activity across
community volunteers varied significantly. These numbers are tabulated below:
                                   Table 8: Community Volunteers Activity

                             Total       # of           Avg #         10th          90th
                             Messages    Volunteers     of Msgs       Percentile    Percentile
           Election             132            30            4.4            1            7.5
           Non-Election         155            29            5.3            1            11
           Overall              287            59            4.9            1            11



Analysis of Responses from Interactive Voice Response Calls
Chapter 4 discussed the specific content of the Interactive Voice Response calls, the idea behind each,
and the options and questions that were part of its interactive design. Annex 9 reassesses the rationale
behind these calls, discusses the process for executing them, and highlights the period over which these
calls were made. This subsection deals with the specific number of calls made, the number answered
and the number answered that generated valid responses. These statistics assist us in understanding the
success rate of Interactive Voice Response calls in the context of the intervention.
Specifically, the statistics in this subsection include calls made during the first round (four calls made to
village participants) and the second round (four calls made to participants and two made to community
volunteers). All components of the analysis in this subsection are accompanied by tree diagrams, which
can be found in Annex 9. These illustrate the statistics for a particular call.
Table 9 provides detailed descriptive statistics on Interactive Voice Response calls.
64    ANALYSIS OF TEXT MESSAGES




                                  Table 9: Descriptive Statistics for IVR Calls


It can be difficult to achieve a high response rate for Interactive Voice Response calls, because these
calls might not catch respondents at a convenient time; respondents might not be willing to answer
calls from unknown numbers; or respondents might not understand the automated instructions in the
calls. We can check if the first two factors affected the project by looking at the percentage of calls that
were answered. For Round 1, a total 33% of all calls were answered. For Round 2, the percentage rose
to 38%.
Looking at the fraction of answered calls that generated valid responses provides key insights into the
automated message’s ability to elicit a valid response from the user. Of the calls that were answered
during Round 1, some 87% elicited valid responses. This percentage dropped in Round 2, with 55%
of all calls answered eliciting valid responses.



Key Messages Received on Community Dialogue Platform
The Community Dialogue Platform tagged incoming text messages according to their content, giving
the intervention team an accurate idea of the most significant topics of discussion on the portal. For
this purpose, 18 non-junk, high-occurring tags were created. Annex 7 takes a look at these categories
in detail. A word cloud helps to visualize the issues that were most frequently discussed by users on the
Community Dialogue Platform.
                                                                     ANALYSIS OF TEXT MESSAGES                   65



                                        Figure 12: Word Cloud of Key Words




The size of each of the words in the word cloud is proportional to the frequency of its appearance in
complaints, opinions and suggestions sent by villagers.25 The diagram shows that a large number of
participants talked about infrastructure and facilities at schools, including the number of classrooms,
boundary walls, gates and roofs. Villagers also frequently discussed issues related to teachers, and to
School Management Committee funds, specifically the allocation of finances and the fund’s manage-
ment. These findings can provide critical feedback to any efforts to scale up the intervention.

25
  	The word cloud merges some of the categories originally used for sorting. “SMC” here includes “SMC,” “SMC Fund,” 	
	 “Executive Committee” and “Budget.” “SMS Campaign” includes “SMS Campaign” and “Thanks.” Finally, the category 	
	 “Others” pulls together “Parent,” “Flood,” “Stipend” and “S.I.P.”
66      ANALYSIS OF CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT




Chapter 8: Analysis of Capacity-Building
Support

The suite of interventions introduced by the project included village mobilization, the provision of a “voice”
to local community members, and institutional strengthening. The analysis up to now has largely focused on
the first two interventions. While mobilization and provision of a “voice” are crucial for improving educa-
tional accountability at the local level, villagers can affect further change by utilizing existing institutions.
For this, community members need concrete process knowledge of these institutions to be able to interface with
them, and the capacity to harness their potential. Elections and capacity support (also termed the “crossover
intervention”) provided the community with precisely these capabilities. This section builds on the structure
of the crossover intervention that was introduced in Chapter 5, and provides information on its key elements:
the buy-in of the community and the success of the project team in mobilizing villagers for this intervention.
These were gauged through participation rates in Executive Body meetings and the successful development of
School Improvement Plans, which are a critical tool used by local participants to spur change through School
Management Committees.



Elections
The crossover intervention was rolled out in 57 Intervention 1 (School Management Committee) vil-
lages and 56 Intervention 2 (SMS) villages. Elections took place in at least one school in all crossover
villages which were part of Intervention 1.26 For crossover villages within the treatment sample for In-
tervention 2, elections were not held in two villages: village Dharoro in district Mirpurkhas and village
Khipro in district Sanghar.27
After the Executive Body elections, the project team provided training and capacity-building to the new
members. The engine of these capacity-building measures were three Executive Body meetings, during
which members received training on drafting School Improvement Plans, record-keeping, engaging
vendors and maintaining the School Management Committee bank account.


Participation Rates in Executive Body Meetings
A high attendance rate for Executive Body meetings was critical for the successful implementation
of the project, as well as for the future sustainability of the School Management Committees. While
community feedback and oversight is essential for a Committee’s effective functioning, the Executive
Body members are the ones who get things done – fulfilling legal requirements, such as maintaining
documents related to the bank account, record-keeping for the Committee, drafting and finalizing the
School Improvement Plan, and procuring goods and services for the school.

26
   	 Attendance sheets for the three Executive Body meetings were used as an indicator that elections were held in a particular 		
	village.
27
   	 It was necessary for elections to be conducted in the presence of governmental district officials. In these two villages however, 	
	 district education staff did not show up.
                                                   ANALYSIS OF CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT                     67



Analysis of attendance sheets data received from crossover intervention villages shows that attendance for
Executive Body meetings was high across districts as well as treatment arms (School Management Com-
mittee and SMS). As explained earlier, an Executive Body has five members. Attendance for Executive
Body meetings was never less than four in any of the villages across the three meetings. In fact, a large
fraction of Executive Body meetings were attended by all five members. The high level of attendance indi-
cates that mobilization efforts made by project staff in the crossover intervention villages were successful.
The mean attendance level across treatment types (SMS and School Management Committee) was
approximately 4.8 out of 5. There was almost no variation in mean attendance across the two types of
crossover interventions. These results are reproduced in Table 10:

                    Table 10: Mean Attendance Rates for SMC & SMS Crossover Interventions

                                       1st EB Meeting     2nd EB Meeting       3rd EB Meeting
                SMC + Elections             4.76                4.80                4.83
                SMS + Elections             4.80                4.79                4.80
                Overall                     4.78                4.80                4.81


                Mirpurkhas                   4.7                 4.9                 4.9
                Mitiari                      4.4                 4.3                 4.3
                Sanghar                      5.0                 5.0                 5.0


We find that for Executive Body meetings in Mirpurkhas and Sanghar, the mean attendance level was
approximately 4.9 and 5, respectively. For district Mitiari, the mean attendance level was closer to 4.
There was relatively greater potential for a lack of a tiebreaking vote, which could cause problems in
this district. However, it must be emphasized that this is only one factor in ascertaining the ability of
Executive Bodies to successfully oversee the School Management Committee.
Statistics related to Executive Body meetings also have a temporal element: The first meeting was fol-
lowed by the second, which was followed by the third and final meeting.
Any increase or decrease in mean attendance levels from Executive Body Meeting 1 to Meeting 2 and
Meeting 3 could indicate an increase or decrease in the level of interest in the meeting among members
over time. However, as illustrated in Table 10, participation rates were sustained across the three meetings
for both variants of the crossover treatment, as well as for all three districts. This indicates that the quality
of training being imparted in Executive Body meetings was successful in maintaining members’ interest.
There are multiple non-monetary benefits associated with a successful School Management Commit-
tee. These include parental involvement in school-related activities, greater accountability of Sindh
Government officials, and heightened awareness among the community about the advantages of ed-
ucation. However, non-monetary benefits may take time to manifest. On the other hand, finance-re-
lated benefits can be realized in the short term. This is because increased use of School Management
Committee resources translates into better facilities, potentially better teachers and an overall improved
learning environment for students.
The School Improvement Plan contains estimates of costs for making various physical improvements
to schools. In the following section, we analyze these cost estimates prepared by Executive Bodies. This
68     ANALYSIS OF CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT



analysis is made both across districts (comparing average cost estimates between districts) and treatment
arms (comparing average estimates made between villages in the different treatment samples). Thus, we
train a lens on the level of finances that communities require for the better functioning of their schools
through an analysis of approved School Improvement Plans, which are also an important indicator for
need at the local level.


Average Cost Estimates in School Improvement Plans
Executive Body members received training on how to develop a School Improvement Plan for their
School Management Committee. First, however, they learned how to check the availability of funds in
the Committee’s bank account. Once they ascertained the availability of funds – or lack thereof – they
could start developing the improvement plan, based on the amount of funds available and the needs
of the school.
Aggregate cost estimates were recorded for each village. These were extracted from School Improvement
Plans prepared by the Executive Bodies and finalized during the third and final Executive Body meeting
held under the auspices of the crossover intervention. As with attendance rates, we averaged cost esti-
mates across schools at the village level, and across villages at the district level (or at the treatment level).
The Sindh Government is legally bound to provide PKR 22,000 (approximately USD 214) annually
to each School Management Committee. However, the individual Executive Bodies did not limit their
cost estimates to this funding level. The cost estimates in many Plans were greater than PKR 22,000.
This is primarily due to two reasons: 1) many of the School Management Committees had not un-
dertaken repairs over multiple years, leading to significant investments for repairing depreciated assets;
and 2) some Committees had been receiving annual funding which they had not spent, and therefore,
had accumulated in their bank accounts. These Committees could afford to develop plan cost estimates
greater than the annual funding limit.
Looking at the distribution of mean cost estimates, it is clear that large differentials existed across dis-
tricts. The overall mean cost estimates for Mirpurkhas (PKR 40,365 or USD 392) were almost twice as
large as those for Sanghar (PKR 23,214 or USD 225). We can therefore infer that, by and large, villages
in Mirpurkhas either required a larger overhaul of their schools as compared to schools in Sanghar, and/
or have been underspending their funds more than those in Sanghar.
                               Table 11: Distribution of Cost Estimates (Statistics)

                             Mean
                 Mean                           Standard 10th        50th percentile 90th
                             (Current
                 (PKR)                          Deviation percentile (Median)        percentile
                             USD)
 Mirpurkhas        40,365           392            30,039         21,000               25,525      77,500
 Mitiari           34,047           331            17,780         21,025               21,950      62,000
 Sanghar           23,214           225             9,749         16,000               21,500      28,600



While differentials in cost estimates existed across districts, there were also large variations across vil-
lages within the same districts. Looking at the 10th and 90th percentiles, we see that the 10th percentile
cost estimate for Mirpurkhas was PKR 21,000, compared to PKR 77,500 for the 90th percentile. If
                                               ANALYSIS OF CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT                      69



we use cost estimates as a proxy for available funds, we can assert that villages at the 90th percentile in
Mirpurkhas had funds that accumulated for an average of 3.5 years (PKR 77,500, when annual fund-
ing is PKR 22,000).
Variation in Mitiari revealed a similar pattern as in Mirpurkhas. However, in Sanghar, we find a nar-
rower range: The 10th percentile cost estimate was PKR 16,000, compared to the 90th percentile cost
estimate of PKR 28,600. Figure 13 illustrates the distribution of cost estimates for the three districts.


                                   Figure 13: Distribution of Cost Estimates




Across treatment arms, there was relative consistency in terms of average cost estimates. District Mitiari
showed higher mean cost estimates as compared to Sanghar, but lower mean cost estimates as compared
to Mirpurkhas.


Expenditure Analysis of School Improvement Plans
The earlier word cloud analysis presented in Chapter 7 highlighted multiple issues related to education,
including lack of quality teachers, poor facilities, insufficient finances, lack of support from the education
department; and the community’s perception of the effectiveness of the SMS campaign. The School
Improvement Plan, in contrast, is supposed to focus on the specifics of running a functioning school:
ceilings, boundary walls, gates, fans, bathrooms, blackboards, and desks. It is clear, therefore, that the
Executive Body’s primary responsibility is to ensure that the school is physically running smoothly.
70     ANALYSIS OF CAPACITY-BUILDING SUPPORT



                Figure 14: Word Cloud of Frequently Stated Budget Items in School Improvement Plans




This analysis relies on the frequency of common budget line items appearing in School Improvement
Plans as a measure of the basic needs of schools at the local level.28 The size of each word in the word
cloud in Figure 14 is proportional to the frequency with which it appeared in the Plans. The word cloud
reveals that there was a dire need to implement structural repairs in schools. Furniture and fixtures also
featured frequently across School Improvement Plans. Next in line were water, sanitation and hygiene
needs. Clean drinking water, access to bathrooms, and good hygiene ensured by regular cleaning are
necessary for attracting students to schools and for providing them with a healthy environment for
learning. Many of the schools function without electricity, which is why electricity installation and repairs
were also frequently cited. Lastly, schools appeared to be in urgent need of stationery for students.29
It is obvious that generally, the first step that School Management Committee Executive Bodies wanted to
take was to improve the physical condition of the schools in order to make them more attractive for stu-
dents to attend. Generally, a community driven to improve the state of education at the local level would
also be incentivized to take care of school facilities that it has helped to repair and renovate.
The word cloud reflects the dire physical state of schools at the local level. It must be kept in mind that Exec-
utive Body members have a low capability for requesting bids for jobs, filling purchase orders, record-keeping
and maintaining budgets. Given that procurement appears to be a major next step in implementing School
Improvement Plans, designers of future interventions should keep in mind the capacity constraints of Exec-
utive Body members, when it comes to navigating the process for procuring goods and services.

28
   	 Cost estimates for budget heads are not used to construct the word cloud. This is because certain cost items, especially 		
	 those related to construction are expensive and would therefore, shift the distribution of funds in their favor, and skew
	 their perceived importance. Frequency of cost items is a better indicator to identify common issues faced by schools across 	
	 the three target districts.
29
   	 Infrastructure here encapsulates cost items such as ceiling and floor construction, as well as the school’s gate, walls and 		
	 fixtures such as doors cabinets, blackboards, fans and windows. Facilities include furniture such as chairs and tables;
	 stationary for students; as well as amenities related to hygiene, toilets and clean drinking water. Repairs include both 		
	 repairing of infrastructure as well as painting of walls and ceiling.
                                                                                  CONCLUSION          71




Conclusion

The community engagement mechanisms tested in this field experiment attempt to advance our under-
standing of challenges faced in the design, implementation and take-up of innovative technology-based
solutions. This knowledge can help to inform the use of similar strategies in other World Bank projects.
The design of a project can help to shape not only the level of participation among community mem-
bers, but also the degree of responsiveness of, and collaboration among, local community members.
In this project, the key design parameters that contributed to the success of village-level meetings
were: 1) reaching out to the community through channels that they trusted and that they were familiar
with, such as village elders, youth, and mosques; 2) selecting community volunteers who understood
the local context and who could facilitate participation of community members; and 3) providing
support and constantly monitoring the implementing partner companies to ensure that they did their
job effectively in the field. Likewise, the salient design features of the Community Dialogue Platform
intervention were: 1) a viable technology architecture for two-way communication to take place in
rural Sindh; 2) customization of the Platform to take into consideration the local language as well as
mobile devices used in these villages; and 3) a combination of nudges in the form of airtime credit and
community volunteers to support the take-up of this initiative. Lastly, the key design elements of capac-
ity-support intervention were: 1) a transfer of authority through the district officials to newly elected
members in village meetings; 2) participatory training where the members were expected to draft a
School Improvement Plan by the end of the third meeting; and 3) availability of financial resources to
implement those plans.
This field experiment illustrates the level of complexity involved in a small-scale project targeting 230
communities in rural Sindh. We recommend conducting similar field experiments before scaling up
such mechanisms for sustained citizen engagement. Lessons learned from the design and implementa-
tion of interventions could prove useful for developing a refined design to be implemented by the Sindh
Government. The pilot stage could address the fundamental issue of what strategies most effectively
engage local communities. Once a successful design has been established, the dialogue and efforts of the
Sindh Government could focus exclusively on implementation. Otherwise, we might commit an error
in concluding that mechanisms to support community engagement are not effective when, in fact, the
quality of supervision and capacity might have been lacking on the government side.
72    BIBLIOGRAPHY




Bibliography

Agarwal, S., Asim, S., Khan, A. (2012). Implementation Completion and Results Report: Sindh
Education Sector Project, Pakistan. Report Number: ICR2481. Washington DC: World Bank.
Ali, S. (2006). Why does policy fail? Understanding the problems of policy implementation in Pakistan - a
Neuro-Cognitive Perspective. International Studies in Educational Administration, 34(1). < http://
ecommons.aku.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1009&context=pakistan_ied_pdck>.
Asim, S. “About.” Weblog post. Education Policy Dialogue. n.d. Web. 17 Aug. 2014. <http://
edupolicydialogue.wordpress.com/about/>.
Asim, S., Raju, D., Adil, M., Pandey, P. and De Icaza, L.. (2013). Impact of Community Engagement
Mechanisms on Education Outcomes in Sindh, Pakistan, Baseline Survey: Unpublished Data.
Washington DC.
Banerjee, A. V., Banerji, R., Duflo, E., Glennerster, R., & Khemani, S. (2010). Pitfalls of Participatory
Programs: Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation in Education in India. American Economic Journal:
Economic Policy, 1-30.
Bruns, B., Filmer, D., & Patrinos, H. A. (2011). Making Schools Work: New Evidence on Accountability
Reforms. Washington DC: World Bank.
Carneiro, P., Das, J., & Reis, H. (2010). Estimating the Demand for School Attributes in Pakistan.
University College London, Institute for Fiscal Studies and Centre for Microdata Methods and
Practice. (Preliminary Version).
Coffey International Development. (2007). The Role of Communication in Governance: Detailed
Analysis. <http://www.icdev.info/portal/documents/GovernanceSummaryPaper_003.pdf>.
Evans, Peter. (2014). Pakistan - Key Statistics, Telecom Market and Infrastructure, Regulatory Overview,
and Forecasts. Budde Comm. <http://www.budde.com.au/Research/Pakistan-Key-Statistics-Telecom-
Market-and-Infrastructure-Regulatory-Overview-and-Forecasts.html>.
Hirschman, Albert O. Exit, Voice and Loyalty: Responses to the Decline in Firms, Organizations and
State. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1978. Print.
Oxfam India. (2014). Community Participation and Institutional Experiences in School Education:
School Development and Monitoring Committees in Karnataka. New Delhi. <http://www.oxfamindia.
org/sites/default/files/wp-community-participation-and-institutional-experience-in-school-
education_0.pdf>.
Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. (2013). Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement Survey
(PSLM) 2012-13 Provincial / District. Government of Pakistan.
Pandey, P., Goyal, S., & Sundararaman, V. (2009). Community Participation in Public Schools: Impact
of Information Campaigns in Three Indian States. Education Economics, 17(3), 355-375.
Pradhan, M., Suryadarma, D., Beatty A., Wong, M., Alishjabana, A., Gaduh, A., & Artha, R. (2011).
                                                                              BIBLIOGRAPHY         73



Improving Educational Quality through Enhancing Community Participation: Results from a Randomized
Field Experiment in Indonesia. Policy Research Working Papers. The World Bank.
Pritchett, L. (2013). The Rebirth of Education: Schooling Ain’t Learning. Washington, DC: Center for
Global Development.
Reform Support Unit. (2014). Annual Schools Census 2013-14. Education and Literacy Department,
Government of Sindh.
Uemura, Mitsue. (1999). Community Participation in Education: What Do We Know?. Washington,
DC: World Bank. <http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/1999/01/1989001/community-
participation-education-know>.
World Bank. (2003). World Development Report 2004: Making Services Work for Poor People. World
Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/5986 License: CC BY 3.0 IGO.”
World Bank. (2009). Sindh Education Sector Project (SEP) Project Appraisal Document. (Report No:
47642-PK). Washington DC.
World Bank. (2013). Sindh Education Sector Project (SEP-II) Project Appraisal Document. (Report No:
74552-PK). Washington DC.
74    ANNEXURE




Annexure

     1.	 Snapshots of Select Project Tools
     2.	 Technical Design of the Community Dialogue Platform
     3.	 Content of Informational Messages and Interactive Voice Response Calls
             a.	 Informational SMS Messages – Round 1 (Translated)
             b.	 Informational SMS Messages – Round 2 (Translated)
             c.	 Interactive Voice Response Calls – Round 1 (Translated)
             d.	 Interactive Voice Response Calls – Round 2 (Translated)
     4.	 Workflow Diagrams
             a.	 Intervention 1 (School Management Committee)
             b.	 Intervention 2 (Community Dialogue Platform)
     5.	 Timeline of the Intervention
     6.	 Material from Executive Body Meetings
     7.	 Sorting Algorithm
     8.	 Project Cost Estimates
     9.	 Data on Interactive Voice Response Calls
     10.	 List of Databases
                                                                                         ANNEXURE          75



Annex 1: Snapshots of Select Project Tools
Instruments such as handouts, flyers and scripts played a critical role in the successful implementation of the
project. Handouts and flyers helped to spread the word about village meetings while easy-to-understand scripts
provided guidelines on how to conduct the various kinds of meetings. This annex provides snapshots of these
project tools.
76        ANNEXURE



Annex 2: Technical Design of the Community Dialogue Platform
While Chapters 3 and 4 provide an overview of how the Community Dialogue Platform was designed, pi-
loted and implemented, the significance of the portal, as well as its innovative structure, necessitate a detailed
discussion of its design features. This annex lays out the fundamental concepts upon which the platform was
built, and provides details about its structure. This annex is especially relevant for readers who wish to under-
stand the nuts and bolts of the portal.
The Community Design Platform was programmed using ASP.Net on the Windows 8.0 platform. ASP.
Net is a faster and easier alternative to other Web application frameworks such as Perl or C. Further,
it can accommodate a host of languages, including VBScript or Jscript. It also allows for separation
between the database and the web design aspects of the platform. Such features allowed for ease of
maintenance. This is important given that programmers of the portal are not necessarily the same peo-
ple who maintain it. Anyone with a working knowledge of the platform could, therefore, make course
corrections to avoid potential problems that might emerge during project rollout. This feature thus
protected the portal from potential staffing changes on the project team.
An external Modulator/Demodulator, or modem, was used for sending and receiving messages. The
modem was connected to the server, allowing for messages to be directed to specific sections of the
portal’s database. Before any activity was initiated, the administrator of the Platform checked the con-
nectivity status of the modem by sending a test message and waiting for a response, and by checking the
modem test report for its connectivity status. In case the modem was not responding, the administrator
had to contact the M3 Technologies support team to restart it.
The portal has its own dedicated URL with server space reserved for storing large amounts of data.
It can be accessed at http://www.aknservices.com/worldbanksms/. A username and password are re-
quired to log in; this protects the database from unauthorized users and secures the confidentiality of
the participants. A snapshot of the main page of the portal is provided in Figure 1530. The page has a
minimalist design, with an emphasis on functionality and ease-of-use rather than aesthetics.	
The Community Dialogue Platform was supported by three principles: 1) a smooth flow of infor-
mation from the users to the platform; 2) ease of data management for back-end data managers; and
3) versatile access to existing information for data analysis. This subsection discusses these principles
and provides a background on the decisions that the project team had to make to balance them with
feasibility.


Streamlined Participant-Portal Information Flow
The first decision that M3 Technologies – the lead technology partner on the project – and the World
Bank team had to make involved the channel to be used to connect with village participants. The cost
of sending messages to participants would depend on the traffic generated on the portal. Given that the
traffic flow was relatively unpredictable, it was difficult to do a cost-benefit analysis of the method for
sending messages to participants. The two primary methods for sending these text messages were the
long code and the short code.
Short codes are reliable, and faster than long codes, and would enable users such as the project team to
track receipt of messages. Short code charges are not tied to the level of traffic generated, and therefore,
30
     All snapshots are provided in the “notes” section at the end of this chapter.
                                                                                    ANNEXURE          77



are ideal for massive informational and marketing campaigns which generate hundreds of thousands
of text messages. However, they have a fixed price level and are much more expensive in terms of fees
paid to telecom carriers. If short code were used, each message received from village participants would
have cost PKR 1 per participant, unless an overall traffic threshold were achieved. Bear in mind that
this was a discounted rate for nonprofit organizations. For corporate campaigns, such messages cost
twice as much. The Bank’s project partner M3 Technologies held discussions with two of Pakistan’s big-
gest telecommunications companies, Mobilink and Telenor, on whether they could reduce these rates
further. The two companies said villagers could use short code at no cost to them, if the project could
pay a fixed cost per month (approximately PKR 100,000 or USD 980) on behalf of the participants.
Long codes are less reliable compared to short codes, and do not provide administrators with the abil-
ity to confirm receipt of messages sent. However, they do not have a fixed price and the cost for both
sending and receiving messages is relatively inexpensive. Long codes are not regulated like short codes,
reducing the ability of users to control spam. But that also means that administrators have greater flex-
ibility in sending out messages, with no wait time required between sending different text messages. In
contrast, in the use of short code, telecom companies will vet any messages before they are received by
project participants. Long codes also have a dedicated number that can send and receive messages, and
which could be easily saved and recalled by project participants.
Analyzing these pros and cons, the project team decided to use long codes so that: 1) the cost of the
project to both the project team and the participants was minimal; and 2) the flow of information was
uninhibited. The long code used for the project was +92 315 3002182.
The project team at M3 Technologies was responsible for consistent debugging of the portal in case of
any issues. Debugging was especially necessary at the beginning of the project when unexpected issues
were likeliest to arise. The team carefully assessed whether text messages being sent by village partici-
pants were actually being received on the portal, and whether texts being sent by the project team were
being received by village participants. As mentioned earlier, long codes do not allow for receipt of mes-
sages to be verified. However, the team on the ground informed the M3 Technologies team whether the
summary messages had been received by the community during the initial field visits. This sustained
evaluation process was necessary to ensure that there were no stoppages in the flow of information
between participants and the portal.


Versatile Data Management
The initial village meeting played a significant role in generating new traffic on the portal. But other
catalysts were needed to maintain participant interest. These included individual messages sent to par-
ticipants in two rounds over the course of the project, and periodic summary text messages that were
sent to participants on a weekly basis. Further, maintenance of village-level information, such as data
related to village meetings, polling, tagging of messages and contact details of participants, was time
sensitive and required a robust system of data management.
Data in the form of messages was automatically stored in the database when these messages were re-
ceived using long code. The larger database consisted of multiple filters, such as date, contact number
of the message sender, village code and type of text message content. With the help of these filters, ex-
tracting specific parts of the database became easier. Otherwise, this would have been a Herculean task,
requiring managers to sift through large amounts of unwanted data to get what they needed.
78    ANNEXURE



Attendance data in the form of contact information of participants could be conveniently uploaded on
the portal. This was done by accessing the “Meeting” tab and clicking on “Upload Meeting Contacts.”
The relevant tabs for this process are highlighted in Figure 16 in the notes below.
For ease of use, attendance details received from meetings did not have to be entered one participant
at a time. Instead, the project team could fill out a pre-designed Excel worksheet and upload it to the
portal. It was then automatically appended to the existing database maintained by the portal. Wherever
bulk information had to be uploaded, a pre-designed Excel sample was provided so data managers were
always aware of the correct format of the worksheet that was to be uploaded. This precluded errors and
made uploading information more convenient. Figure 17 provides a snapshot of a sample worksheet,
specifically the one used to upload attendance information. The portal could also be used to update
contact information after the initial meeting. Once the meeting ended, the portal could send text mes-
sages to participants. These could be in the form of single text messages sent to individual numbers, or
bulk texts sent to a large number of participants in specific villages. The bulk texts were the primary
tool used to send summary messages as well as informational messages to participants. Using two col-
umns in a simple Excel spreadsheet, portal users could construct a list of messages corresponding with
contact numbers to which these messages should be sent. Once this was done, the file was uploaded
on the portal. The portal would then automatically go down the list and blast text messages to the
corresponding participants.
Cataloguing received messages was just as important, if not more so, as managing the process of send-
ing messages. This was especially true since a large number of messages received from participants were
junk messages. Junk messages – those that were incomplete or irrelevant – would have clogged up the
Community Dialogue Platform if they were not filtered.
It was important to sort non-junk messages into different buckets related to different aspects of school
management and educational governance at the local level. This allowed for a large, nebulous dataset to
be turned into smaller fractions of information focused on different topics. Sorting was accomplished by
tagging messages based on the message’s topic of discussion. One of the weaknesses of the portal design
was that tagging had to be undertaken manually. The primary reason for this was because the design could
not undertake tagging in multiple languages, and participants used several languages for texting: English,
Urdu, Roman Urdu and Sindhi. Therefore, tagging required significant manpower and was bound to
induce some errors. However, the magnitude of errors was assumed to be low, since a single message could
be tagged with multiple labels and therefore, each non-junk message was expected to fall into at least one
relevant category. Annex 7 provides further details about the categorization of messages.


Ease of Access to Data for Analysis
The portal was designed to accommodate simple data extraction and recall. The interface provides
highly intuitive categorization of data, making it easy for analysts to query and retrieve information
from the database. This was a critical design feature, since the analysts were assumed to be different
from the data managers. It was essential that the design of the portal allow for data retrieval without an
exhaustive understanding of the data entry and management process.
Figure 15 provides a snapshot of the portal’s main page. Designers placed a strong emphasis on making
it visually effective. The tabs at the top allow for easy navigation through the data. The “Intervention”
tab gives options for filtering and retrieving information that was collected during the intervention.
This tab is primarily used to access text messages that were received from project participants. Such
                                                                                        ANNEXURE          79



messages could be sorted based on village type, individual contact number, community volunteer code,
and their tags. Similarly, the “Meeting” tab – as the name suggests – provides access to information
collected during the first village meeting.
The “Sent SMS” tab provides detailed information on messages sent from the portal to participants
by the project team. Once again, the key feature of the portal is its ability to filter information. Logs
of sent messages could be viewed either by SMS type (single or bulk) or by contact numbers that the
messages were sent to. This feature allows data analysts to hone in on different parts of the sent text
messaging data.
A key feature of summary statistics on portal activity that could be generated by the portal was that
these statistics could be filtered by date, mobile number, SEMIS (Sindh Education Management Infor-
mation System) code (government-assigned identification codes for public schools), GPS coordinates,
district, tehsil, village, settlement ID (project-defined), contact person name, and type of contact person
(village representative or participant). Therefore, analysis of activity on the Community Dialogue Plat-
form can be disaggregated using such filters. This disaggregation allows analysts to examine heterogene-
ity in activity on the portal. For example, the project team might seek to analyze activity during specific
periods for a particular district, and for a specific group of stakeholders, such as village participants. The
disaggregation of data on the portal allows the team to do this, saving significant amounts of time. One
of the most important outcomes of real-time analyses was that the project team could retain situational
awareness of the project, and understand which areas had a higher fraction of active, versus passive,
users. Active users were defined as participants who sent non-junk messages to the portal, while passive
users did not directly engage with the portal, but who were likely to inform the opinion of active users.
80    ANNEXURE



Notes
The following snapshots illustrate different aspects of the Community Dialogue Platform:


                         Figure 15: Main Page of the Community Dialogue Platform




                Figure 16: Uploading Attendance Contacts on the Community Dialogue Platform




                Figure 17: Example of Sample Worksheets on the Community Dialogue Platform
                                                                                          ANNEXURE            81



Annex 3: Content of Informational Messages and Interactive Voice
Response Calls
External nudges that aimed to catalyze activity on the Community Dialogue Platform and to prevent drift in
community-level discussions were meticulously crafted to be highly effective in the context of rural Sindh. An-
nex 3 deals with two such nudges – Informational SMS messages and Interactive Voice Response calls – and
sheds light on their content. The first two sub-annexes provide English translations of informational messages
that were sent in Urdu across two rounds. The last two sub-annexes provide information on Interactive Voice
Response calls, including their purpose and the translation of their content.


Annex 3a: Informational SMS Messages – Round 1 (Translated)
The table below provides details on specific informational text messages sent to community members
during Round 1, categorized by themes and sorted chronologically.
                           Table 12: Translation of Informational Messages - Round 1

  Day       Thematic Area                              Informational SMS Message
                                 The Government of Sindh welcomes you to the SMS project. Teachers,
                                 School Management Committee members and parents will be connected via
    1     Welcome Message
                                 this project, in which all of us, together, will be able to provide your child
                                 with a better education.
                                 You will be provided free of charge information regarding the school through
          Information on         the SMS project. You can text your opinion about the given information to
    2
          Process                0315-3002182. A summary of all messages received from the village shall be
                                 sent back to you.
                                 Every year the School Management Committee of each primary school
                                 receives PKR 22,000, which goes into the Committee’s account. This
                                 account can be used with the signatures of the headmaster or the chairperson.
    3     SMC Funds
                                 A School Management Committee’s budget can be spent on three things:
                                 1) facilities and maintenance of the school; 2) wages for workers to clean the
                                 school; and 3) transportation of students to and from school
                                 Every year, the Government of Sindh provides all books free of charge to
    4     School Inputs
                                 each student in primary school. These do not include notebooks.
                                 Each School Management Committee has two components: the General
                                 Body and Executive Body. The General Body includes teachers and parents
                                 of all the schoolchildren enrolled in the respective school.
                                 The Executive Body consists of five members: the headmaster, who is the
                                 general secretary; two representatives from among the parents, one of who is
    5     Structure              the chairperson; and two respected members of the village.

                                 The responsibility of managing the School Management Committee’s
                                 administrative processes lies with the head teacher and chairperson. Since
                                 the chairperson is from among you, you have a huge role to play in the
                                 workings of the Committee.
82       ANNEXURE



                             Elections for the Executive Body in a proper manner are necessary for the
                             success of the School Management Committee. Members are elected every
     6
                             two years. Elections are held during a meeting of the General Body. The
                             headmaster is responsible for conducting these elections.
                             A general announcement regarding the elections should be made at least 10
                             days before the elections. Four members of the Executive Body, excluding
     7                       the headmaster, are elected. People who want to become members of the
           Elections         Executive Body come forward on Election Day. Elections for these seats are
                             held one by one.
                             The Government of Sindh would like to inform you that there are two ways
                             to vote in School Management Committee elections: by ballot or by a show
                             of hands. All members of the General Body will vote for their preferred can-
     8
                             didate. The candidate with the most votes for a seat will be elected to that
                             seat. No member can be a close relative of another member. Keep in mind
                             that in a girls school, at least three of the members should be female.
                             The Government of Sindh would like to inform you that the biggest respon-
                             sibility of the School Management Committee is the smooth running and
                             betterment of the school.
 10        Action Planning   If there is a dearth of anything at the school, then it should be addressed
                             through the following ways: take part in School Management Committee
                             meetings; visit schools; and stay in regular contact with the members of the
                             Executive Body.
                             The General Body must meet at least twice a year. A general announcement
                             for these meetings should be made at least three days prior to the meeting.
                             The day and timing of the meeting shall be posted outside the school as
                             well as communicated to children. At least one-third of the parents must be
                             present at the meeting. It is the responsibility of the headmaster to maintain
                             minutes of the meeting.
 11
                             Each parent, especially mothers, should actively participate in the General
                             Body meetings. How the money allocated to the School Management Com-
                             mittee is to be utilized should be decided in the meeting. Voice your opinion
                             on the Executive Body’s plans regarding the betterment of the school and
                             approve them. If a certain expenditure is causing differing opinions, then the
           General Body      one agreed upon by the majority shall be accepted.
           Meeting
                             Teachers’ attendance, teaching techniques and students’ academic perfor-
                             mances should be discussed in the General Body meeting and decisions
                             about them executed. If there is a complaint about a teacher or a student
                             is lacking in his or her studies, discuss the issue at the meeting or at school
                             with the teacher. If this is not enough, then talk to the head teacher or officer
 12                          superior to the head teacher.
                             The Executive Body makes a list of the village’s children who are not
                             enrolled in school. Discuss ways in which all such children can be enrolled
                             in school. It is essential for such decisions that you give your opinion and
                             a unanimous decision is reached. If a certain decision is causing differing
                             opinions, then the one agreed upon by the majority shall be accepted.
                                                                                         ANNEXURE              83



                                The Government of Sindh would like to inform you that you should visit
                                schools and check the following: Do the teachers arrive at school punctually
                                and teach properly? Do the students know how to read and write according
         School Visit           to their grade level? Are the school facilities usable or not? Are approved
                                plans for improving the school being implemented properly? If you feel
                                anything is lacking, then discuss it in the General Body meeting or contact
   13                           the Executive Body.
                                The betterment of the school will happen through the Executive Body
                                because it comprises members from among you. You should talk to these
                                members without hesitation and give them your opinions and improve the
         Contact with           school together. Check if the Executive Body meets on a monthly basis and
         Executive Body         carries out its work properly.
                                You have been provided names and mobile numbers of all committee
   14                           members. If you cannot meet them, then talk to them on the phone. Stay in
                                regular contact with these members.




Annex 3b: Informational SMS Messages – Round 2 (Translated)
The informational text messages sent out in this round are categorized and presented in the table below:
                          Table 13: Translation of Informational Messages - Round 2

  Thematic Area                                  Informational SMS Message
                          •	 The SMS project is a method for improving the school. Love of children, a call
                             to knowledge.
                          •	 Make the Executive Body, head teacher and teachers hear your views.
                          •	 These steps can lead to an improvement in the school:
                               •	 Exchange views via the SMS project.
                               •	 Get involved in discussions with the Executive Body and teachers.

 SMS Portal – School           •	 Take part in the planning of improvements in the School Improvement
 Improvement                      Plan or school.
                               •	 Make sure that the expenditure of the School Management Committee’s
                                  budget is according to approved School Improvement Plan.
                          •	 A summary of the villagers’ opinion is sent on a weekly basis to the villagers.
                             The summary does not include anyone’s name and your anonymity is guaran-
                             teed.
                          •	 You should send your opinions and recommendations via text message to the
                             villagers.
84 ANNEXURE



                          •	 Each primary school has its own School Management Committee.
                          •	 Primary school’s School Management Committee receives annual funding of
                             PKR 22,000.
                          •	 SMC’s Executive Body has five members. Four members are selected via elections.
                             The Executive Body has a monthly meeting.
                          •	 SMC’s General Body consists of all the parents. General Body meetings are held
School Management            at least twice a year.
Committee                 •	 School Improvement Plan consists of the details of the expenses incurred by the
Information                  School Management Committee.
                          •	 Villagers should include all such expenses in the School Improvement Plan that
                             they consider important for the school via discussions through the SMS project.
                          •	 The School Management Committee’s elections and approval of School
                             Improvement Plan are decided by a vote among the General Body.
                          •	 Name and phone numbers of members of the Executive Body are provided in
                             the brochure given to you during the meeting. If you cannot find the names,
                             then ask the head teacher.

                          •	 Express your desire to participate in the SMS project by messaging 0315-
                             3002182.
                          •	 To send messages via the portal, you received mobile credit worth PKR 30 after
                             the meeting. Use this credit and express your opinion via text message. You will
 SMS Portal -                receive credit in the upcoming months as well.
 Functioning              •	 If you do not know how to read or write text messages, then meet with your
                             village representatives [representatives’ names]. These are their contact numbers:
                             [representatives’ contact information]. If these representatives do not help you,
                             let us know.




Annex 3c: Interactive Voice Response Calls – Round 1 (Translated)
The table below provides information on the purpose, content and options provided in these
Interactive Voice Response calls:
                      Table 14: Translation of Interactive Voice Response Calls - Round 1

Call
                  Purpose                                    Content                          Options
  #
Audience: Community Participants
        This was an introductory message,     The Government of Sindh wel-            1. For “Yes,” press 1.
        checking on the status of households’ comes you to the SMS project. A
        attendance at the village meeting.    few days ago, a meeting was held        2. For “No,” press 2.
1                                             in your village for the initiation
                                                                                      3. For “I don’t know,”
                                              of the SMS project. Did anyone
                                                                                      press 3.
                                              from your household attend the
                                              meeting?
                                                                                        ANNEXURE             85



    The purpose of this voice message          Through the SMS project,           1. For “Sindhi,” press 1.
    was to acquire participants’ prefer-       important information about the
    ences for the language used in the         school will be sent to you in the  2. For “Urdu,” press 2.
    text messages sent to their mobile         form of a text message. These text
2   phones. Participants received text         messages can be sent in Urdu or
    messages in the preferred languages        Sindhi, depending on your pref-
    after this Interactive Voice Response      erence. Which language do you
    call.                                      want to read the text message in?
    The third Interactive Voice Response       The SMS project has been initiat- 1. For “Yes,” press 1.
    follow-up call aimed to gather             ed to bring improvements to the
    information on the participation of        school. Your participation in this 2. For “No,” press 2.
    registered villagers in the project, and   project is very important. Have
    to understand the reasons for them         you sent any text message(s) to
    staying away from project activities.      the project?
                                               If “No,”, then why did you not      1. For “lack of credit
                                               participate in the project?         balance,” press 1.

3                                                                                  2. For “I don’t know how
                                                                                   to text,” press 2.
                                                                                   3. For “I don’t want to
                                                                                   participate in the project,”
                                                                                   press 3.
                                               If “I don’t know how to text,” did 1. For “Yes,” press 1.
                                               the village representatives help
                                               you in sending a text message?     2. For “No,” press 2.


    The last Interactive Voice Response        Informational messages about the    1. For “Yes,” press 1.
    call of the first round sought to          School Management Committee
    gather information on whether              have been sent to you over the      2. For “No,” press 2.
    intra-community engagement was             last few weeks. Based on these
    being generated by the Community           text messages, did you have a
    Dialogue Platform project and spe-         conversation with anyone?
    cifically, between which stakeholders.     If “Yes,” with whom did you have 1. For “Members of the
4                                              this conversation?               Executive Committee,”
                                                                                press 1.
                                                                                   2. For “Teacher or head
                                                                                   teacher,” press 2.
                                                                                   3. For “Other parents,
                                                                                   friends and relatives,”
                                                                                   press 3.
86   ANNEXURE



Annex 3d: Interactive Voice Response Calls – Round 2 (Translated)
The table below provides information on the purpose, content and options provided in these Interac-
tive Voice Response calls:
                        Table 15: Translation of Interactive Voice Response Calls - Round 2

 Call #             Purpose                                      Content                            Options
 Audience: Community Participants
          The first Interactive Voice Response       Hello. This call is being made by     1. For “Improvements
          call of the second round asked             the Government of Sindh. What         in the school’s facilities,”
          participants about changes brought         is the biggest change that has been   press 1.
          about by the Community Dialogue            brought about in your village
          Platform intervention.                     because of the SMS project?           2. For “Lower teacher
                                                                                           absenteeism,” press 2.
 1
                                                                                           3. For “More interaction
                                                                                           among community
                                                                                           members,” press 3.
                                                                                           4. For “No improvement,”
                                                                                           press 4.

          The purpose of this call was to            Hello. This call is being made by     1. For “Lack of credit
          understand the reasons for                 the Government of Sindh. What         balance,” press 1.
          potential non-participation of             is the biggest problem for you in
          registered participants in the             terms of participating in the SMS     2. For “I don’t know how
          Community Dialogue Platform                project?                              to read and write text
          intervention.                                                                    messages,” press 2.
 2
                                                                                           3. For “I don’t understand
                                                                                           the summary messages,”
                                                                                           press 3.
                                                                                           4. For “I haven’t faced a
                                                                                           problem,” press 4.
          This important call was made to            Hello. This call is being made        1. For “Very useful,”
          understand the effectiveness of            by the Government of Sindh. In        press 1.
          summary text messages that were            your opinion, how helpful are the
          blasted to the local community.            summary text messages that are        2. For “Useful to a
 3                                                   sent by the SMS project?              certain extent,” press 2.
                                                                                           3. For “Not useful at all,”
                                                                                           press 3.

          The last call, similar to the first one,   Hello. This call is being made by     1. For “Improvements
          asked participants about changes           the Government of Sindh. What         in the school’s facilities,”
          brought about by the Community             is the biggest change that has been   press 1.
          Dialogue Platform intervention.            brought about in your village be-
                                                     cause of the SMS project?             2. For “Lower teacher
                                                                                           absenteeism,” press 2.
 4
                                                                                           3. For “More interac-
                                                                                           tion among community
                                                                                           members,” press 3.
                                                                                           4. For “No improvement,”
                                                                                           press 4.
                                                                                        ANNEXURE   87




Audience: Village Representatives
          The first Interactive Voice Response   Respected representative, this call
          call made to village representatives   is being made by the Government
          provided procedural information to     of Sindh. It is your responsibility
          the representatives on how to          to strengthen the SMS project.
          undertake their responsibilities       Help villagers in composing and
          under the Community Dialogue           sending text messages about
          Platform intervention.                 the school, and win free credit
1                                                balance as a prize. Keep in mind
                                                 that:
                                                 1. The text message should only
                                                 be sent from villagers’ mobile
                                                 phone numbers.
                                                 2. The text message should in-
                                                 clude your code.
          The second Interactive Voice           Respected representative, this call
          Response call made to village          is being made by the Government
          representatives provided them          of Sindh. From May 1, it will
          with information on the incentive      be even easier to win free credit
          structure that they faced, in terms    balance as a prize. After May 1,
          of free credit balance.                you will receive free credit balance
                                                 based on the following:
2                                                1. PKR 50 for getting 10-20 text
                                                 messages sent.
                                                 2. PKR 100 for getting 20-50 text
                                                 messages sent.
                                                 3. PKR 200 for getting 50 or
                                                 more text messages sent.
                                                                based on the following:
                                                                1. PKR 50 for getting 10-20 SMS
                                                                messages sent
                                                                2. PKR 100 for getting 20-50
        88      ANNEXURE                                        SMS messages sent
                                                                3. PKR 200 for getting 50 or
                                                                more SMS messages sent


        Annex 4a: Workflow Diagram – Intervention 1
ANNEX 4A: WORKFLOW
   (School            DIAGRAM – INTERVENTION 1
           Management Committee)
This annex   focuses
       This annex      speci
                    focuses     cally on
                            specifically    the SMC
                                         onthe       intervention
                                                School Managementand illustrates
                                                                  Committee       each step
                                                                             intervention and taken    in its
                                                                                               illustrates    rollout
                                                                                                           each step with
key details.
       taken in its rollout with key details.


                                                                    SOCIAL                       Field teams utilized posters, a musical
                At least one member from each
             household mobilized by eld teams                     MOBILIZATION                   jingle and public announcements via
                                                                   CAMPAIGN                      megaphones and mosques




          Attendance rates > 40% for majority of                    VILLAGE                      Meeting facilitated by two team
           meetings. Very low rates were used as
                                                                    MEETING                      members who received prior classroom
         indicator to remobilize community and                                                   training and utilized prepared script
                             reorganize meeting                    ORGANIZED




                                                           SMC ELECTIONS FACILITATED



          First audio tape/CD played, detailing                                                  Second audio tape/CD played,
           purpose, structure, membership and                      CAPACITY-                     recommending actions for improving
         funding of SMCs, and recapped using                      BUILDING OF                    education outcomes and recapped
                                      ip charts                   PARTICIPANTS                   using ip charts




         A discussion was facilitated between
          community members, based on the                          FACILITATED
         model introduced in audio tapes/CDs                       DISCUSSION
                                and ip charts


                                                                                                 Training included recap of SMC
            Three hands-on trainings provided                                                    functions; developing, nalizing and
         over a period of three weeks to elected               CAPACITY-BUILDING OF              ratifying SIP; and withdrawing funds,
         members and head teacher who is the                    ELECTED MEMBERS                  bookkeeping and tracking progress of
                                co-chair of SMC                                                  SIP activities



                                               Core Activity       Cross-cutting Activity   Description




  Annexure                                                                                                                                 75
                                                                                                                        ANNEXURE                    89



Annex 4b: Workflow Diagram – Intervention 2
(Community Dialogue Platform)
ANNEX 4B: WORKFLOW DIAGRAM – INTERVENTION 2 (CDP)
This annex focuses specifically on the Community Dialogue Platform and illustrates each step taken in its
This annex focuses speci cally on the CDP and illustrates each step taken in its design, testing and
design, testing
rollout with keyand rollout, including key details.
                 details.


                                                                     DEVELOPMENT
                 Building on past experiences                                                         Multilingual, economical, easy-to-use
                                                                     OF SMS PORTAL




      Systems pilot-tested in sample villages                        FIELD TESTING
      and feedback used to re ne nal portal                            OF PORTAL




                                                                      ROLLOUT IN                      Villagers mobilized through posters
                                                                      TREATMENT                       and announcements via megaphones
                                                                       VILLAGES                       and mosques




          Attendance of participants used to                           VILLAGE                        Audio tape/CD played, detailing the
           build database of participants via                          MEETING                        uses of the portal and recapped with
                         GPRS submissions                             ORGANIZED                       the help of ipcharts




                                                              SMC ELECTIONS FACILITATED




          Participants respond to an MCQ by                                                           Interest in portal built on 3 pillars:
             SMS summary text of responses                           DEMONSTRATION                    anonymity; awareness of community’s
          blasted in real-time to participants.                        OF PORTAL                      viewpoints; cheap, easy to use tech




      Two facilitators selected to assist those                      SELECTION OF                     Interest in portal built on 3 pillars:
      participants in using the portal who are                        COMMUNITY                       anonymity; awareness of community’s
                            not mobile literate                       VOLUNTEERS                      viewpoints; cheap, easy to use tech




                                                                                                      Disincentives to using portal because
                    Registration on the Portal                       REGISTRATION                     of cost removed through provision of
                                                                                                      free credit to participants




                                                                      COMMUNITY
                                                                       DIALOGUE
                                                                       PLATFORM
                                                                      ESTABLISHED


                                                                                                      Training included recap of SMC
         Three hands-on trainings provided
                                                                                                      functions; developing, nalizing and
      over a period of three weeks to elected                     CAPACITY-BUILDING OF
                                                                                                      ratifying SIP; and withdrawing funds,
      members and head teacher who is the                          ELECTED MEMBERS                    bookkeeping and tracking progress of
                             co-chair of SMC
                                                                                                      SIP activities

                                                  Core Activity       Cross-cutting Activity   Description



  Annexure                                                                                                                                     76
90     ANNEXURE


 ANNEX 5: TIMELINE OF THE INTERVENTION
Annex 5: Timeline of the Intervention
  Design of the intervention began in April of 2011, with signi cant amounts of time taken to develop and
        of thethe
    ne tune
Design            design ofbegan
               intervention  the project
                                   in April and  to bring
                                             2011,        together multiple
                                                    with significant  amounts ofstakeholders
                                                                                   time taken tosuch   as partner
                                                                                                  develop  and fine-tune
  organizations. While training of facilitators and pilot activities went through multiple iterations, the nal
the design of the project and to bring together multiple stakeholders, such as partner organizations. While train-
  round of piloting, eld testing and trainings occurred in January 2013. The project was rolled out in
ing of facilitators
  February    2013 and
                    andpilot          tillwent
                              activities
                         continued             through
                                          the end       multiple
                                                   of June  2013. iterations, the final
                                                                   The following        round
                                                                                    Gantt  chartof provides
                                                                                                   piloting, field-testing
                                                                                                              an overview of
and  trainings
  these         occurred
         key project     in January 2013. The project was rolled out in February 2013 and continued until the
                       activities.
end of June 2013. The following Gantt chart  Tableprovides an overview
                                                    16: Timeline          of these key project activities.
                                                                    of Intervention
                                 2011-12   Table 16: Timeline of Intervention       2013


                                 April -     Jan      Feb      Mar       Apr      May       Jun      July      Aug
                ACTIVITIES        Dec


              Coding of
            Community
     Development Portal
                 (CDP)

     Pilot testing of CDP
                    portal

         Development of
            Community

  Engagement Material
       Training of eld
            facilitators

     Social Mobilization

         Village Meeting

       Demonstration of
                   CDP

      Revisits to Villages

      Informational SMS
       messages round 1

         IVR calls round 1

          Summary SMS
             messages

      Informational SMS
       messages round 2

        IVR calls round 2

             Wrap up and
     analytics generation
                from CDP



     Annexure                                                                                                            77
                                                                                        ANNEXURE          91



Annex 6: Material from Executive Body Meetings
The project aimed to strengthen the institution of the School Management Committee by providing its lead-
ers – the Executive Body members – with capacity-building support. This support focused specifically on
strengthening process knowledge on how to manage the Executive Body. Lack of such knowledge was seen as
the missing link in the smooth functioning of the School Management Committee, following -community
mobilization. This annex provides snapshots of the materials that were used for this capacity-building support
during the three Executive Body meetings and procedural instruments that Executive Body members were
expected to use on a routine basis when managing the affairs of the School Management Committee.

                             Figure 18: Extract from Executive Body Meeting Script
92   ANNEXURE



     Figure 19: Sample Tender Notice, Quotation Comparison Form, Purchase Order and Payment Voucher




       Figure 20: Sample Cash Book                   Figure 21: Sample Stock Register for Executive Body Participants
                                                                                           ANNEXURE            93



Annex 7: Sorting Algorithm
The Community Dialogue Platform was regularly receiving large amounts of data in the form of text mes-
sages sent to the portal by village-level participants. It was crucial that the project team was aware of what
this data meant: What were issues of common interest at the local level? How were participants reacting to
the portal? What was the percentage of junk to non-junk messages being received by the portal? To streamline
the process of analyzing these messages, they were diverted into different data buckets, based on their content.
This annex explains the algorithm that was used to sort the data.
Messages received on the portal were tagged manually. This had to be done because of the multiple
languages being used on the portal. Tagging allowed for real-time and future analysis of the data that
was being generated in the form of accumulating text messages received from village participants. For
example, analysts could identify what villagers felt were the key issues in the education sector simply
by looking at the number of times a keyword – such as “School Management Committee” – appeared.
The Community Dialogue Platform had the capability to tag a single message with multiple tags.
However, multiple messages could not be tagged in one go. If multiple messages could be tagged simul-
taneously, then the process of tagging messages would have taken less time; this is something that could
be improved in the design of similar portals in the future.
As discussed in Section 8, specific keywords were used to tag all incoming messages. The list of these
keywords with their descriptions follows below:

                                          Table 17: Sorting Categories

 Sr. #        Keyword                                           Description
 1        Junk                 Incomplete or irrelevant messages.
 2        Teacher              There was an issue with the teachers in the school, including teacher absentee-
                               ism and teacher quality.
 3        Infrastructure       The structural integrity of the school was in question, or the amenities provid-
                               ed within the structure were insufficient.
 4        Facilities           Messages that mentioned facilities, such as bathrooms and drinking water, or
                               provision of desks and chairs.
 5        Learning             Issues such as poor quality of classroom instruments or instruction or the like,
                               which affected students’ learning at schools.
 6        SMC Fund             Queries or suggestions about the annual fund provided to School Management
                               Committees.
 7        Textbooks            Complaints or suggestions related to the books used at school. Issues included
                               a lack of books, incomplete or torn texts, or no books at all.
 8        School Management Suggestions and queries about School Management Committees in local
          Committee         schools.
 9        Thanks               Messages containing notes of appreciation for the project or for community
                               champions.
 10       Education            Used for messages which covered broad suggestions or queries regarding the
          Department           state of education at schools, such as whether a school was good or poor, or if
                               more attention should be given to education by the government.
 11       Parent               Messages pertaining to the role of parents in education within the local com-
                               munity.
 12       Flood                Mention of floods as a reason for poor educational performance in schools and
                               suggestions about how the impact of floods could be mitigated.
94    ANNEXURE



 13                          Questions and suggestions about the functioning of the Executive Body of the
         Executive Body
                             School Management Committee.
 14                          Queries or suggestions which directly mentioned the SMS campaign being
         SMS Campaign
                             rolled out by the World Bank.
 15      Stipend             Discussion about the stipend being provided at the school level.
 16      School
         Improvement Plan Conversations around School Improvement Plans.
 17                          Questions about the budgeting practices at the school, both in terms of School
         Budget
                             Management Committees and overall budgetary allocations from the government
 18      Miscellaneous       All other items of discussion



If it was not clear whether a message belonged to any of the first 17 categories, then it was tagged as
“Miscellaneous.” While most categories are self-explanatory, it is important to describe the types of
messages that were marked as junk. The portal identified messages at times as Junk, Junk2 and Junk3,
based on categories formed by the team for internal use after the number of junk messages shot up.
However, there is no differentiation between the three categories and all three primarily deal with sim-
ilar junk messages.
A significant number of messages that were received on the portal were blank messages. Since these
did not add any value to the discussion on the portal, they were tagged as junk. Certain messages were
incomplete, meaning that they might have provided identifiers of individuals, schools or communities
in the form of village codes and SEMIS codes and were being received from registered participants, but
that they were either incomplete or contained irrelevant information. An example of an incomplete
message would be: “JDM our school has”. An extreme example of an irrelevant message would be: “The
economy of Punjab province is performing better this year”. A subcategory of irrelevant messages was
one in which the sender appeared to be attempting to have a casual conversation on the portal, or was
forwarding content that was not relevant to the project. Such messages sent during the project cycle
included poetry, local and national news and comments about local politics.
For incomplete messages, a caveat is in order. At times, a message was too long and was, thus, broken
into two messages, causing the first to be incomplete and the second to be nonsensical. However, if the
two were put together, one complete, relevant message could be formed. Messages were split if they
were more than 160 characters long if sent in English, or more than 68 characters long if sent in Urdu
or Sindhi. M3 Technologies, the primary IT partner on the project, merged all messages that appeared
to be split if they were received within a very short duration (one or two minutes). Most of the merging
was undertaken manually.
                                                                                           ANNEXURE           95



Annex 8: Project Cost Estimates
Cost-effectiveness analysis of the project provides additional understanding of the project’s impact. This section
lays the foundations for such an analysis, by highlighting the assumptions made in distributing costs across
different project components, and specifying the magnitude of these costs.



Assumptions for Cost Distribution:
1.	 School Management Committee villages totaled 119 in number (12,258 participants). SMS villag-
    es totaled 111 in number (13,384 participants).
2.	 Two-thirds of the cost of “Development of Audiotapes” was attributed to Intervention 1 (School
    Management Committee) and one-third of the cost was attributed to Intervention 2 (SMS).
3.	 For “Executive Body Meetings,” the cost was averaged over multiple schools in each village.
4.	 For “Honorarium for Assistant District Officer,” the total cost was divided across the four months
    when honorariums were given: February to May 2013. Monthly exchange rates were used.
5.	 For “Half-day Workshop for District Officials,” the exchange rate for the month of January 2013
    was used.
6.	 For “Consultants’ Fees for Portal Management,” “SMS Charges”, “Credit Transfer to Participants”,
    “Credit Transfers to Community Volunteers” and “Interactive Voice Response Calls”, monthly
    PKR-to-USD exchange rates were used.
7.	 For all “Monitoring Costs,” average PKR-to-USD exchange rate was used for the year 2013 (dura-
    tion of contract for Social Policy Development Centre).
8.	 For “Staff Time” in Total Fixed Development Cost and “Additional Staff Time” in Total Variable
    Cost, average PKR-to-USD exchange rate was used for the year 2012 in the case of design costs,
    and for the year 2013 in the case of implementation costs. All costs for “Staff Time were split equal-
    ly across the three interventions. All costs for “Additional Staff Time” were split equally across the
    three interventions, with the exception of additional monitoring costs for the portal. These were
    built into the cost estimate provided for Country Office implementation costs for Intervention 2.
9.	 “Opportunity Cost for Participants” was calculated as: (Daily Wage / 2) x Number of Participants.
    For Intervention 1, villagers were advised to conduct a second, non-facilitated meeting after the
    first General Body meeting had been conducted by the project team. The assumption was made
    that in all Intervention 1 villages, the second, non-facilitated meeting was conducted with the
    same participation rate as the first. Therefore, for Intervention 1, the overall opportunity cost was
    multiplied by two.
10.	 The daily wage was approximated to be PKR 333, as per the Household Integrated Economic
     Survey (HIES) 2010-11. Conversion to USD was done using average PKR-to-USD exchange rates
     for 2012 and 2013.
11.	 he source for PKR-to-USD exchange rate was “Monthly Statistical Bulletin, Annual Report of SBP
     and International Financial Statistics (IFS).”
12.	 All costs are given in USD.
96     ANNEXURE



                                               Table 18: Project Costs

                                  Contracting                                                         Capacity
          Cost Item                Partner                 SMC                        SMS             Support
                                                 Unit Cost         Total    Unit Cost       Total    Unit   Total
                                                 (Village)         Cost     (Village)       Cost     Cost   Cost
Fixed Development Cost                                                                                         
    Development of                                                                                             
    Audiotapes                       JWT                            691                      346

    Printing of Pamphlets/          Weitek                                                                     
                                                      13           1,500        13          1,500
    Posters                         Group
    Staff Time
      Staff/Consultants (HQ)      World Bank                       22,088                   22,088          22,088
      Staff/Consultants
                                                                   2,803                    2,803           2,803
      (Country Office)
Total Fixed Development Cost                                       27,083                   26,737          24,891
Variable Cost                                                                                                  
    Implementation                                                                                             
      General Body Meetings                          174           20,000       174         20,000             
                                    Weitek
      Executive Body                                                                                           
                                    Group             87           10,348       87          9,652
      Meetings
      Honorarium for ADOs                                                                            29     3,320
      Half-day workshop for         Reform                                                                     
      District Officials          Support Unit
        Logistics                                                                                            205
        Refreshments                                                                                         308
    Operational Costs of Portal                                                                                
                                                                       ANNEXURE       97



       Consultants’ Fees for                                                       
                                                                  9,286
       Portal Management
       SMS Charges                                               10,593            
       Credit Transfer to                                                          
                                   M3Tech                         1,398
       Participants
       Credit Transfers to                                                         
                                                                   86
       Community Volunteers
       Interactive Voice                                                           
                                                                  1,202
       Response Calls
  Monitoring Cost                                                                  
    Staff Fee                                                                      
       Nadeem Ahmed                                 2,457         2,457            
       Manzoor H. Memon                             1,422         1,422            
                                    SPDC
    Reimbursable Expenses                                                          
       Hotel, subsistence                           1,970         1,970            
       Local transportation                         2,463         2,463            
       Intercity transportation                     985           985              
  Additional Staff Time                                                            
       Staff/Consultants (HQ)     World Bank       14,911        14,911        14,911
       Staff/Consultants
                                                    5,550        12,347        5,550
       (Country Office)
  Opportunity Cost for                 
                                                   51,235        22,564            
  Participants
Total Variable Cost                                101,976       111,632       24,294
Total Project Cost                                 129,058       138,368       49,185
98    ANNEXURE



Annex 9: Data on Interactive Voice Response Calls
Annex 3 provided details on the content of Interactive Voice Response calls. Chapters 7 and 8 provided the
rationale for these external nudges and descriptive statistics on responses to these calls. Annex 9 brings these
three parts of the report together to illustrate call responses in the form of tree diagrams.



Interactive Voice Response Calls in Round 1:
During the first round, four calls were made to village participants.
The first call aimed to reach 4,427 participants, with 1,249 successfully responding to a question
about meeting participation. Most participants had attended the first village meeting.

                            Figure 22: Responses to Message 1 (IVR Calls - Round 1)


                                                 Message 1

                                               Total Number of
                                                  Calls 4427


                       Response - No            Response - Valid       Response - Answer
                           1896                     1249                     1282


                                    Yes               No           Don’t Know
                                    801               171             277


The second call sought to reach 4,427 participants, with 1,370 successfully responding to a question
about preferred language for text messages. Most participants preferred Sindhi as the language used for
informational and summary text messages sent to them.

                  Figure 23: Responses to Message 2 (Interactive Voice Response Calls - Round 1)


                                                 Message 2

                                               Total Number of
                                                  Calls 4427


                       Response - No           Response - Valid        Response - Answer
                           1503                    1370                      1554


                                   Sindhi                              Urdu
                                    977                                393
                                                                                           ANNEXURE   99



The third call reached out to 4,427 participants, with 1,255 successfully responding to a question about
participants’ engagement in the Community Dialogue Platform. More than half of the participants
had sent text messages to the portal. Of those who had not, a majority said it was because of a lack of
credit balance. A significant portion was inactive on the portal because of mobile illiteracy. Of these, a
majority found the village representatives helpful.


                 Figure 24: Responses to Message 3 (Interactive Voice Response Calls - Round 1)


                                                Message 3

                                              Total Number of
                                                 Calls 4427



                      Response - No            Response - Valid       Response - Answer
                          1724                 (Participation)               77
                                                    1255



                                    Yes                                No
                                    737                                518




                                                Message 3

                                           If No - Reason for not
                                              participating 518


                                               Response - Valid       Response - Answer
                      Response - No                 464                      54


                                                  Doesn’t          Doesn’t
                                No Credit        know how          want to
                                 Balance           to use         participate
                                  243             Mobile              50
                                                    171
100    ANNEXURE



              Figure 25: Yes/No Responses to Message 3 (Interactive Voice Response Calls - Round 1)



                                                 Message 3

                                                Doesn’t know
                                              how to use Mobile
                                                     171


                                               Response - Valid        Response - Answer
                      Response - No                 94                        77


                                                                   Facilitators
                               Facilitators                         were not
                               were helpful                          helpful
                                    39                                  55




The fourth and final call sought to reach 4,427 participants, with 1,124 successfully responding to a
question about villagers’ interaction at the community level due to the Community Dialogue Platform
project. Most participants had attended the first village meeting. A majority of respondents indicated
they had had a conversation about the project with someone else in the village. Of these, a large per-
centage had interacted with Executive Body members of the School Management Committee.


                 Figure 26: Responses to Message 4 (Interactive Voice Response Calls - Round 1)



                                                 Message 4

                                           Total Number of Calls
                                                   4427


                                               Response - Valid       Response - Answer
                       Response - No                1124                    1488


                                Regulatory        Teachers           Family
                                  Body              709               474
                                   491
                                                                                          ANNEXURE    101



Interactive Voice Response Calls in Round 2:
During the second round, four calls went out to village participants and two calls to
village representatives.


Participants
The first call sought to reach 4,427 participants, with 876 successfully responding to the question
about changes brought about by the Community Development Platform project. Most participants
believed that school facilities had undergone the biggest changes, followed by teacher absenteeism and
village-level coordination in the education sector.
                 Figure 27: Responses to Message 1 (Interactive Voice Response Calls - Round 2)


                                                Message 1

                                           Total Number of Calls
                                                   4427


                      Response - No            Response - Valid       Response - Answer
                          1789                      876                     1762



                       School          Teachers          Village                No
                      Facilities       Absence         Coordination        Improvement
                        389              197               91                  199




The second call sought to reach 4,427 participants, with 996 successfully responding to a question
about problems faced by participants during engagement with the portal. A large majority of respon-
dents found it difficult to participate due to a lack of credit balance. However, a significant number also
said they faced no problems during participation in the project.
102   ANNEXURE



                Figure 28: Responses to Message 2 (Interactive Voice Response Calls - Round 2)



                                               Message 2

                                            Total Number of Calls
                                                    4427


                     Response - No             Response - Valid      Response - Answer
                         1871                       996                   1560



                                        Unable to        Message          Don’t have
                      Low Credit       read/write        Summary            issues
                         612              msg              85                 198
                                          101



 The third call sought to reach 4,427 participants, with 932 participants successfully responding to
 a question about the utility of summary text messages sent to them. Most participants found these
                                     messages to be beneficial.


                Figure 29: Responses to Message 3 (Interactive Voice Response Calls - Round 2)



                                               Message 3

                                          Total Number of Calls
                                                  4427


                   Response - No              Response - Valid      Response - Answer
                       1625                        932                    1870


                               Beneficial         Partial           Not
                                 499             Beneficial       Beneficial
                                                   204              229
                                                                                          ANNEXURE    103



The fourth call sought to reach 4,427 participants, with 917 successfully responding to a question about
changes brought about by the Community Development Platform project. Most participants had attend-
ed the first village meeting. This was the same question that was posed during the first call of this round
(Round 2). However, this time the responses were less positive. This could indicate a dip in the project’s
activities at the tail-end of the intervention. A majority of respondents thought that the project brought
about improvements in school facilities, reduction in teacher absenteeism and increased village coordina-
tion. The remaining respondents indicated no improvements in the suggested categories.

                 Figure 30: Responses to Message 4 (Interactive Voice Response Calls - Round 2)



                                                  Message 4

                                             Total Number of Calls
                                                     4427


                       Response - No           Response - Valid       Response - Answer
                           1904                     917                    1606



                    No               Increase in          Reduce teacher             Village
               Improvement         school facilities         Absence               Coordination
                   314                   277                   188                     138



Worth noting here is that the success rate of the Interactive Voice Response calls (number of calls
responded to successfully) dropped significantly when we moved from Round 1 to Round 2. This is
illustrated by a drop of 30% and 18% for calls 1 and 4, respectively. This suggests that interest in the
project might have started to lag at the tail-end of the intervention. Future efforts must be cognizant
of this issue, and should aim to sustain the level of interest among participants, including, perhaps, by
making the calls more user-friendly.


Village Representatives
Two calls were made to village representatives. Unlike the calls made to participants, these calls did not
pose questions. Rather, they provided basic information on the responsibilities of, and incentives for,
the representatives.
The first call sought to reach 203 village representatives, with 136 representatives successfully respond-
ing to the call. The second call sought to reach 203 village representatives, of which 140 successfully
responded.
104     ANNEXURE



            Figure 31: Responses to Messages 1 & 2 (IVR Calls - Round 2 – Community Volunteers)



                                                 Message 1

                                                  Total Calls
                                                     203


                         Response - No         Response - Valid        Response - Answer
                              67                    136                      136




                                                 Message 2

                                                  Total Calls
                                                     203


                         Response - No         Response - Valid        Response - Answer
                              63                    140                      140


Table 19 provides a consolidated overview of all relevant statistics related to Interactive Voice Response
                                 calls made during Rounds 1 and 2.

                                 Table 19: Detailed Descriptive IVR Statistics

                                               Avg #                              # of valid       Avg #of
                 # of      # of calls  %      of calls #of valid                  responses          valid
                 calls     answered answered answered/ responses                   for calls      responses/
                                               village                            answered          village
Round 1
Msg 1            4,427         1,282          29%               13        1,249            97%            13
Msg 2            4,427         1,554          35%               16        1,370            88%            14
Msg 3            4,427         1,448          33%               15        1,255            87%            13
Msg 4            4,427         1,448          34%               16        1,124            76%            12
Total Round 1 17,708           5,772         33%                60        4,998         87%               52


Round 2
Msg 1            4,427         7,624          40%               18          876            50%             9
Msg 2            4,427         1,560          35%               16          996            64%            10
Msg 3            4,427         1,870          42%               19          932            50%            10
Msg 4            4,427         1,606          36%               17          917            57%            10
Total Round 2 17,708           6,798         38%                71        3,721         55%               39


Overall         35,116        12,570         3.5%            131          8,719         69%               91
                                                                                           ANNEXURE            105



Annex 10: List of Databases
Over the course of the project, multiple databases were compiled. The biggest was the dataset on
information received on the Community Dialogue Platform, followed by those on attendance, par-
ticipation and registration data, among others. Annex 10 lists each of these databases and provides
brief descriptions on them.
                                        Table 20: Primary Project Data Sources

 Sr. #            Database                        Description and Purpose                          Source
                                       Listed villages that were part of the treatment,
                                                                                              Project design
 1.      Treatment Villages Dataset    with details on district, tehsil, union council,
                                                                                              documents
                                       treatment type and village name.
                                       All attendance sheets were appended and the
         Attendance Sheets Dataset     consolidated data cleaned for analysis on total        General
 2.      (Village Meetings) – Inter-   number of participants, registration rates and the     Body meeting
         vention 1                     like. These attendance sheets were prepared for        attendance sheets
                                       Intervention 1.
                                       All attendance sheets were appended and the
         Attendance Sheets Dataset     consolidated data cleaned for analysis on total        General
 3.      (Village Meetings) – Inter-   number of participants, registration rates and the     Body meeting
         vention 2                     like. These attendance sheets were prepared for        attendance sheets
                                       Intervention 2.
                                       A dataset was prepared containing number of
                                                                                      Executive
         Attendance Sheets Dataset     attendees in each of the three Executive Body
 4.                                                                                   Body meeting
         (Executive Body Meetings)     meetings for every School Management Committee
                                                                                      attendance sheets
                                       in the crossover intervention.
                                     All School Improvement Plans finalized during
                                                                                              School
         Dataset for School Improve- the third Executive Body meeting were digitized
 5.                                                                                           Improvement
         ment Plans                  for analyzing plan cost estimates and key focus
                                                                                              Plans
                                     areas for the School Management Committees.
                                       This dataset was provided by M3 Technologies
                                       and listed credit transfer dates and number of
 6.      Credit Transfer dataset                                                              M3 Technologies
                                       participants per village to whom credit was
                                       transferred.
                                       This raw database was an unfiltered collection of      Community
 7.      Word Bank SMS database
                                       all text messages received on the portal.              Dialogue Platform
                                       This database provided counts of text messages
         Portal Database – Unique                                                             Community
 8.                                    received for 10-day buckets (starting from Day 1
         Messages Received                                                                    Dialogue Platform
                                       to Day 120) for each of Intervention 2 villages.
                                       This dataset provided identifying and contact
         Community Volunteer
 9.                                    information on all community volunteers, as well as M3 Technologies
         Database
                                       data on their activity on the portal as volunteers.
                                       Contacts uploaded by M3 Technologies were pro-
         Uploaded Contact Informa-
 10.                                   vided in this dataset. It aided in triangulating the   M3 Technologies
         tion Database
                                       count for the number of contacts registered.
                                       This dataset listed the number of participants who
         Active and Passive Users
 11.                                   were active on the Community Dialogue              M3 Technologies
         Dataset
                                       Platform, and also listed “active villages.”
                                    This dataset listed schools that were selected to be
                                    part of the treatment in the intervention villages.
         School Level Randomization                                                           Project design
 12.                                It provided details, such as district, tehsil, UC,
         Dataset                                                                              documents
                                    GPS coordinates, address, head teacher contact
                                    information and treatment type.
106   ANNEXURE



                                   This database provided information on the
                                                                                      Project
      Executive Body Schools       schools for which Executive Board meetings were
13.                                                                                   implementation
      Participation Database       held, as well as dates when these meetings were
                                                                                      documents
                                   conducted.
                                   General Body meeting dates for all the treatment   Project
      Meeting Dates and Details
14.                                villages were provided in this dataset.            implementation
      Dataset
                                                                                      documents
                                   This dataset was constructed using Interactive
      Interactive Voice Response   Voice Response data provided by M3Tech fol-
15.                                                                                   M3 Technologies
      Calls Dataset                lowing the two rounds of calls that were made to
                                   participants and community volunteers.
                                   The Keywords dataset aided in analyzing key
                                                                                      Community
16.   SMS Keywords Dataset         areas of concern for participants through the
                                                                                      Dialogue Platform
                                   construction of a word cloud.
                                   Information on funds available in School Manage- Project
17.   Available Funds Dataset      ment Committee bank accounts was taken from      implementation
                                   this dataset.                                    documents
                                   This dataset provided information on the total
                                   number of households in every village. The data
18.   Household Census Dataset                                                        Pre-project census
                                   was used in measuring participation rates across
                                   treatment villages.
