                                                                        99895


       H N P       D i   s   c   u s   s   i   o   n   P a p    e   R




A SNAPSHOT OF HEALTH EQUITY IN PAPUA NEW
GUINEA:

An analysis of the 2010 Household Income and
Expenditure Survey

Wayne Irava, Katie Barker, Aparnaa Somanathan and Xiaohui Hou




June 2015
 A SNAPSHOT OF HEALTH EQUITY IN PAPUA NEW GUINEA:




An analysis of the 2010 Household Income and Expenditure Survey




        Wayne Irava, Katie Barker, Aparnaa Somanathan, and
                            Xiaohui Hou




                            June 2015
             Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice. The papers in this series
aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage discussion and
debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to
members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of
material presented in this series should take into account this provisional character.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor, Martin Lutalo at
mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at Eyanick@worldbank.org.




© 2015 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.




                                                     ii
            Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

                    A Snapshot of Health Equity in Papua New Guinea:
            An analysis of the 2010 Household Income and Expenditure Survey

                     Wayne Iravaa Katie Barkerb Aparnaa Somanathanc Xiaohui Houd

a Centre for Health Information, Policy and Systems Research, Fiji National University, Suva, Fiji.
b Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, World Bank, Washington, DC USA.
c Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, World Bank, Washington, DC USA.
d Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice, World Bank, Washington, DC USA.



Financial support for this work was received from the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade

Abstract: This paper highlights challenges that the government of Papua New Guinea faces in delivering
equitable health care. It analyses findings from the 2010 household survey, including sickness reporting,
health service utilization and out of pocket expenditure — concluding that the poorest quintile is most
vulnerable to illness, yet has the lowest utilization rates of healthcare facilities. The lack of healthcare
workers and the distance to facilities are among the most dominant reasons cited for not utilizing
heathcare facilities in the poorest quintile while out-of-pocket payments have minimal catastrophic impact,
yet have still been found to be a barrier to utilization. The paper also sets out policy implications of these
findings, including the need for the government to focus on, and prioritize, strengthening the health
services delivery to achieve Universal Health Coverage.

Keywords: Papua New Guinea, health equity, health services utilization, out-of-pocket payments.

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in the paper are entirely those of the
authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they
represent.

Correspondence Details: Xiaohui Hou, World Bank, Sydney, Australia, xhou@worldbank.org.




                                                     iii
iv
                                                           Table of Contents

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS .............................................................................................................................. VI

PREFACE ................................................................................................................................................... VII

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY .............................................................................................................................. 9

INTRODUCTION......................................................................................................................................... 11

SICKNESS REPORTING AND HEALTH SERVICES UTILIZATION......................................................... 12

OUT-OF-POCKET HEALTH EXPENDITURE ............................................................................................ 17

SUMMARY .................................................................................................................................................. 21

REFERENCES ............................................................................................................................................ 21




                                                                              v
                                   ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This policy note was prepared by Wayne Irava (Consultant), Katie Barker (Consultant, GHNDR), Aparnaa
Somanathan (Senior Health Economist, GHNDR), and Xiaohui Hou (Senior Health Economist and Task
Team Leader, GHNDR).

Toomas Palu (Practice Manger, Health, Nutrition and Population Global Practice), Venki Sundararaman
(Program Leader), Steffi Stallmeister (Country Manager, Papua New Guinea) and Franz Drees Gross
(Country Director of Timor-Leste, Papua New Guinea and the Pacific Islands) provided the overall
management guidance for this task.

Caryn Brendenkamp (Senior Health Economist, GHNDR), Chandana Kularatne (Senior Economist,
GMFDR) and Alex Stephens (Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, PNG) provided invaluable
comments to the earlier drafts.

The policy note has greatly benefited from discussions with the National Department of Health and the
Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

Financial support for this work was received from the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.

The authors are grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP Discussion Paper.




                                                   vi
                                              PREFACE


The health equity analyses in this report seek to provide evidence about the utilization of health services.
The analyses look into people’s responsiveness to illness and health services, as well as the accessibility
of services. Out-of-pocket (OOP) spending on health looks at the costs incurred to the population for the
use of health services. The objective is to explore whether OOP has catastrophic or impoverishment
effects on the population. Results arising from these analyses will certainly be useful (we hope) for health
policy makers, and vital for any calls for reformation of the health system.

The healthy equity analyses methods adopted here mirror the methodological approach presented in the
World Bank report “Analyzing Health equity Using Household Survey Data” by Adam Wagstaff and
colleagues (2008). In this report the analysis focuses primarily on health care utilization, out-of-pocket
expenditures for health, and their catastrophic or impoverishment impacts.

The 2010 Papua New Guinea (PNG) Household Income and Expenditure Survey (HIES) data is ideal for
Health Equity Analysis for several reasons. The HIES (i) is the most recent dataset that contains a national
representative sample, (ii) contains information related to health utilization, expenditure and consumption,
and (iii) includes both government and non-government healthcare facilities. The HIES data is thus the
most comprehensive and useful source for estimating utilization and spending on health services.




                                                    vii
                                    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Background

The country of Papua New Guinea faces a number of formidable obstacles to achieving equitable
healthcare for the entire population. There are geographical access constraints as a result of the partially
rugged terrain and a predominately rural population (87.5 percent). There is a critical shortage of health
care workers in PNG, especially in the rural areas. This issue is compounded by the condition of the
current health workforce, which is inadequately trained, aging and demotivated due to poor working
conditions. Access to quality infrastructure, medicine and to medical supplies is limited. Health providers
involved in the delivery of healthcare services range from government owned facilities, church health
services and to a lesser extent, privately managed hospitals and clinics. The coordination between this
range of healthcare providers is poor and service delivery is complex.

Purpose of Analysis

This paper analyses the findings of the 2010 Household Income and Expenditure Survey. It highlights a
baseline that can be used to evaluate current programs and more in-depth health equity analysis in the
future. Whilst the findings in this brief are not new, they serve as a reminder of the barriers to health care
utilization and reinforce the key issues that impact access to PNG’s health system. The purpose is thus to
generate and solidify evidence related to health equity, highlight its implications, and assist with policy
guidance.

Key Findings:

    •   Ill health is more concentrated among the poor. Across quintiles, the poorest 20 percent of the
        population had a higher percentage of illness.
    •   The survey showed that the poorest households were less likely to seek treatment than richer
        households when having reported some health discomfort. The predominant reasons given were:
        (i) health facilities were too far, (ii) health workers were not present and (iii) healthcare was too
        expensive.
    •   Like other Pacific Island countries, PNG has relatively low out-of-pocket (OOP) expenditure for
        health. This is especially true when compared with many of the Asian countries.

Policy Implications

1. The government of PNG has established Free Primary Health Care and Subsidized Secondary Care.
   The PNG government should focus on, and prioritize strengthening the health services delivery
   system, which implies having a health workforce that can support an affordable, efficient, well-run
   health system that meets priority health needs. An effective health system requires good governance,
   sound systems of procurement, sufficient supply of medicines, and well-functioning health
   technologies and information systems. Overall, the priority should be to use available funds more
   efficiently and equitably.

2. Access to quality health facilities and healthcare workers needs to be continually improved and
   monitored. This improvement must include an increase in the number of trained health workers.
   Provision needs to be made for ongoing professional learning, including interpersonal and teamwork
   skills. Health workers must have access to suitable working environments and appropriate resources
   (that is, medicines, medical supplies and up-to-date protocols).


3. The utilization of healthcare facilities needs to be monitored and improved, especially amongst the
   poorest quintiles. Funding must be commensurate with need. Initiatives geared toward the most
   vulnerable that are not increasing utilization, that is, mobile clinics or patrol visits need to be reviewed
   and amended. Though increased resources were allocated to these initiatives, the on-time receipt of
   funding by the front line services remains an issue. The cost and distribution of medicine needs to be
   improved and monitored.

4. OOP payments need to be continuously improved and monitored. The impact of a potentially tighter
   fiscal space on health care spending and the effect that it has on OOP payments, especially in the
   poorer quintiles, needs to be monitored. Whilst OOP payments have minimal catastrophic impact, the
   healthcare expenses haves been shown to be a barrier to healthcare utilization, especially amongst
   the poorest. Therefore, it still affects the equity of the health system.




                                                     10
                                         INTRODUCTION

The country of Papua New Guinea faces a number of formidable obstacles to achieving equitable
healthcare for the entire population. All aspects of health care access in PNG — including geographical
access, qualified health care workers, infrastructure, medicine and medical supplies — favour the richest
quintiles. The PNG government is striving to change this reality, but has not been successful to date.

Of all the island nations in the Pacific Basin, the health system of PNG is perhaps the most complicated.
This complexity arises from a number of factors but certainly significant is the fact that PNG (relative to
other Pacific Island countries) has a large, predominately rural population with a myriad of cultures,
scattered over a large diverse and rugged terrain. This makes health service delivery to the population a
challenging task.

In addition to geographic constraints, PNG has a critical shortage of health care workers. This issue is
compounded by the condition of the current health workforce, which is inadequately trained, aging and
demotivated due to poor working conditions.

Health providers involved in the delivery of healthcare services range from government owned facilities,
privately managed hospitals and clinics, and large church-based institutions many of which are heavily
subsidized by the government. This is in contrast to most Pacific Island countries, where the delivery of
health services is largely a government owned and managed system. The significant involvement of
private and church-based health providers adds to the complexity of the management and monitoring of
PNG’s health system.

The National Department of Health (NDoH) — the PNG government’s arm that governs the country’s
health system —acknowledged in their 2011 annual report that these challenges (together with inadequate
financial resources) continue to deny the majority of the population their right to quality healthcare. The
same report presents falling and plateaued health indicators and calls for reforms and new approaches.
The report specifically calls for the development of a health system that is responsive, effective and
affordable, acceptable and accessible to everyone in the country.

The health equity analysis methods adopted here mirror the methodological approach presented in the
World Bank report “Analyzing Health Equity Using Household Survey Data” by Adam Wagstaff and
colleagues (2008). In this report, the analysis focuses primarily on health care utilization, out-of-pocket
expenditures for health, and their catastrophic or impoverishment impacts.

The 2010 PNG HIES data is ideal for health equity analysis for several reasons. The HIES (i) is the most
recent dataset that contains a national representative sample, (ii) contains information related to health
care utilization, expenditure and consumption, and (iii) includes both government and non-government
healthcare facilities. The HIES data is thus the most comprehensive and useful source for estimating
utilization and spending on health services.

The health equity analyses in this report seek to provide evidence about the utilization of health services;
validating the necessity for change. The PNG population’s responses to illness and utilization of health
services, as well as the accessibility of services are examined. The section on out-of-pocket (OOP)
spending on health looks at the costs incurred to the population for the use of health services. The
objective is to explore whether OOP has catastrophic or impoverishing effects on the population. Results
arising from these analyses will certainly be useful for health policy makers as a vital guide for reforming
the health system.




                                                    11
     SICKNESS REPORTING AND HEALTH SERVICES UTILIZATION


Health equity is the absence of systemic disparities in health between groups with different levels of
underlying social advantages/disadvantages i. Better understanding of health equity issues can improve
the distribution of resources based on need. In PNG, the poorest quintile of the population has a higher
percentage of illness.

Figure 1a shows that approximately 27 percent of the population reported having some health problem in
the 30 days prior to the survey. Across quintiles, the poorest 20 percent of the population had a higher
percentage of illness reporting. The incidence of self-reported illness is higher in the fourth and fifth
quintiles compared to the second and third quintiles. This may be because the better-off were better able
to identify the symptoms and not necessarily confirmation that the second and third quintiles have better
health. Across age categories, children and the elderly reported the highest percentage of health
complaints (Figure 1b).

Figure 1: A. Illness reporting in the 30 days prior to the survey across quintiles; B. Illness
reporting in the 30 days prior to the survey across age categories




While the poorest were the most likely to experience illness they were less likely to seek treatment than
richer households. Across different age groups, treatment was most likely to be sought for children
younger than 5 years old. Those over 55 years old were among the least likely to seek treatment despite
being found to be the most vulnerable group. This could be attributed to constraints such as a diminished
ability to travel to health facilities, inability to afford OOP payments, or a preference for traditional
medicines.

Similar to the overall trends, treatment was much more likely to be sought for children from rich
households than children from poorer households (Figure 2). This is not an indicator of higher illness
prevalence in wealthier households. In fact, children in the poorest quintile are the most vulnerable to
illness, however they have limited access to health services.




                                                   12
Figure 2: Percentage of children who sought treatment for their health complaint, by quintile.




Figure 2 illustrates the reality that health services utilization is not a direct reflection of need. The figures
below explore causes and compare perceived barriers to health care in urban versus rural areas and in
the poorest versus richest segments of the population. In addition to highlighting access issues it also
shows behaviour patterns that should be considered when developing policies and programs.

In order to further understand the underlying reasons why health services utilization is not a direct
reflection of need, as discussed above, more in depth analyses were conducted to compare perceived
barriers to health care in urban versus rural areas across the wealth quintiles.

On average, 45 percent of those who reported some health discomfort did not seek treatment. The
survey was ambiguous in this question. In urban areas, 60 percent of those who had some discomfort,
and 40 percent in rural areas reported the main reason for not seeking treatment as “being treated at
home” (Figure 3). It is not clear what treatment was given at home, whether it was a home-based
remedy or a visit from a medical professional. This first scenario is possible given the patrol program
offered in the rural areas (although quite infrequent) and the ability of the rich to afford a private medical
provider visit in the urban areas. However, it also raises some behavioral or cultural issues quite
common in the Pacific region, where there is a tendency to try home-based remedies and only visit a
medical facility for critical situations.

Figure 3: Reasons for not visiting a health facility despite having some health discomfort.




It is alarming that 20 percent of the rural population reported that the “health facility is too far” and close to
10 percent of the rural population reported that “health care is too expensive” and that “health workers are
not present” as the main reasons for not seeking care. This implies that access to health facilities in rural
areas and the presence of health workers are ongoing challenges facing the PNG health system.

When comparing across the quintiles, the poorest are more disadvantaged in terms of access to care for
both financial and non-financial reasons. Figure 4 highlights the inequity of the poorest quintile in
comparison to the richest 20 percent for the reasons: (i) health facilities are too far, (ii) health workers are
not present and (iii) healthcare is too expensive.



                                                        13
The reason “healthcare workers are not present” is not surprising given that PNG faces a critical shortage
of health workers. PNG currently has 6 health workers per 10,000 people, which is well below the 23
health workers recommended by WHO to achieve the MDGs. ii In addition to the low number of health
workers, the current workforce has been found to be inadequately trained, aging and demotivated by poor
working conditions, including pay and infrastructure. This contributes to concerns of “health care is not
good quality” (Figure 3 and 4) and ”health workers are unfriendly” (Figure 3). Shortage of staff, poor
conditions, and insufficiently trained staff are felt most acutely in the poorer or rural areas.

The fact that “health facilities are too far” highlights the challenges of health services delivery in a country
like PNG. Only 12.5 percent of PNG’s population lives in urban centres. iii The geographic terrain and a
predominantly rural and scattered population make ease of physical/ geographical access to health
services a challenging deliverable.

Interestingly, the 20 percent richest segment of the population was also dissatisfied with the quality of the
health care services. Although this reason was less reported amongst the 20 percent poorest segment, it
is a serious issue as well.

Figure 4: Reasons for not visiting a health facility, between poorest and richest




While elderly people are more prone to illnesses, their outpatient and inpatient utilization is quite low
compared to other age groups. Figure 5 shows outpatient and inpatient utilization across six age
categories. Approximately 15 percent of the population visited an outpatient health facility in the 30 days
prior to their date of survey interview. The outpatient visit percentage was highest in the age category 36-
55, and was followed by the age category less than 5. In the case of inpatient utilization, 4 percent of the
population reported that they were hospitalized in the last 12 months.

Figure 5: Health services utilization by age category




                                                      14
Government-run health facilities were the most utilized for both inpatients and outpatients. Church
managed facilities are also prominent in outpatient services. Facilities such as mobile clinics, community
health worker and public health posts showed very little use — these were the facilities designed to meet
the health needs of the population in remote villages and communities. The utilization of these services
should potentially be quite high given that most of the PNG population is located in rural or remote
localities. The private (for profit) hospitals and clinics show some utilization however it is minimal in
comparison to public and church managed facilities.

Figure 6: Percentage utilization of health services by facility type




Between the richest and the poorest, outpatient utilization was greater amongst the poorest only in
government aid posts. In terms of inpatient utilization, the richest used public, private and church facilities
more than the poorest.

Figure 7: Utilization between the richest and the poorest (quintiles)




Inpatient utilization by quintiles and facility type show that utilization by the richest is more concentrated in
public and private facilities while utilization by the poorest is concentrated in the church and other inpatient
facilities.




                                                       15
Figure 8: Inpatient utilization by quintiles across facility type




Outpatient utilization by quintiles and facility type show that private facilities are more utilized by the rich,
while the poor opt to utilize community health workers and traditional healers. Utilization of government
run facilities is relatively equal across quintiles.

Figure 9: Outpatient utilization by quintiles across facility type




                                                       16
 OUT-OF-POCKET HEALTH EXPENDITURE, CATASTROPHIC HEALTH
        EXPENDITURE AND IMPOVERISHMENT IMPACTS
PNG has relatively low out-of-pocket (OOP) expenditure for health by international standards. OOP, as a
percentage of total household expenditure, accounts for only 0.5 percent. This percentage is higher in
urban areas as opposed to rural areas (see Figure 10). OOP is also pro-rich. The richest quintiles spend
more out-of-pocket (Figure 11). The richest 20 percent of the population account for 59 percent of total
OOP. Seventy five percent of OOP is accounted for by the richest 40 percent of the population. The
poorest 20 percent only account for 4 percent of total OOP. However, the economic burden is greater for
the poor since the rich have a higher capacity to pay.

Figure 10: OOP as a percentage of total household expenditure




Figure 11: OOP distribution across quintiles




OOP payments are slightly more in urban areas than in rural areas. Reasons for this could include
increased access to private facilities (for treatment or to procure medicines) and greater economic power.
When comparing OOP spending between the richest 20 percent and poorest 20 percent (see Figure 12),
the poorer population tends to spend most of OOP on traditional healers and the public facilities. Amongst
the richest quintile, OOP is concentrated in the following categories: Other, Nurse, Private and Medicines.




                                                    17
Figure 12: OOP distribution across facilities between the richest and the poorest




The catastrophic impact of OOP in health is relative small in PNG. OOP spending on health is considered
catastrophic when a household’s financial contributions to the health system exceed 40 percent of income
remaining after subsistence needs have been met iv - that is, expenses are high relative to the resources
available to the household and thus disrupts the household’s normal living standards v. OOP took up no
more than 30 percent of total consumption in any household in PNG and only 0.02 percent of households
spent more than 20 percent of their total consumption on OOP, and 0.23 percent of households spent more
than 10 percent of their budgets (Table 1).

Table 1: Percentage of households by OOP as a share of consumption
    OOP as a % of              % households                                 % households
    household                  (denominator    -          total             (denominator:        non-food
    consumption                consumption)                                 consumption)
    <0.01%                     89.55                                        75.30
    0.01-4.99%                 9.12                                         18.96
    5-9.99%                    1.1                                          3.88
    10-19.99%                  0.21                                         1.21
    20-29.99%                  0.02                                         0.35
    30-39.99%                  0                                            0.21
    40-49.99%                  0                                            0.06
    50-59.99%                  0                                            0.03
    > 60%                      0                                            0
    Total                      100%                                         100%

Consequently, the impoverishing impact of OOP spending in health is small. Table 2 presents poverty
measures corresponding to household consumption gross and net of OOPs. A comparison of the two
shows the scale of impoverishment due to health payments. The idea is that a health problem
necessitating OOPs may be serious enough to push a household from being above the poverty line before
the health problem to being below the poverty line after the health problem. The first column, the poverty
headcount, which excludes the health payment (consumption excluding health payments) – or pre-OOP
payment poverty headcount, gives us a sense of what the standard of living looks like without the health
problem; the second column, the poverty headcount by adding OOPs to the household’s nonmedical
consumption (consumption including – or gross of – health payments) – post-OOP payment poverty
headcount (%), gives us a sense of what the standard of living would have been without the health
problem. The assumption here is that OOPs are involuntary and caused by health “shocks”; health
spending is assumed to be financed by reducing current consumption. The difference between the pre-
OOP payment poverty headcount (%) and post-OOP payment headcount (%) is the poverty impact. The



                                                   18
poverty impact with regards to OOP is minimal in PNG (Table 2). The results are similar when using
different international poverty line of PPP $1.08/day, $1.25/day and $2/day and compared with other
countries (Figure 14).

Table 2: Poverty impact of OOP
    Poverty        Pre-OOP                 Post-OOP                Poverty Impact
    Line ($)       payment poverty         payment poverty         (%)
                   headcount (%)           headcount (%)
    1.08/day       17.39                   17.49                   0.10
    PPP
    1.25/day       16.25                   16.29                   0.04
    PPP
    2.00/day       30.42                   30.49                   0.08
    PPP
    2.15/day       45.91                   46.16                   0.25
    PPP




                                                19
                                                SUMMARY
Ill health is more concentrated among the poor in PNG. Across quintiles, the poorest 20 percent of the
population have a higher percentage of illness. The poor use health services less than the rich. The
survey showed that the poorest were less likely than wealthier households to seek treatment when having
reported some health discomfort. The predominant reasons included: (i) health facilities were too far, (ii)
health workers were not present, and (iii) healthcare was too expensive. There was also a high
percentage of the rich who chose not to utilize health facilities, citing a preference for being treated at
home and concerns with the quality of services provided. Between the richest and the poorest, outpatient
utilization was greater amongst the poorest only in government aid posts. In terms of inpatient utilization,
the richest used public, private and church facilities more than the poorest.

The effect of out-of-pocket payments on household financial well-being is minor. Like other Pacific Island
countries, PNG has relatively low OOP expenditure for health. Especially when compared with many of the
Asian countries. The two poorest quintiles of the population spend a higher proportion of their
consumption on health when compared to the richer population. Health expenditure was cited as the main
reason for not utilizing health facilities by the poorest and remains a barrier to achieving an equitable
health system.

Policy implications

1.   The government of PNG is moving toward Universal Health Coverage, along with many other
     developing countries. The goal is to ensure that all people obtain the health services they need without
     suffering financial hardship when paying for them. The government of PNG has recently established
     “Free Primary Health Care and Subsidized Secondary Care.” Now, the government should focus on,
     and prioritize strengthening health services delivery, which implies having a healthcare workforce that
     can support an affordable, efficient, well-run health system that meets priority health needs. An
     effective health system requires good governance, a sound systems of procurement, sufficient supply
     of medicines, current health technologies and well-functioning health information systems. Overall, the
     priority should be to use available funds more efficiently and equitably.

2.   Access to quality health facilities and healthcare workers needs to be continually improved and
     monitored. This improvement must include an increase in the number of trained health workers.
     Provision must be made for ongoing professional learning, including interpersonal and teamwork
     skills. Health workers must have access to suitable working environments and appropriate resources
     (that is, medicines, medical supplies and up-to-date protocols). These improvements will nurture the
     health worker- patient relationship by improving the attitudes of the workforce and the confidence
     patients have in the health workers’ skills. Attention must be paid to engaging and retaining health
     workers in rural areas.

3.   The utilization of healthcare facilities needs to be monitored and improved, especially amongst the
     poorest quintiles. Funding must be commensurate with need. Initiatives geared toward the most
     vulnerable that are not increasing utilization, i.e. mobile clinics or patrol visits need to be reviewed and
     amended. Though increased resources were allocated to these initiatives, the on-time receipt of
     funding by the front line services remains an issue. The cost and distribution of medicine needs to be
     improved and monitored.

4.   OOP payments need to be continuously improved and monitored. The impact of a potentially tighter
     fiscal space on health care spending and the effect that it has on OOP payments, especially in the
     poorer quintiles, needs to be monitored. Whilst OOP payments have minimal catastrophic impact,
     healthcare expenses have still been shown to be a barrier to healthcare utilization, especially amongst
     the poorest. Therefore, healthcare expenses still affect the equity of the health system.




                                                     20
                                          REFERENCES

Braveman, P. 2003. “Defining Equity in Health.” Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health. 57(4), 254-
258.

Global Health Workforce Alliance. World Health Organisation.
http://www.who.int/workforcealliance/countries/png/en/

iiO’
   Donnell, O., E. Van Doorslaer, R. Rannan-Eliya, A. Somanathan, S. R. Adhikari, B. Akka- zieva, D.
Harbianto, C. G. Garg, P. Hanvoravongchai, A. N. Herrin, M. N. Huq, S. Ibragi- mova, A. Karan, S.-M.
Kwon, G. M. Leung, J.-F. R. Lu, Y. Ohkusa, B. R. Pande, R. Racelis, K. Tin, L. Trisnantoro, C. Vasavid, Q.
Wan, B.-M. Yang, and Y. Zhao. Forthcoming. 2008. “Who Pays for Health Care in Asia?”. Journal of
Health Economics, 27 (2), 460 – 475.

World Health Organization. http://www.who.int


Xu K, Evans D.B., K. Kawabata, R. Zeramdini, J. Klavus, C.J.L. Murray. 2003. “Household Catastrophic
Health Expenditure: A Multi-country Analysis.” Lancet, 362, 111-7.




                                                 21
                                                      About this series...
                           This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Family
                           (HNP) of the World Bank’s Human Development Network. The papers
                           in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary and
                           unpolished results on HNP topics to encourage discussion and debate.
                           The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper
                           are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in any
                           manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members
                           of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent.
                           Citation and the use of material presented in this series should take
                           into account this provisional character. For free copies of papers in this
                           series please contact the individual authors whose name appears on
                           the paper.

                           Enquiries about the series and submissions should be made directly to
                           the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory Ser-
                           vice (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256, fax 202 522-3234).
                           For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




The world bank

1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC USA 20433
Telephone: 	     202 473 1000
Facsimile:	      202 477 6391
Internet:	www.worldbank.org
E-mail:	 feedback@worldbank.org	
