Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               TRADE AND COMPETITIVENESS GLOBAL PRACTICE

                               LOW-INCOME DEVELOPING
                               COUNTRIES AND G-20 TRADE
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               AND INVESTMENT POLICY
                               September 2015

                               WORLD BANK REPORT NUMBER 99933
Public Disclosure Authorized
                                                                                                                                     99933
                                   Low-Income Developing Countries and G-20 Trade and Investment Policy1
                                                               Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice

                                                                                World Bank

                                                                              September 2015


                                                                           Executive Summary
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               This paper provides background information for the study on the Group of 20 (G-20) and challenges for
                               low-income developing countries (LIDCs) that was prepared by the World Bank for the G-20 Forum under
                               the Turkish presidency. The G-20 LIDCs study aims to analyze the development challenges of LIDCs and
                               how the coordination of G-20 economic policies can contribute to creating an enabling environment for
                               their development.2

                               This background paper focuses on the role that trade and investment policies of G-20 countries play in this
                               context. The discussion is organized in three parts that identify (a) the characteristics of LIDCs’ integration
                               in the world economy, (b) the evolution of G-20 policies that affect LIDCs’ integration, and (c) the potential
                               for changes in the G-20 trade and investment policy landscape to benefit LIDCs.

                               1. LIDCs’ integration in the world economy

                               Integration in the world economy through international trade and investment is a key element of the
                               development process in LIDCs, but the current picture is mixed. The share of LIDCs in world trade (goods
                               and service markets) is small with few and concentrated exports, and so is participation in global value
                               chains, but there are exceptions among lower-middle-income economies. A combination of high trade costs
                               and domestic factors constrain the ability of LIDCs to integrate into the world economy.

                               Trade in goods

                               The value of trade of LIDCs has increased substantially in recent years, driven by stronger
                               integration with G-20 countries, but it still represents a small fraction of world trade. The total value
                               of LIDC exports and imports increased more than fivefold between 2001 and 2013. Although the sum of
                               exports and imports as a proportion of gross domestic product (GDP) also increased over time, this measure
                               of trade openness remains very low for most LIDCs—on average 0.22 percent.
Public Disclosure Authorized




                               G-20 countries are the main trading partners of LIDCs. About 70 percent of LIDC imports come from
                               the G-20 and about 80 percent of LIDC exports are directed to the G-20. Data at the industry level show
                               that LIDCs import mainly machinery and electrical equipment from G-20 countries. Almost half of the
                               exports from LIDCs to G-20 comprise mineral products.


                               1
                                 This report was coordinated by Michele Ruta and included contributions by Yago Aranda Larrey, Marcus Bartley
                               Johns, Roberto Echandi, Martin Molinuevo, Gaurav Nayyar, Alberto Osnago, Jose Daniel Reyes, Sebastian Saez (all
                               of World Bank). The analysis has benefited from comments and inputs from Varapat Chensavasdijai and Christian
                               Henn (the International Monetary Fund), Raed Safadi (the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
                               Development), and Diwakar Dixit, Hubert Escaith, Alexander Keck (coordinator), Peter Morrison, Nora Neufeld,
                               Cédric Pene, Taufiqur Rahman, Roy Santana, and Robert Teh (all of the World Trade Organization).
                               2
                                 See Annex I for the list of low-income developing economies.


                                                                                     1
There are important differences in the ability of LIDCs to export, especially between low- and
middle-income economies. Low-income economies experienced some success in diversifying exports
across products starting in the mid-1990s, whereas the speed of product diversification was much faster in
lower-middle-income economies, resulting in a higher gap between those two groups. At the same time,
the LIDCs group as a whole has made substantial progress in export diversification across partners. With
regard to “quality” of exports, ample scope still exists to upgrade the LIDCs’ existing export basket, to
introduce new higher value-added products, or both, not only in manufacturing but also in agriculture.

Trade in services

Exports of services have increased for all LIDCs, but their market share as a group has remained
stagnant. World services exports have multiplied fourfold since 1990. Some low- and middle-income
developing economies have been taking advantage of that expansion. Examples include exports of
professional services to Europe by Kenya, exports of medical services by the Philippines, or expansion of
tourism in countries like Cambodia, Nepal, and Tanzania. However, only upper-middle-income economies
have been successful in expanding their market share. The share of LIDCs exporting in the global services
market, instead, has remained stagnant and negligible in the past 35 years.

Global value chains

Although there are important data limitations, integration into global value chains (GVCs) by LIDCs
appears to be limited despite some noticeable exceptions. LIDCs constitute only 3 percent of world
imports in parts and components. However, countries like the Philippines and Vietnam have much higher
shares, indicative of their participation in “Factory Asia.” Similarly, a study on Sub-Saharan Africa
conducted by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) finds that although countries are at the start of their
integration process in GVCs, a large degree of heterogeneity exists with some LIDCs in the region that
have seen their GVC integration rise substantially (for example, Ethiopia, Tanzania).

Trade costs and domestic constraints

High trade costs and the resulting lack of connectivity help explain why LIDCs are less integrated in
the world economy. Trade costs between LIDCs and any G-20 country are systematically higher than trade
costs between G-20 countries or other non-LIDCs and any G-20 country. Over time, some G-20 countries
became cheaper destinations for imports and exports of LIDCs. In general, however, the level of trade costs
changed little between 2001 and 2010. Those costs reflect policy restrictions (discussed below), but also
the quality of transportation infrastructure and other domestic variables.

Domestic factors that inhibit the productive capacity of LIDCs contribute to the low connectivity of
LIDCs to GVCs and world trade more generally. The availability of basic infrastructure, such as good-
quality ports and telecommunication services, is central to ensuring that goods reach the border.
Institutional barriers to trade, such as red tape, customs procedures, laws, and access to services are equally
important. Besides customs procedures, regulatory and contract-enforcing institutions play a key role in the
development of the export sectors in both goods and services. From an investment policy perspective too,
domestic constraints play a crucial role in inhibiting foreign direct investment (FDI) flows and, therefore,
connectivity to GVCs.




                                                      2
2. G-20 trade and investment policies toward LIDCs

Tariff barriers faced by LIDCs have declined over time, more so for those imposed by G-20 countries.
However, tariff uncertainty, tariff peaks and escalation, nontariff measures (NTMs), and domestic
regulation in services are impediments to LIDCs’ exports. Many provisions that shape the integration of
LIDCs in the world economy are contained in bilateral trade and investment agreements.

Tariffs

G-20 most-favored-nation (MFN) (that is, nondiscriminatory) tariffs faced by least developed
countries (LDCs) have declined over time and are currently at 9.9 percent, on average.3 Average MFN
tariffs faced by LDCs declined by 2.1 points between 2001–03 and 2011–13. And that decline has been
driven mainly by the reduction of tariffs imposed by G-20 developing countries, although they start from a
higher level.

Tariff uncertainty faced by LDCs is still high, particularly with regard to G-20 developing countries.
G-20 developed countries apply MFN tariffs that are much lower than MFN tariffs applied by G-20
developing countries. The difference is even more pronounced for bound rates: G-20 developing countries
have bound rates that are five times the bound rates of G-20 developed countries. That large “binding
overhang”—the gap between bound and applied MFN rates—allows countries to potentially raise tariffs up
to the bound level without being taken to dispute settlement and creates costly policy uncertainty.

Tariff peaks and tariff escalation policies also affect market access and export diversification in
developing countries, although not necessarily in LDCs that may benefit from preferential schemes
in those areas. Tariff peaks—when tariffs on certain products are considerably higher than usual—in
developed G-20 countries are especially prominent in agriculture, where 35 percent of agriculture tariffs in
2015 were tariff peaks. The same holds for tariff escalation, which penalizes value addition through higher
tariffs on products at more advanced stages of the production chain; in 2015, there was a 9 percent
difference in the tariffs on raw and finished agricultural goods.

Nontariff measures

NTMs are an important restriction to LIDCs’ exports, but G-20 countries, for which data are
available, are very heterogeneous with regard to the incidence of NTMs in imports. On the one side
of the spectrum are the European Union (EU), India, the Russian Federation, and Turkey, which apply
trade-related regulations to more than 90 percent of imports. On the other side are China, Indonesia, and
Mexico, which use those measures on less than 65 percent of imports. Higher shares are associated with
higher required levels of compliance with the trade-related regulations and, therefore, are an indication of
the difficulty for exporters of entering into highly regulated markets.

Although, in general, G-20 NTMs do not penalize LIDCs relative to other trading partners, sanitary
and phytosanitary (SPS) regulations in G-20 countries affect mainly LIDC partners. Although G-20
economies differ in the incidence of NTMs on imports, incidence is roughly similar between LIDC and
non-LIDC partners. Looking at specific nontariff measures, SPS regulations in G-20 countries affect mainly
LIDC partners. That circumstance reflects the fact that many LIDCs specialize in agricultural products that
are more susceptible to SPS regulation, whereas non-LIDC partners have a more diversified export basket.


3
  The country groups used in certain parts of this discussion (for example, on tariff analysis and on multilateral trade
issues) are those commonly used at the World Trade Organization; therefore, where appropriate, the group of least
developed countries is used instead of LIDCs.


                                                           3
Services measures

Services exports by LIDCs, in their trade with G-20 economies, are more heavily affected by general
domestic regulatory policies than by formal trade restrictions. Except for China, India, Indonesia, Saudi
Arabia, and South Africa, all other G-20 members score an overall restrictiveness index of less than 30
points over a total of 100. Yet that does not mean that services exports from LIDCs are free from restrictions
into G-20 markets. The movement of individual services suppliers (mode 4) stands out as the most
restrictive mode of supply in all G-20 members, often several times more restrictive than the most open
mode of service supply.

Preferential arrangements

LDCs have benefited from a series of preferential market access schemes. Preferential tariffs imposed
by G-20 developed countries are much lower than those applied by G-20 developing countries.
Preferential market access to developed countries has been promoted under the generalized system of
(nonreciprocal) preferences or through bilateral or regional agreements. The average preferential tariff of
G-20 developed countries is 2.6 percent, whereas that of G-20 developing countries is 8.1 percent.
However, some large developing countries, such as China and India, are also moving (or have already
moved) toward granting extensive unilateral preferences to LDCs. Almost all (98 percent) agricultural
exports from LDCs are exempt from duties by developed countries, whereas only 74 percent are exempt in
the case of developing countries.

Both preference erosion and preference utilization rates are a concern. Over time, there has been some
erosion of the preference margin of duty-free treatment received by LDCs exports in advanced economies
relative to products exported by the other developing countries that may also benefit from various
preferences or from further reduction of MFN duties. Moreover, indicators based on best applicable tariffs
are established on the hypothesis that available preferences are fully used by the exporters. Complex rules
of origin (RoOs), however, can make it difficult for LDC exporters to benefit from preferential access
schemes, resulting in utilization rates of 70 percent with regard to some G-20 advanced economies.

Preferential trade agreements (PTAs) and bilateral investment treaties (BITs) between the G-20 and
LIDCs are not as “deep” as the agreements between the G-20 and other non-LIDCs. PTAs are used
to provide preferential market access, but they also increasingly rule over a wide series of other policy
areas. On the one hand, a significantly smaller share of G-20–LIDC agreements includes “deep” provisions
in areas such as competition policy or investment. On the other hand, provisions on standards and regional
cooperation are included in relatively more G-20–LIDC agreements. Similarly, BITs between LIDCs and
G-20 countries are common, but they are generally limited in scope (“old generation” BITs), protecting
investments that are already established. The relatively low presence of “deep” provisions in G-20–LIDC
trade and investment agreements may limit the ability of LIDCs to improve their domestic frameworks,
which, in turn, is likely to be important for attracting investment and connecting to GVCs.

3. Design G-20 trade and investment policies to benefit LIDCs

Cooperation among G-20 countries in the areas of trade and investment policy can play an important role
in the development of LIDCs’ development going forward. Progress can be made on both the multilateral
and preferential fronts, by implementing the Trade Facilitation Agreement, by building on the successful
2013 Bali Ministerial Conference in delivering a substantive Doha Round outcome, by making sure that
new PTAs are “open,” and by taking action to facilitate foreign investment in low-income developing
countries.




                                                      4
Multilateral trade issues

A strong and evolving multilateral trading system with the World Trade Organization (WTO) at its
center is essential to facilitate the integration of LIDCs into the global economy. Key actions by G-20
countries are outlined below.
x Ratify and fully implement the WTO’s Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) agreed in 2013 in
    Bali, an important step forward in the effort to reduce trade costs, particularly for developing countries.
    By simplifying customs procedures and reducing delays, implementation of the TFA can increase the
    opportunity for developing countries to integrate into GVCs and to both increase and diversify their
    exports, particularly to the benefit of small and medium enterprises that suffer more from administrative
    burdens. Greater efficiency in trade procedures should speed up the flow of goods through customs and
    hence increase the amount of duties collected at the border. It is also an important signal of
    improvements in the overall investment climate, so the TFA should also help developing countries
    attract more FDI.

x   Deliver a substantive Doha Round outcome, building on the progress at the 2013 Bali Ministerial
    Conference. Achieving outcomes in the three core areas of agriculture, nonagricultural market access,
    and services will be key. Specific outcomes that would benefit developing countries include the
    following:

       The parallel elimination of all forms of export subsidies and disciplines on all export measures
        with equivalent effect, which would be a particularly positive outcome for developing countries.
       Further discipline and reduction in the use of production- and trade-distorting domestic
        support in agriculture. This outcome should help developing countries benefit from the
        competitive advantage that many of them have in agriculture.
       A specific outcome on cotton, under the three pillars of export competition, domestic support,
        and market access. This outcome would be particularly welcomed for cotton-producing LDCs.
       Reduction or, as appropriate, elimination of tariffs, including tariff peaks, high tariffs, and
        tariff escalation, as well as nontariff barriers, particularly on products of export interest to
        developing countries.
       A commitment to reduce trade policy uncertainty. Lowering tariff uncertainty (that is, reducing
        currently bound tariffs and increasing binding coverage, even above the applied rate) would
        contribute to reducing trade costs.
       An agreement on and conclusion for an ambitious services element. Widening and deepening
        services commitments, perhaps to levels achieved in PTAs or as actually applied, would help open
        services markets for developing-country suppliers, including addressing the lack of transparency
        and predictability in measures affecting mode 4 and building domestic support for eventual mode
        4 liberalization.

x   Consolidate progress in specific LDC issues within the multilateral trading system, including in
    three areas:

       Duty-free and quota-free (DFQF) market access. Developed-country members not providing
        DFQF market access for at least 97 percent of products originating from LDCs, defined at the tariff
        line level, are required to work toward improving their existing DFQF coverage before the next
        (that is, 10th) WTO Ministerial Conference. G-20 developing countries that are in a position to do
        so should also be encouraged to do the same.
       LDC services waiver to grant preferential market access to LDC services and service suppliers.
        So far, of the G-20 members, Australia, Canada, China, India Japan, Mexico, the Republic of
        Korea, Turkey, and the United States have notified sectors and modes in which they will provide


                                                      5
        preferential treatment, and the European Union has signaled its intention to do so soon. Other
        members of the G-20 could contemplate meaningful preferences for LDCs in their individual
        capacities.
       Preferential rules of origin. The Bali decision on preferential rules of origin for LDCs contains a
        set of multilateral guidelines that WTO members could consider in developing their RoO
        framework, including how preferential RoOs can be simplified to make it easier for LDCs to
        comply. A number of G-20 members (for example, Canada in 2003, the European Union in 2011)
        have already implemented reforms in their generalized system of preferences’ RoO criteria with
        positive results for LDCs. Other G-20 countries are encouraged to do the same.

Preferential trade issues

PTAs negotiated by G-20 countries (“G-20 PTAs”), such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership or the
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, have potentially positive effects on low-income developing
countries. First, deeper economic integration among G-20 countries can stimulate global growth. Second,
G-20 PTAs are likely to generate positive spillovers where they result in liberalization that is broadly
nondiscriminatory. “Deep” PTAs, including many either already agreed or under negotiation, tend to
contain numerous features that are effectively nondiscriminatory. Third, economic integration through G-
20 PTAs can also serve as a laboratory for reform that can be applied more widely, including by low-income
developing countries.

However, it is also important to recognize the potential risks of new PTAs and to identify strategies to
address them: first, trade and investment diversion and preference erosion; second, exclusion of low-income
developing countries and fragmentation of the trading system. Deep PTAs are influenced by existing trade
and investment patterns, but they also affect the direction of such flows. PTAs can crystallize existing
relationships, making it more difficult to include outsiders and possibly creating inefficient path dependence
in trade and investment flows. And third, progress on PTAs may not be matched by efforts to move forward
multilateral negotiations.

Accordingly, G-20 members could maximize the benefits of new PTAs, while minimizing their risks,
with the following set of actions:

x   To avoid the risk of trade and investment diversion for low-income developing countries, G-20
    countries could, for example, adjust preference schemes to offset negative spillovers, including
    through expanding preferences to a wider range of products, providing deeper tariff preferences, or
    both, and providing certainty of preferential access over a long time horizon. G-20 countries could
    commit to review which locational investment incentives generate investment diversion away from
    low-income developing countries and to explore avenues for their reform.
x   To avoid exclusion and fragmentation of the trading system, new G-20 PTAs should be “open,”
    with membership ultimately available to all countries willing to meet the standards. This action also
    requires that rules be transparent and minimize discrimination between members and nonmembers,
    such as through “open” mutual recognition requiring low-income developing countries to comply with
    only one standard set through a PTA, rather than each party’s standard.
x   To further improve efficiency and transparency of new PTAs, G-20 members should task
    international organizations with collecting and analyzing information on the implementation and
    effects of preferential disciplines, identifying policies that generate negative spillovers.
x   G-20 countries should commit themselves to making progress on the multilateral trade issues
    above as the best guarantee that benefits from new PTAs are eventually shared by all.
x   G-20 countries should target Aid for Trade at actions to address pressures from PTAs, including
    the following:



                                                      6
   Building competitiveness to offset erosion of competitiveness and helping ease adjustment
    pressures caused by preference erosion;
   Helping developing countries take advantage of opportunities opened up by nondiscriminatory
    liberalization through G-20 PTAs;
   Lowering trade costs, which have fallen more slowly for developing countries, to increase
    competitiveness, regardless of developments under way in G-20 PTAs;
   Helping achieve compliance with standards established through G-20 PTAs (as well as existing
    standards), thereby strengthening capacity to participate in global value chains; and
   Continuing to provide targeted and focused Aid for Trade to the LDCs, including through the
    Enhanced Integrated Framework, to help build their supply-side capacity and strengthen their trade
    related infrastructure.




                                                7
1. LIDCs trade and investment integration in the world economy

Integration in the world economy through international trade and investment is a key element of the
development process in LIDCs. The current picture is mixed, with some LIDCs having integrated more
than others.

1.1. Trade in goods

The value of total LIDC imports and exports has increased substantially in recent years, but it still
represents a small fraction of world trade. Despite the global trade collapse of 2009 and the following
slowdown, the international exchange of goods is at its historical maximum. The total value of imports of
LIDCs increased more than fivefold between 2001 and 2013, from US$141 billion to US$762 billion. The
total value of exports increased almost fourfold, from US$192 billion in 2001 to US$718 billion in 2013
(see figure 1.1). However, when compared with the global value of imports and exports, the value traded
by LIDCs is still very small, between 3 percent and 4 percent of world trade.4

Figure 1.1: Imports and Exports of Low-Income Developing Countries by Partner Group, 2001–13

               a. Imports (US$ billion)                              b. Exports (US$ billion)
      800                                                    800
      700                                                    700     G20
                                                                     LIDC
      600                                                    600
                                                                     Non-LIDC
      500                                                    500
      400                                                    400
      300                                                    300
      200                                                    200
      100                                                    100
        0                                                     0
            2001
            2002
            2003
            2004
            2005
            2006
            2007
            2008
            2009
            2010
            2011
            2012
            2013




                                                                   2001
                                                                   2002
                                                                   2003
                                                                   2004
                                                                   2005
                                                                   2006
                                                                   2007
                                                                   2008
                                                                   2009
                                                                   2010
                                                                   2011
                                                                   2012
                                                                   2013
Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nation’s COMTRADE database.
Note: G-20 = Group of 20; LIDC = low-income developing country.

G-20 countries are the main trading partners of LIDCs. About 70 percent of LIDC imports come from
the G-20, and about 80 percent of LIDC exports are directed to the G-20. The share of trade between LIDCs
remained quite constant and low (about 6.5 percent on average) between 2001 and 2013. In general, the
composition of LIDCs’ trade partners does not seem to have changed over the period under consideration
(see figure 1.1).

The aggregate level of trade, relative to GDP, is lower in LIDCs compared with G-20 countries. Trade
openness, defined as the sum of imports and exports as a proportion of GDP, takes into account the size of
a country.5 In 2013, aggregate trade openness in LIDCs was 0.22 percent, whereas that in the G-20 was
0.36 percent. Over the past decade or so, trade openness of both LIDCs and the G-20 increased with the

4
 As reported also in WTO (2014), the share of LDCs in global trade was negligible throughout the period 1995 –2012.
5
 The openness index bears some limitations, including the fact that small countries appear to be systematically more
open.


                                                         8
exception of 2009. Moreover, until 2008, G-20 countries were growing relatively more open to global trade
than LIDCs. But that pattern of divergence seems to have ended with the trade collapse. After 2009, the
difference in openness between G-20s and LIDCs appears to be stable.

Aggregate figures hide the heterogeneous experience of individual countries. Although the trade-to-
GDP ratio increased for most LIDCs between 2001–03 and 2011–13, it remains very low (most LIDCs are
concentrated in the lower left corner of figure 1.2). Only three countries (the Federated States of Micronesia,
Papua New Guinea, and Honduras) recorded a trade-to-GDP ratio of at least 30 percent in 2001–03; only
four countries (the Solomon Islands, Papua New Guinea, the Federated States of Micronesia, and Guyana)
recorded a trade-to-GDP ratio of at least 60 percent in 2011–13.

Figure 1.2: Trade Openness in 2001–03 and 2011–13
                                  1.2
                                                                         SLB
                                   1
                                                                           PNG
            Openness in 2011–13




                                  0.8
                                                                         GUY                  FSM
                                  0.6                 MRTVNM
                                                             MDA
                                                           MOZ            HND
                                  0.4                ZWE
                                                     MNG NICKHM
                                                   PRYUKR
                                                        TGO   WSM
                                                 KGZ
                                                   GEO  CIV   SLV
                                                 BOL
                                                 ZMB SEN MWI
                                                        MAR
                                                       STPCPV
                                                     ARM
                                                    GHA GTM     PHL
                                  0.2          NERBEN
                                                   CMR
                                                  GMB
                                                 KEN
                                                BGD
                                                 NGA
                                                 MLI
                                               BFA  LKA
                                                  MDG
                                            BDI
                                              TZA
                                              UGA
                                              ETH
                                             RWA
                                               NPL
                                             SDN
                                             PAK  CAF
                                   0
                                        0      0.1      0.2           0.3         0.4   0.5          0.6
                                                              Openness in 2001–03

Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nation’s COMTRADE database and the World
Bank’s World Development Indicators database.
Note: Openness has been calculated as the average openness in the periods 2001 –03 and 2011–13.
The upward sloping 45° line represents the points for which openness in the later period is equal to openness in the
earlier period. Points above the line indicate countries that increased their openness to trade.

Composition of trade

LIDCs import mainly machinery and electrical equipment from G-20 countries (see panel a of figure
1.3). Transportation and chemicals and allied industries also represent a consistent share of LIDC imports.
The relatively high share of mineral products, such as oil, in LIDC imports from the G-20 is due to imports
of resource-poor countries from Russia, Saudi Arabia, and the United States. The major LIDC importers of
mineral products are Ukraine, Morocco, the Philippines, Egypt, and Nigeria.

Almost half of total exports from LIDCs to G-20 countries comprise mineral products, but for many
LIDCs, agriculture is a key export sector (see panel b of figure 1.3). Exports of machinery and electrical
equipment and metals represent more than a quarter of total exports to the G-20. In contrast, exports of
transportation equipment and chemicals and allied industries are low. For 40 percent of LIDCs, agriculture
represents more than 30 percent of their exports.



                                                                   9
Figure 1.3: Industrial Composition of Low-Income Developing Countries’ Imports from and Exports
to Group of 20 Countries, 2011–13
                                                a. Imports




                      Machinery/Electrical                   Mineral Products
                      Chemicals & Allied Industries          Transportation
                      Metals                                 Agriculture and Food

                                               b. Exports




                      Machinery/Electrical                 Mineral Products
                      Chemicals & Allied Industries        Transportation
                      Metals                               Agriculture and Food
Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nation’s COMTRADE database.

The composition of LIDC imports and exports has not changed much over time. LIDCs imported a
lower share of machinery and a higher share of mineral products and metals from G-20 countries in 2011–
13 relative to 2001–03. LIDCs exported more mineral products and fewer machinery and agricultural
products to G-20 countries in 2011–13 relative to 2001–03.

Although LIDCs have made some progress in diversifying their exports, both over products and
trading partners, they remain at the bottom of product quality ladders. LIDCs, as a group, have made
substantial progress in export diversification across trading partners. Low-income economies have
experienced some success in diversifying their export baskets, starting in the mid-1990s. The speed of
product diversification, however, was much faster in lower-middle-income economies, resulting in a
growing gap between those two groups. Low-income economies occupy the relatively low rungs of product




                                                      10
quality ladders,6 reflecting the extent of heterogeneity in quality across different varieties of a given product.
That situation implies that ample scope still exists to upgrade the quality of low-income countries’ existing
export basket, to introduce new higher value-added products, or both, not only in manufacturing but also
in agriculture—often the least productive sector in low-income countries (see figure 1.4).7

Figure 1.4: Export Diversification and Quality by Low-Income Developing Countries
                                    Export Diversification                                                                                                                     Export Diversification                                                                                                                                    Quality Upgrading, 2010
                                 across Products, 1962-2010                                                                                                                  across Partners, 1962-2010                                                                                                          1.2

                                                                                Low-income economies                                                         4.1
                  5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Low-income economies                                                                         1
                  4.8                                                           Lower-middle-income economies                                                3.9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Lower-middle-income economies
                  4.6                                                           Upper-middle-income economies                                                3.7                                                                                                                                                 0.8




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Export Quality Index
                  4.4                                                                                                                                                                                                Upper-middle-income economies
                                                                                                                                                             3.5




                                                                                                                                               Theil Index
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.6
                  4.2
    Theil Index




                  4.0                                                                                                                                        3.3                                                                                                                                                 0.4

                  3.8                                                                                                                                        3.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.2
                  3.6
                                                                                                                                                             2.9
                  3.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Animal &       Beverages Chemicals    Crude Food/Live         Machinery             Minerals   Misc. Mfg   Others
                  3.2                                                                                                                                        2.7                                                                                                                                                       Vegetable Oils   & Tobacco           Materials, etc Animals   and Transport
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Mfg
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Articles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Goods
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Equipment
                  3.0                                                                                                                                        2.5
                        1962
                               1965
                                      1968
                                             1971
                                                    1974
                                                           1977
                                                                  1980
                                                                         1983
                                                                                1986
                                                                                       1989
                                                                                              1992
                                                                                                     1995
                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                   2001
                                                                                                                          2004
                                                                                                                                 2007
                                                                                                                                        2010




                                                                                                                                                                   1962                                                                                                                                                Quality Ladders of the World                                    Low-income economies
                                                                                                                                                                          1965
                                                                                                                                                                                 1968
                                                                                                                                                                                        1971
                                                                                                                                                                                               1974
                                                                                                                                                                                                      1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                             1980
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1983
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1986
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1992
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2004
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2007
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2010
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lower-middle-income economies                                   Upper-middle-income economies


Source: International Monetary Fund (IMF) calculations based on the IMF Diversification Toolkit.
Note: A lower Theil Index value indicates more diversification. Income groups are defined in accordance with World
Bank classifications.

Trade costs

High costs of trading agricultural and manufactured goods internationally may explain why LIDCs
are so little integrated in the world economy.8 Trade costs between LIDCs and any G-20 country are
systematically higher than trade costs between G-20 countries or other non-LIDCs and any G-20 country.
In figure 1.5, trade costs between LIDCs and each G-20 country are compared with trade costs faced by the
G-20 and all other countries for trading with each G-20 member. LIDCs pay a premium when exporting to
all G-20 countries with respect to the trade costs faced by G-20 countries and other non-LIDCs. A
comparison of trade costs across G-20 countries shows that EU members, the United States, and China are
the lowest trade cost partners of LIDCs. In contrast, Mexico, Argentina, Australia, South Africa, and
Indonesia are the highest trade cost partners of LIDCs. The geographical pattern seems to be influenced by
distance.




6
  The average quality index of each economy corresponds to its income levels in 2010. These quality measures correct
unit values for such factors as production cost differences. Developed by the IMF, it is the most extensive quality
database available, covering 178 countries (including most LIDCs) and 851 products over the period 1962–2010.
7
  This paragraph is based on work done by Chris Papageorgiou and Ke Wang of the IMF.
8
  Based on the World Bank UNESCAP Trade Costs Database, which synthesizes a wide set of bilateral trade barriers,
including policy restrictions, geographic distance, and the quality of transportation infrastructure. Arvis et al. (2013)
provide a comprehensive description of the data. Here the data set is used to construct a measure of how costly it is
for LIDCs to trade with each G-20 member relative to the cost of exchanging goods within borders. From a policy
perspective, as explained by Arvis et al. (2013), it is important to bear in mind some caveats regarding this measure
of trade costs. First, since trade costs are bilateral, it is impossible to say without further analysis to disentangle the
contribution of actions taken by one country to changes in trade costs. Second, the trade costs measure is a measure
of international relative to domestic trade costs. Therefore, a change in trade costs might be due to a change in either
domestic or international conditions, or both simultaneously.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                    11
Figure 1.5: Average Bilateral Trade Costs by Country Group, 2010
                    400
                    350
                    300
                    250
                    200
                    150
                    100
                     50
                      0



                                              G20     LIDC   non-LIDC

Source: World Bank computation based on data from the World Bank’s UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific) Trade Costs database.
Note: G-20 = Group of 20; LIDC = low-income developing country. For comparison purposes, trade costs are
computed for the subsample of partner countries for which data are available for all G20 countries.

Some G-20 countries became cheaper destinations for imports and exports of LIDCs between 2001
and 2010, but the level of trade costs changed little during that period. Figure 1.6 compares trade costs
between LIDCs and G-20 countries in 2001 and 2010. The decline in trade costs between China and LIDCs
is the only remarkable change. LIDCs saw only a slight reduction of trade costs with most other G-20
countries. Only the United Kingdom and Russia seem to be more expensive partners for LIDCs in 2010
than 2001.9




9
 Trade costs for G-20 countries decreased or remained constant across all countries, whereas trade costs for other
non-LIDC countries exhibited a more heterogeneous pattern.


                                                       12
Figure 1.6: Bilateral Trade Costs between Low-Income Developing Countries and Group of 20
countries, 2001 and 2010
                   450
                   400
                   350
                   300
                   250
                   200
                   150
                   100
                    50
                      0



                                                   2010     2001

Source: World Bank computation using data from the World Bank’s UNESCAP (United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Asia and the Pacific) Trade Costs database.
Note: For comparison purposes, trade costs are computed for the subsample of partner countries for which data are
available both in 2001 and 2010.

In sum, the evidence presented here highlights the relative isolation of LIDCs from the world trading system
and from the G-20. Box 1.1 analyzes the role of domestic constraints in hampering the participation of
LIDCs in the global economy.

                            Box 1.1: LIDCs’ Domestic Constraints to Export

Domestic factors that inhibit the cost of doing business can impede the participation of low-income
developing countries (LIDCs) in global value chains (GVCs) and world trade more generally.
Ensuring that goods reach the border is one of the most pervasive binding constraints to LIDCs ’ export
growth. Freund and Rocha (2010), for instance, find that transit delays were the most important constraint
to exports from African countries. The availability of basic infrastructure, such as good-quality ports and
telecommunication services, is central in this regard (Nordås and Piermartini 2004). The effect of poor
infrastructure on transport costs is magnified for landlocked countries (several of which are LIDCs), since
their ability to trade also depends on the infrastructure in neighboring transit countries (Limão and Venables
2001).

Infrastructure alone, however, does not determine high transport costs and transit delays.
Institutional barriers to trade, such as red tape, customs procedures, laws, and access to services are
equally important. According to the World Bank’s Doing Business data, more onerous border procedures
means that it takes three times as many days, nearly twice as many documents, and six times as many
signatures to import goods in poor countries as it does in rich ones; Africa, which is home to several LIDCs,
has twice as many import procedures as member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) (McLinden 2012).

Besides customs procedures, rules and regulations implemented by a combination of government
agencies—health, agriculture, law enforcement, immigration, and so forth—also contribute to border
delays. It is worth noting that the burden of border procedures and other clearance processes is particularly
acute for landlocked countries, because regulation in transit countries matters as well (Arvis, Raballand,


                                                       13
and Marteau 2007). Furthermore, the lack of competition in the market for logistics services—such as
trucking—can result in high markups (Portugal-Perez and Wilson 2009; Raballand, Macchi, and Petracco
2010). Teravaninthorn and Raballand (2009) show that competition-restricting market regulations in West
and Central Africa have kept prices high, whereas competition and deregulation in East and Southern Africa
have produced lower costs to users. To maximize their participation in global value chains, LIDCs may
also have to invest in innovation systems and skill development and, in certain cases, deepen backward and
forward linkages to commodity exports (Park, Nayyar, and Low 2013).

Domestic constraints matter for services trade as well. Amin and Mattoo (2006) find that countries with
better institutions have larger and more dynamic services sectors. They suggest that regulatory and contract-
enforcing institutions play a key role in the development of services sectors because of the complex web of
transactions with the rest of the economy. Comparative advantage in services can also be linked to
governance frameworks, laws and regulations, business environment, and labor skills (Sáez et al. 2015;
Van der Marel 2012). Countries with more restrictive regulations toward foreign services providers are
associated with lower total services exports on a value-added basis. This relationship is not as strong,
however, for gross services export shares or direct value-added services export shares. That factor suggests
that the regulatory environment matters more for other sectors seeking to use services as inputs for their
exports than for direct services exports. Therefore, one can conclude that a restrictive regulatory framework
is likely to reduce services exports (and thus export diversification) and limit the competitiveness of other
sectors of the economy (see figure B1.1).

Figure B1.1.1: Services Exports and the Services Trade Restrictiveness Index




Source: World Bank Export Value Added database; Borchert, Gootiiz, and Mattoo 2012.
Note: STRI = Services Trade Restrictiveness Index. Countries are abbreviated according to the International
Organization of Standards method.

Domestic constraints also play a crucial role in inhibiting FDI flows and, therefore, participation in
GVCs. In addition to the lack of infrastructure and skills, the investment climate in LIDCs is often
characterized by barriers to entry, lack of transparency, corruption, mandatory local content requirements,
and lack of property rights protection. Furthermore, political risk—manifested in arbitrary changes of
regulations, breach of contract, and expropriation—can reduce the competitiveness of LIDCs in attracting
FDI. The inadequate investment climate and low institutional quality in LIDCs, relative to G-20 economies,
are reflected in a number of global indexes, including Doing Business (189 economies), the Global
Competitiveness Index (144 economies), and the Corruption Perception Index (175 economies). Table
B1.1.1 provides the relevant rankings of G-20 countries and LIDCs and the annexes include additional
information on these rankings.




                                                     14
Table B1.1.1: Country Rankings According to Doing Business, the Global Competitiveness Index,
and the Corruption Perception Index
                             Group of 20 countries                                          Low-income countries
                  Doing            Global          Corruption                    Doing           Global         Corruption
                 Business,     Competitiveness     Perception                   Business,    Competitiveness     Perception
                   2015        Index, 2014–15      Index, 2013                    2015       Index, 2014–15     Index, 2013
 Argentina         124               104              107        Afghanistan       183              —               172
 Australia           10               22               11        Bangladesh        173             109              145
 Brazil             120               57               69        Benin             151              —                80
 Canada              16               15               10        Burkina Faso      167             135               85
 China              90                28              100        Burundi           152             139              159
 France              31               23               26        Cambodia          135              95              156
 Germany             14                5               12        Central           187              —               150
                                                                 African
                                                                 Republic
 India             142                71               85        Chad             185              143              154
 Indonesia         114                34              107        Comoros          159               —               142
 Italy              56                49               69        Congo, Dem.      184               —               154
                                                                 Rep.
 Japan              29                6               15         Eritrea          189               —               166
 Korea, Rep.         5                26               43        Ethiopia         132              118              110
 Mexico             39                61              103        Gambia, The      138              125              126
 Russian            62                53              136        Guinea           169              144              145
 Federation
 Saudi Arabia       49                24               55        Guinea-          179              —                161
                                                                 Bissau
 South Africa       43                56               67        Haiti            180              137              161
 Turkey             55                45               64        Kenya            136               90              145
 United              8                9                14        Liberia          174               —                94
 Kingdom
 United States      7                 3                17        Madagascar       163              130              133
                                                                 Malawi           164              132              110
                                                                 Mali             146              128              115
                                                                 Mozambique       127              133              119
                                                                 Myanmar          177              134              156
                                                                 Nepal            108              102              126
                                                                 Niger            168               —               103
                                                                 Rwanda           46                62               55
                                                                 Sierra Leone     140              138              119
                                                                 Tajikistan       166               91              152
                                                                 Tanzania         131              121              119
                                                                 Togo             149                               126
                                                                 Uganda           150              122              142
                                                                 Zimbabwe         171              124              156
Sources: World Bank’s Doing Business rankings for 2015; World Economic Forum’s Global Comp etitiveness Index
for 2014–15; Transparency International’s Corruption Perception Index for 2015.
Note: — = not ranked.




                                                            15
1.2. Trade in services

Exports of services have increased for all country income groups and regions (figure 1.7). World
services exports have increased fourfold since 1990. Upper-middle-income developing economies have
benefited the most from this boom, expanding services exports ninefold between 1991 and 2013. In Latin
America, Brazil, Costa Rica, and Uruguay export professional and information technology–related services;
Mexico exports communication and distribution services; and Chile exports distribution and transportation
services. Exports of professional services to Europe by Kenya, South Africa, and Tunisia are growing. The
Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand are exporting medical services, and Malaysia is increasing its exports
of education, Islamic banking, and telecommunication services. Low-income developing countries
experienced around a fivefold increase of their exports between 1991 and 2013, largely because of the
expansion of tourism in countries like Cambodia, Nepal, and Tanzania. High-income countries, the leaders
of services exports in absolute terms, also expanded their exports four times during the same period.

                       p
Figure 1.7: Services Exports Growth, 1991–2013




Source: UNCTADStat database.

Only upper-middle-income economies (together with India) have successfully expanded their share
in the global services market (see figure 1.8). Upper-middle-income countries more than doubled their
share of the global services market, from 6 percent in 1980 to over 13 percent in 2013, thereby reducing
the participation of high-income countries. The share of LIDC exports in the global services market,
however, has remained stagnant, and negligible, over the past 35 years. Exports from lower-middle-income
economies (excluding India and Indonesia) have remained below 3 percent of the global market, whereas
those of low-income countries were at 0.6 percent in 2013, the same as in 1980.




                                                    16
Figure 1.8: Share of World Services Exports, 1980–2012




Source: UNCTADStat database.

In addition to providing a channel for export diversification, services trade is a key input for the
export of other goods and services. Assessing trade in relation to value added, rather than direct export
values, provides greater insight into how services trade can enhance competitiveness and promote
integration in the global economy. This deeper analysis of services trade shows that, when measured in
value added, services exports from LIDCs are more significant than is reflected by the direct exports. In
addition, it also becomes clear that trade in services is an essential input for other exports of LIDCs,
especially for manufacturing and primary exports. Figure 1.9 provides three different measures of the
importance of services exports by LIDCs.10 The first bar (blue) represents gross exports of services.11 The
second bar (red) represents the share of direct services exports when measured by value added.12 The third
bar (green) represents both the direct and indirect (or total) value added of services in all exports (for
example, including forward linkages).13 The gap between the two indicates that services are supporting
other export activities.




10
   The data come from the World Bank’s export of value added database. It covers only 25 countries in Africa. We
have included all African countries in the database.
11
   Gross exports are the transaction value of a sector’s exports. They capture both the value added embodied in the
production of the export and all domestic and imported intermediate inputs.
12
   Direct value-added exports measures gross exports less domestic and foreign inputs. This measure captures the true
sector-specific value-added contribution of exports.
13
   Total value added of exports adds the value added of inputs produced domestically to the direct value added of
exports. It captures the indirect contribution through value chain linkages with other export activities, expressed as
forward or backward linkages.


                                                         17
Figure 1.9: Low-Income Developing Countries’ Share of Service Exports in Total Exports, 2011
                                      a. African LIDCs
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
     0




          ben   bfa   cmr    civ    egy     eth     gha         gin     mdg         moz      mar     mwi      nga    rwa    sen    tza   tgo   uga
                                                           Gross                    Direct            Total

                                    b. LIDCs from the Americas, Asia, and Europe
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
      0




          arm   bgd   bol   khm    slv    geo     gtm     hnd         kgz     lao      mng     npl     nic     pak    pry    phl   lka   ukr   vnm
                                                           Gross                    Direct            Total

Source: World Bank’s Export Value Added database.
Note: LIDC = low-income developing country.

These values suggest that services can be valuable to LIDCs either as exports per se or as inputs to other
exports. That seems to apply to LIDCs across regions. For example, in Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, Malawi,
Bangladesh, all Central American countries, and Pakistan, the total services exports far exceed the values
for the direct exports, suggesting that services in those countries are mostly exported as input to other
products—mostly exported goods. In other LIDCs, such as Benin, Morocco, Georgia, and Ukraine, services
are mostly exported as such.

Transport, distribution, trade, and “other business services”14 are the main services exports of Africa,
which is home to a large number of LIDCs (see figure 1.10). Transport services represent a significant
percentage of total services exports in nearly all LIDCs. However, their importance diminishes when
measured for value added. That decline in the share of value added indicates weak linkages between
transport and other service sector exports. In contrast, distribution and trade services (which include hotels
and restaurants) and other business services (which include information and communication technology

14
   Other business services include (a) real estate activities, (b) rentals of transport equipment, (c) rentals of other
machinery and equipment, (d) rentals of personal and household goods not elsewhere classified, (e) computer and
related activities, (f) research and development, and (g) other business activities.


                                                                            18
and professional services) tend to have stronger linkages to other export sectors. In the case of Guinea,
Senegal, Togo, Bangladesh, and El Salvador, for example, those shares are much larger when forward
linkages are included. That fact confirms that those services play a critical role in supporting other export
activities in those countries and the region as a whole. It is also interesting to note that exports of “other
commercial services”—such as personal, cultural, and recreational services—are important exports for
several of the LIDCs, such as Madagascar, Malawi, Senegal, Uganda, Nepal, and Honduras.

Figure 1.10: Structure of Low-Income Developing Countries’ Services Exports, 2011

                                                                           a. African LIDCS
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0




       Total


                 Total


                          Total


                                   Total


                                             Total


                                                        Total


                                                                  Total


                                                                            Total


                                                                                     Total


                                                                                              Total


                                                                                                        Total


                                                                                                                 Total


                                                                                                                             Total


                                                                                                                                      Total


                                                                                                                                               Total


                                                                                                                                                        Total


                                                                                                                                                                   Total


                                                                                                                                                                            Total
      Direct


                Direct


                         Direct


                                  Direct


                                            Direct


                                                       Direct


                                                                 Direct


                                                                           Direct


                                                                                    Direct


                                                                                             Direct


                                                                                                       Direct


                                                                                                                Direct


                                                                                                                            Direct


                                                                                                                                     Direct


                                                                                                                                              Direct


                                                                                                                                                       Direct


                                                                                                                                                                  Direct


                                                                                                                                                                           Direct
      Gross


                Gross


                         Gross


                                  Gross


                                            Gross


                                                       Gross


                                                                 Gross


                                                                           Gross


                                                                                    Gross


                                                                                             Gross


                                                                                                       Gross


                                                                                                                Gross


                                                                                                                            Gross


                                                                                                                                     Gross


                                                                                                                                              Gross


                                                                                                                                                       Gross


                                                                                                                                                                  Gross


                                                                                                                                                                           Gross
        ben      bfa      cmr       civ         egy      eth      gha       gin      mdg         moz     mar       mwi       nga       rwa      sen      tza       tgo      uga
                         Transport                             Finance                  Communications                   Water & utilities                 Construction
                         Distribution & trade                  Insurance                Other business                   Other commercial



                                                b. LIDCs from the Americas, Asia, and Europe
 50
 40
 30
 20
 10
  0



        Total


                 Total


                          Total


                                   Total


                                            Total


                                                       Total


                                                                Total


                                                                         Total


                                                                                  Total


                                                                                           Total


                                                                                                    Total


                                                                                                             Total


                                                                                                                      Total


                                                                                                                               Total


                                                                                                                                        Total


                                                                                                                                                 Total


                                                                                                                                                          Total


                                                                                                                                                                   Total


                                                                                                                                                                            Total
       Direct


                Direct


                         Direct


                                  Direct


                                           Direct


                                                      Direct


                                                               Direct


                                                                        Direct


                                                                                 Direct


                                                                                          Direct


                                                                                                   Direct


                                                                                                            Direct


                                                                                                                     Direct


                                                                                                                              Direct


                                                                                                                                       Direct


                                                                                                                                                Direct


                                                                                                                                                         Direct


                                                                                                                                                                  Direct


                                                                                                                                                                           Direct
       Gross


                Gross


                         Gross


                                  Gross


                                           Gross


                                                      Gross


                                                               Gross


                                                                        Gross


                                                                                 Gross


                                                                                          Gross


                                                                                                   Gross


                                                                                                            Gross


                                                                                                                     Gross


                                                                                                                              Gross


                                                                                                                                       Gross


                                                                                                                                                Gross


                                                                                                                                                         Gross


                                                                                                                                                                  Gross


                                                                                                                                                                           Gross




        arm      bgd      bol     khm       slv        geo      gtm      hnd      kgz      lao     mng       npl      nic      pak      pry      phl      lka      ukr      vnm
                         Transport                             Finance                  Communications                   Water & utilities                 Construction
                         Distribution & trade                  Insurance                Other business                   Other commercial

Source: World Bank’s Export Value Added database.
Note: LIDC = low-income developing country.




                                                                                        19
1.3. Integration in global value chains

Following the pattern of total trade, although the value of LIDC imports of parts and components
has increased in the past 10 years, the role of LIDCs in that GVC-related trade appears to be limited
(see figure 1.11). Only 3 percent of world imports of parts and components are done by LIDCs (see box
1.2 for a brief review of the Sub-Saharan Africa experience in this regard). G-20 countries dominate the
value of world imports in parts and components, and that situation has not changed in the past decade or
so.15

Figure 1.11: Value of Imports in Parts and Components by Country Group
                                  3000
                                          G20    LIDC   Non-LIDC
                                  2500


                                  2000
                    US$ Billion




                                  1500


                                  1000


                                  500


                                    0
                                     2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nation’s COMTRADE database.
Note: G-20 = Group of 20; LIDC = low-income developing country. Parts and components are defined according to
the Broad Economic Categories.




15
  To analyze participation in GVCs, measures of trade in value added are ideally needed. However, trade in value-
added data for LIDCs are scarce. Imports of parts and components, although imperfect, are an alternative measure of
the participation of LIDCs in GVCs.


                                                               20
            Box 1.2: Global Value Chains and the Missing Link in Sub-Saharan Africa’s Trade Integration

One key aspect in the development of global trade in recent decades has been the development of global
value chains (GVCs). Experience across the globe shows that deeper integration into GVCs has been
associated with a pickup in income levels over time. Yet Sub-Saharan African countries still generally find
themselves at the start of this integration process, although a substantial degree of heterogeneity exists
across the region (figure B1.2.1). Oil exporters are the least integrated in GVCs, reflecting their heavy
reliance on extractive activities. However, in the rest of the region, a majority of countries have made
progress since the early 1990s, even if from low starting points.

Figure B1.2.1: Sub-Saharan Africa and Comparator Countries: Depth of Integration in Global
              g
Value Chains, Average 2008–12
                                              50
 Share of foreign value added in countries'




                                              45                   Oil exporters
                                              40                                  -intensive countrie
                                                                   Non-oil resource
                                              35                             -Saharan Afric
                                                                   Rest of Sub
            exports, in percent




                                              30                   Comparator countrie
                                              25                   1991–95 average
                                              20
                                              15
                                              10
                                               5
                                               0




                                                   Low-income developing…
                                                              Bangladesh
                                                              Madagascar




                                                                  Senegal




                                                       Emerging markets¹
                                                     Advanced economies
                                                              Cabo Verde


                                                                   Burundi
                                                                 Tanzania
                                                               Seychelles




                                                                    Angola
                                                                    Poland
                                                      Central African Rep.




                                                                   Uganda




                                                                  Vietnam
                                                             Mozambique
                                                             Sierra Leone




                                                       Congo, Republic of




                                                            South Sudan
                                                                   Lesotho
                                                                Swaziland
                                                     São Tomé & Príncipe




                                                                Botswana
                                                                  Mauritius




                                                                Zimbabwe




                                                                     Malawi
                                                                      Benin




                                                                       India
                                                             Côte d'Ivoire

                                                                      Chad
                                                       Congo, Dem. Rep.




                                                                      China
                                                                   Ethiopia




                                                                     Liberia




                                                              South Africa
                                                                      Niger




                                                                    Ghana


                                                                    Gabon
                                                               Cameroon
                                                                    Guinea
                                                                   Namibia
                                                                  Rwanda




                                                                     Kenya
                                                            Burkina Faso
                                                                      Togo
                                                                   Gambia




                                                                        Mali




                                                                    Nigeria
                                                                    Zambia
                                                                     Eritrea




Sources: Eora database; International Monetary Fund calculations.
Note: Emerging markets data excludes Sub-Saharan African countries.

Even more encouraging, five countries stand out, having seen their integration rise by a magnitude similar
to countries like Poland or Vietnam—examples of successful partnerships in larger global value chains. In
those countries—Tanzania, Ethiopia, the Seychelles, South Africa, and Kenya—the sectors that benefited
the most from deeper integration include manufacturing, agriculture and agrobusiness, and to a lesser
extent, textiles, transport, and tourism. These results highlight the sectors where the region may build on its
comparative advantages (a young and growing workforce, a large share of unused land, a favorable climate),
provided the business environment is sufficiently conducive.

In that respect, infrastructure appears as the most important impediment to trade for the region: bringing
the quality of infrastructure in the region to the level found elsewhere in the world could help enhance the
region’s trade flows by as much as 40 percent (figure B1.2.2). Likewise, policies to improve access to credit
for the private sector, improve the rule of law, and lower tariffs would also allow for further trade growth.
Finally, G-20 countries could support the expansion of Sub-Saharan African trade by opening their markets
in more systematic ways to the region’s goods, especially in the context of the renewal of the African
Growth and Opportunity Act (with the United States) and conclusions of the Economic Partnership
Agreements (with the European Union). Increased foreign direct investment from G-20 countries into Sub-
Saharan African nonresource sectors could also strongly underpin future export growth.




                                                              21
Figure B1.2.2: Sub-Saharan Africa: Potential Increase in Trade
                                      45
                                      40
                                      35
                                      30
                                      25



                            Percent
                                      20    42

                                      15                      29        28
                                      10
                                                                                      14
                                       5
                                       0




                                                            Domestic
                                           Infrastructure




                                                                                      Tariffs
                                                                        Rule of law
                                                             credit
Source: International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook database; World Economic Forum; International
Monetary Fund calculations.
Note: Percentage increase in Sub-Saharan Africa’s trade if the variable moves from the average for Sub -Saharan
Africa to the average for the rest of the world.
Source: This box was written by Celine Allard, Wenjie Chen, and Jesus Rodrigo Gonzalez-Garcia of the African
Department of the International Monetary Fund and is based on chapter 3 of Regional Economic Outlook: Sub-
Saharan Africa (IMF 2015).

Although the absolute value of imports may strongly depend on the size of the LIDC in question, the
share of imports in parts and components over total imports (blue dots in figure 1.12) still provides
a mixed picture. More than one-fourth and one-fifth of total manufacturing imports, respectively, of the
Philippines and Vietnam are in parts and components. The picture of other Southeast Asian economies is
different. For Bangladesh and Cambodia, less than 5 percent of total imports are in parts and components.
Differences are also present in Africa where Mauritania, Morocco, Niger, Mali, and Zambia appear to be
more integrated than Republic of Congo, Togo, Malawi, Benin, and The Gambia.

Figure 1.12: Value and Share of Imports in Parts and Components
  30%                                                                                                       100000
          VNM
        PHL
  25%                                      UKR
                MAR NGA      EGY                                                                            10000
                                                              PAK
  20%     PNG ZMB       GHA           KEN ETH
                       TZA   SDN
                            MNG MOZ      BOL PRY              GTM         LKA         BGD
        MRT                                        CIV                                     1000
                                                                                                                     Million $



                               CMR SEN              NIC        HND ZWE   GEO
                                                                       YEM   SLV  COG
               MLI BFA                                 MDAUGA
                                                         KGZ     NPL
  15%       NER                                 MDG                           ARM      KHM
                                 GUY                         RWA               MWI
                           BTN                        AFG            BEN         TGO
                      CPV                      BDI                                         100
  10%             SLB                                                      TMP
                                           CAF             VUT    GMB
                                        STP                                        WSM
                                                                      FSM                  10
   5%
                                                                                     KIR
   0%                                                                                                       1
         VUT
        MNG




        TMP
          MLI



          TZA




         UKR




         AFG



        GTM




         TGO
         GEO
        VNM
         NER

          SLB



         EGY

        CMR




          CIV




        ZWE
         FSM




        BGD
         GUY

          STP



        MDG



         KGZ




        ARM
         PHL




         BFA




         CAF
          PRY




         NPL




        WSM




            Value of imports in parts and components (million $)         Share of imports in parts and components

Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nation’s COMTRADE database.


                                                                   22
2. G-20 trade and investment policies toward LIDCs

In addition to domestic factors (box 1.1), LIDCs’ competitiveness is affected by G-20 policies. Tariff
barriers faced by LIDCs have largely decreased over time, more so for those imposed by G-20 countries.
Nontariff measures (NTMs) are increasingly perceived as an impediment to trade for LIDCs, although at
times the story is more nuanced (see box 2.1 for two illustrative examples). Many provisions that shape the
integration of LIDCs in the world economy are contained in bilateral trade and investment agreements.

          Box 2.1: The Case of Intellectual Property Rights and Government Procurement

Protection of intellectual property rights
Research and development (R&D) entails high levels of investment coupled with uncertain results.
Therefore, stronger intellectual property (IP) protection—which provides patent holders with exclusive
marketing rights over the product for a specified time—increases the incentives for firms in advanced
economies to invest in innovation. At the same time, strong IP protection helps attract foreign direct
investment to developing countries—including low-income developing countries (LIDCs) —which is
likely to strengthen their ability to participate in the world economy, including through global value chains.
LIDCs could also benefit from the transfer of technology associated with foreign direct investment and
resulting trade relationships.

Empirical evidence suggests that stronger patent protection in developing countries is associated with
higher returns to domestic R&D in advanced economies, larger international R&D spillovers, and greater
innovation in developing economies (Branstetter, Fisman, and Foley 2006; Coe, Helpman, and Hoffmaister
2009). Conversely, there is the possibility that stronger IP protection may reduce the incentive to innovate
by diminishing the threat of competition. Some evidence documents a negative relationship between
strengthening IP protection, on the one hand, and increasing innovation or technology diffusion, on the
other (Bessen and Maskin 2000; Lerner 2002; Sakakibara and Branstetter 2001; Scherer and Weisburst
1995). Given this trade-off, incentives to innovate must be balanced against the need to accelerate
knowledge dissemination and absorption. The optimum, therefore, places the focus on the duration and
scope of patent protection. The system must also determine instances where minor modifications prolong
the life of a patent without amounting to genuine scientific invention.

The World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPS) attempts to find an appropriate balance between the short-term interests of maximizing
access to knowledge and the long-term interests of promoting creativity and innovation. This issue is much
cited with regard to pharmaceutical patents, where there are tensions between the need to provide incentives
or R&D into new drugs and the need to make existing drugs available to LIDCs at a reasonable cost. Under
the TRIPS Agreement, all member countries are required to provide exclusive marketing rights to holders
of patents on pharmaceutical products for a period of at least 20 years. That provision determines the length
of the approval process for the production and import of nonpatented (generic) versions of several drugs.
WTO rules do provide public health safeguards, especially in the case of national health emergencies,
provided that the measures taken are consistent with the provisions of the agreement. The flexibilities in
the TRIPS Agreement were subsequently clarified by the 2001 Doha Declaration on the TRIPs Agreement
and Public Health. It helped catalyze the growing understanding that access to medicines in LIDCs requires
the right mix of intellectual property rules and the judicious and informed use of a range of measures,
including procurement strategies, attention to tariffs, and other trade-related drivers of cost (WTO 2013).

More generally, flexibilities in the TRIPS Agreement are also reflected in its transition provisions, which
provide LIDCs with extra time to implement the applicable changes to their national laws in two tiers of
transition according to their level of development. Least developed countries were originally given a
transition period of 10 years to undertake disciplines under the TRIPS Agreement. That period expired in


                                                     23
2005, but it has been extended twice. The transition period for LDCs to implement TRIPS was extended to
2013, and until January 1, 2016, for pharmaceutical patents, with the possibility of further extension.
Following a decision of the TRIPS Council on June 11, 2013, the transition period has now been extended
until July 1, 2021 (WTO 2014).

Many developing countries have been found not to have incorporated TRIPS flexibilities—related to
compulsory licensing, parallel importation, limits on data protection, use of broad research and other
exceptions to patentability, and so forth—into their legislation to the extent authorized under the Doha
Round (Musungu and Oh 2005). That fact may be attributable to the lack of the legal and technical expertise
needed to draft legislation that implements flexibilities. WTO’s technical assistance programs are central
in this regard. There are also various provisions in the WTO agreements and subsequent decisions at WTO
Ministerial Conferences, which specifically require developed countries to provide technical assistance to
LIDCs (WTO 2014).

Government procurement
The general principle behind the WTO Government Procurement Agreement (GPA) is to form a single
government procurement market “to maximize opportunities for competitive suppliers and reduce costs of
doing business for both government and industry.” The procurement provisions are designed to ensure that
both parties’ suppliers are given equal access to each other’s government procurement markets.

The GPA has only 43 signatories out of 161 WTO members (10 additional countries are currently
negotiating accession)—most of which are advanced economies.a LIDCs, and developing countries more
generally, tend to be nonsignatories primarily because governments do not want to place local suppliers
and small and medium enterprises at a disadvantage against more competitive foreign firms (Wells and
Hawkins 2008).

At the regional level, some U.S. and EU preferential trade agreements (PTAs) include “nonparty” most-
favored-nation (MFN) clauses in the area of government procurement, which ensure that more
advantageous commitments with other nonmember partners—past and future—should be granted to PTA
partners as well (Fink and Molinuevo 2008). Third-party MFN guarantees also limit the extent to which
preferential procurement is undermined by subsequent PTAs (Baldwin et al. 2009). The government
procurement provisions of regional trade agreements have therefore made feasible a significant further
expansion of the membership of the GPA, which can enable LIDCs to partake in the benefits of that
multilateral agreement (Anderson et al. 2010).

Local content requirements (LCRs) are commonly embedded in government procurement policiesb of
several G-20 countries and are often designed for industrial objectives (Hufbauer et al. 2013). c They are
likely to restrict exports from LIDC firms (Luckey 2012). The same holds true for a number of climate
change–based and energy security–based local content requirements enacted by advanced economies in the
context of government procurement. The GPA actually eliminates LCRs between signatories to the
agreement. However, as very few LIDCs are party to the GPA, they cannot avail themselves of this
associated benefit. In fact, the lion’s share of government procurement remains outside the multilateral
trading system and is therefore subject to discretionary LCRs.

A revised text of the GPA has been negotiated, and several accession negotiations are actively being
pursued (WTO 2013). The revised GPA (and more specifically Article X:6) explicitly states that parties
may apply technical specifications to promote the conservation of natural resources or to protect the
environment. Hence, instead of a member proving that its environmental policies fall under an exception to
the GPA, a member challenging those policies would need to demonstrate that the policies were
discriminatory or unrelated to climate change. Parties to the revised GPA also agreed to initiate a work
program on sustainable procurement (GPA/113, annex E). The design of these rules will have to be mindful


                                                    24
of the fact the more widespread use of climate-based local content requirements in government procurement
may hurt exports from LIDCs to G-20 markets.
a
         WTO             “Agreement             on        Government            Procurement”        web          page,
https://www.wto.org/english/tratop_e/gproc_e/gp_gpa_e.htm.
b
  The National Treatment article of the GATT-1947 excluded government procurement from its coverage. In 1994,
government procurement was carved out from the main commitments in the General Agreement on Trade in Services.
c
  Consider the “Buy American” policy or Section 1605 of the American Recover y and Reinvestment Act of 2009,
which requires that all of the iron, steel, and manufactured goods used in all ARRA-funded public buildings and public
works projects are produced in the United States.

2.1 Most-favored-nation tariffs

MFN (that is, nondiscriminatory) tariffs faced by least developed countries in G-20 markets have
declined over time and are 9.9 percent, on average.16 Across all WTO member countries, the simple
average MFN tariff on total nonoil imports of G-20 countries is 7.5 percent compared with 7.4 percent for
low- and middle-income members and 9.9 percent for LDCs. Moreover, although average MFN tariffs
faced by LDCs declined by 2.1 points between 2001–03 and 2011–13, the decline in MFN tariffs has been
slightly faster if all WTO members are considered. WTO commitments made by G-20 countries toward
low- and middle-income WTO members, represented by bound rates, are slightly more than twice MFN
tariffs (see table 2.1). It should, however, be noted that G-20 countries have put in place and announced
new preferential duty-free regimes for LDCs and some LIDCs, which means that exports originating in
those countries are not necessarily affected by high tariff barriers (see section 2.4).

Differences in MFN tariffs and bound rates across groups are due to different export structures.17
Substantial heterogeneity exists in the level of MFN and bound rates across sectors. Textiles and food
products are the most protected sectors; natural resources, such as ores and metals and fuel products, are
associated with lower tariffs and bound rates in G-20 countries. That sectoral pattern is similar across
partner groups. Imports of food, machinery and transport equipment, and fuels from LIDCs experienced
the largest decline in MFN tariffs. Bound rates remained roughly constant over time for all groups of
countries (see table 2.1).

The aggregate numbers—both MFN and bound rates—for all G-20 countries hide an important
difference between developed and developing countries. G-20 developed countries apply MFN tariffs
that are much lower than MFN tariffs applied by G-20 developing countries. The difference is even more
pronounced for bound rates: G-20 developing countries have bound rates five times the bound rates of G-
20 developed countries. Table 2.2 reports the simple average MFN and bound rates that G-20 developed
countries (Australia, Canada, the EU, Japan, and the United States) and G-20 developing countries
(Argentina, Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, the Republic of Korea, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South
Africa, and Turkey) apply to LDCs as well as low- and middle-income WTO members. The aggregate
decline in MFN tariffs faced by LDCs has been driven mainly by G-20 developing countries. The accession
of China to the WTO has been crucial in this respect (see also WTO 2014).




16
   The country groups used in the empirical analysis are those defined at the WTO. Therefore, in this section, the group
of least developed countries is used instead of LIDCs.
17
   MFN tariffs presented in this section are simple averages of tariffs on goods with positive trade.


                                                          25
Table 2.1: Most-Favored-Nation and Bound Rates of the Group of 20 by Partner Group and
Industry
                                                                   MFN tariff (%)             Bound rate (%)
                                                                              Change                    Change
                                                                               since                     since
                                                                2011–13       2001–03      2011–13      2001–03
 All WTO members
    Agricultural materials (SITC 0+1+2−27−28+4)                       12.1         −2.0         28.5          −0.7
        Food (SITC 0+1+22+4)                                          14.7         −2.6         32.5          −1.5
    Manufactures                                                       6.8         −2.8         17.8          −0.2
        Textiles as 26+65+84 of SITC Rev. 1                           11.9         −2.1         21.9          −0.2
        Chemicals (SITC 5)                                             4.8         −2.9         16.2          −0.4
        Machinery and transport equipment (SITC 7)                     4.9         −2.9         16.0           0.0
    Ores and metals (SITC 27+28+68)                                    3.1         −2.4         15.5           0.4
    Fuels (SITC 3)                                                     2.2         −2.1         15.2           0.5
    Total non-oil trade                                                7.5         −2.5         19.7          −0.1
 Low- and middle-income WTO members
    Agricultural materials (SITC 0+1+2−27−28+4)                       11.6         −1.8         28.1          −0.6
        Food (SITC 0+1+22+4)                                          14.2         −2.4         32.3          −1.5
    Manufactures                                                       6.9         −2.9         17.9          −0.2
        Textiles as 26+65+84 of SITC Rev. 1                           12.1         −2.1         21.9          −0.3
        Chemicals (SITC 5)                                             4.9         −3.0         16.3          −0.3
        Machinery and transport equipment (SITC 7)                     4.9         −2.9         16.0          −0.1
    Ores and metals (SITC 27+28+68)                                    3.2         −2.4         15.5           0.5
    Fuels (SITC 3)                                                     2.2         −2.1         15.1           0.2
    Total non-oil trade                                                7.4         −2.6         19.4          −0.1
 WTO least developing country members
    Agricultural materials (SITC 0+1+2−27−28+4)                       10.3         −2.1         26.4          −1.4
        Food (SITC 0+1+22+4)                                          12.6         −3.7         30.3          −2.5
    Manufactures                                                       9.8         −2.2         19.6          −0.4
        Textiles as 26+65+84 of SITC Rev. 1                           15.0         −1.1         24.3          −0.2
        Chemicals (SITC 5)                                             7.0         −2.3         18.8           0.8
        Machinery and transport equipment (SITC 7)                     4.5         −3.0         14.8          −0.4
    Ores and metals (SITC 27+28+68)                                    2.1         −2.5         14.3           0.7
    Fuels (SITC 3)                                                     1.7         −3.0         14.2           1.2
      Total non-oil trade                                                9.9       −2.1         21.1           −0.6
Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s
TRAINS (Trade Analysis Information System) database.
Note: SITC = Standard International Trade Classification; MFN = most-favored-nation; WTO = World Trade
Organization. MFN tariffs are the rates countries apply on imports from other members of the WTO, unless the country
is part of a preferential trade agreement. Bound tariffs are maximum specific commitments made by individual WTO
member governments. MFN tariff levels should not exceed the bound tariff for a given commodity line. When
countries join the WTO, or when WTO members negotiate tariff levels during trade rounds, they negotiate bound
tariff rates rather than actually applied MFN rates.




                                                        26
Table 2.2: Most-Favored-Nation and Bound Rates of the Group of 20 by Partner Group
                                                           MFN tariff (%)          Bound rate (%)
                                                                    Change                   Change
                                                                     since                    since
                                                     2011–13        2001–03     2011–13      2001–03
       Rate imposed by G-20 developed countries
       to
           All WTO members                                    3.5       −0.7           5.3          0.0
           Low- and middle-income WTO
           members                                            3.5       −0.8           5.4         −0.1
           Least developed country WTO members                4.8       −1.2           7.6          0.0
       Rate imposed by G20 developing to:
           All WTO members                                    9.5       −3.2         27.7          −0.2
           Low- and middle-income WTO
           members                                            9.4       −3.4         27.2          −0.2
           Least developed country WTO members           12.4         −2.3         28.6        −1.0
Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s
TRAINS (Trade Analysis Information System) database.
Note: G-20 = Group of 20; WTO = World Trade Organization.

Tariff uncertainty faced by LIDCs is still high, particularly with regard to G-20 developing countries.
Such uncertainty could be the result of either unbound tariffs (that is, tariffs for which the WTO members
have not committed a legal maximum) or, for those tariff lines that are bound, a large binding overhang—
the gap between bound and applied MFN rates—which allows countries to potentially raise tariffs up to the
bound level without being taken to dispute settlement or incurring sanctions. Table 2.2 shows that G-20
developing countries have, on average, more policy space than G-20 developed countries to use the binding
overhang. Uncertainty about tariffs reduces the incentive of firms to start exporting. That, in turn, has a
negative effect on trade.18

Tariff peaks and tariff escalation policies also affect market access and export diversification in
developing countries, although not necessarily in LDCs and some LIDCs that may benefit from
preferential schemes in those areas (see section 2.4 below). Since 2000, there has been little change in
the percentage of tariff peaks (when tariffs on certain products are considerably higher than usual) in
developed countries’ MFN schedules (that is, before granting preferences). As shown in table 2.3, tariff
peaks in high-income OECD countries are especially prominent in agriculture where 35 percent of
agriculture tariffs in 2015 were tariff peaks. The same holds true for tariff escalation, which penalizes value
addition through higher tariffs on products at more advanced stages of the production chain; in 2015, there
was a 9 percent difference in the tariffs on raw and finished agricultural goods.




18
  See Handley (2014) and Osnago, Piermartini, and Rocha (2015) for theoretical and empirical evidence of the
negative effects of trade policy uncertainty.


                                                      27
Table 2.3: Tariff peaks and escalation in high-income OECD countries, 2000–15
                                                     Percentage
                          2000     2005     2010    2011    2012   2013     2014                          2015a
       Tariff peaks
       Agricultural        33.4      37.6     34.6   36.3    36.0    35.8    37.2b                          35.4
       Nonagricultural       3.1      2.2      2.2    2.3     2.5     2.6      2.6                           2.5
       Tariff escalation
       Agricultural        12.6      10.7      9.8   11.2    10.0    10.5     10.9                            8.9
       Nonagricultural       2.1      1.6      1.2    1.2     0.3     0.3      0.3                            0.3
Source: UN-MDG Gap Task Force, forthcoming, on the basis of International Trade Centre data.
Note: Table shows country averages weighted by share in world imports. Tariff peaks are the proportion of total tariff
lines in a country’s most-favored-nation tariff schedule with tariffs above 15 percent. Tariff escalation refers to the
percentage point difference between the applied tariffs for finished (processed) goods and the tariffs applied on raw
materials. The country average is a simple average of the Harmonized System six-digit duty averages.
a
  Data for Australia are for 2014.
b
  The increase in the proportion of tariff peaks reflects the effect of exchange rate movements only.

2.2 Nontariff measures

Countries within the G-20 group19 are very heterogeneous with regard to the incidence of NTMs on
imports. On one side of the spectrum are the European Union, India, Russia, and Turkey which apply trade-
related regulations to more than 90 percent of imports. On the other side are China, Indonesia, and Mexico,
which use those measures on less than 65 percent of imports. Higher coverage ratios20 are associated with
higher required levels of compliance with the trade-related regulations in those countries and, therefore, are
an indication of the difficulty for exporters of entering into highly regulated markets.

For the largest markets in the G-20, the incidence of NTMs on import flows is mostly balanced across
trading partners (see figure 2.1).21 China, the European Union, India, and Russia accounted for 88.5
percent of LIDC exports to the G-20 in 2010–12, and, although these economies differ in the incidence of
NTMs on imports, coverage ratios are roughly similar between LIDC and non-LIDC partners. Among the
group of important markets in the G-20, India shows the highest incidence of NTMs with a coverage ratio
of 97.7 percent for imports from LIDCs. India is followed by Russia (94.0 percent), the European Union
(90.1 percent), and China (63.9 percent). The regulatory frameworks for trade in Brazil and Indonesia affect
imports from LIDC partners more than imports from the rest of world. Brazil, which represented 4 percent
of LIDC exports to G-20 countries in 2010–12, applies at least one NTM to 93.8 percent of imports from
LIDC partners. The corresponding figure is 69.2 percent for imports from non-LIDC partners. Likewise,
Indonesia, which accounts for 1.9 percent of LIDCs’ exports to the G-20, applies at least one NTM to 48
percent of imports from LIDCs compared with 38 percent of imports from the rest of the world. Japan and
Argentina, conversely, apply more NTMs to imports from non-LIDC partners than from LIDC partners.



19
 For which data are available.
20
  A measure of the importance of NTMs for overall import value is given by the coverage ratio. This indicator
measures the percentage of imports to country j subject to at least one NTM. In formal terms, the coverage ratio (Cj)
                  σ ஽ ೔ ௏೔
is given by: ‫ܥ‬௝ ൌ ൤   σ ௏೔
                             ൨ Ǥ ͳͲͲ, where ‫ܦ‬௜ is a dummy variable indicating the presence of one or more NTMs, and Vi is
the value of imports in product݅Ǥ We use the average of total imports by product (six-digit Harmonized System codes)
for the period 2010–12.
21
   Compares G-20 countries’ coverage ratios (for which data are available) computed for imports from LIDCs to
coverage ratios computed for imports from the rest of the world. Each bubble on the scatter plot represents a country,
and its size is relative to the importance of that specific market for the LIDC’s exports in 2010–12.


                                                              28
Figure 2.1: Share of Low-Income Developing Countries’ Imports to Each Group of 20 Country
Covered by at Least One Nontariff Measure, Average for 2010–12


             100
                                                                                         TUR
                                                                                          IND
                                                             BRA                      RUS

               80                                                               EUN




                                                                                   ARG




                                                  CHN
               60




                                          MEX



                       IDN
                                                JPN
               40




                       40                       60                   80                     100
                                                Coverage Ratio - ROW
Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nation’s COMTRADE database and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s TRAINS (Trade Analysis Information System) database.

Technical versus nontechnical regulations affecting LIDCs’ exports to G-20 countries

The incidence of nontariff measures depends not only on the types of products that are traded
between countries but also on the types of measures applied by the country. NTMs applied to imports
are divided into technical and nontechnical regulations. Technical regulations comprise science-based
measures that are enacted to preserved societal values, such as health protection, or to ensure particular
technical specification of products, such as product standards. Nontechnical regulations include measures
traditionally used as instruments of commercial policy, such as quantity (quotas) or price controls. To
identify whether G-20 countries use a particular type of NTM to influence trade from LIDC partners more
than trade from non-LIDC partners, we compare coverage ratios by different type of measures (see figure
2.2). 22




22
  As before, the 45-degree dashed line indicates the perfectly balanced NTM treatment between LIDC and non-LIDC
countries. The line is the LOWESS smoothing, which provides the best nonlinear fit to the data.


                                                        29
Figure 2.2: Trade Incidence of Group of 20 Nontariff Measures in Low-Income Developing Country
Exports, by Type, Average for 2010–12
                                 A: SPS                                                                          B: TBT




                                                                         100
                                                            TUR                                                                         IND




                                    Coverage Ratio - LIDC
     40

                                                                                                                             BRA
                                                                                                                                    EUN
                                                                                                                                     TUR




                                                                             80
     30




                     IDN




                                                                             60
                              RUS
                            EUN                                                                                        CHN
     20




                             JPN                                  BRA                                                MEX
               IND   MEX




                                                                             40
     10




                                  ARG                                                                          JPN                 ARG
                   CHN                                                                           IDN RUS




                                                                             20
       0




               5         10     15      20     25                  30                      20            40        60        80          100
                          Coverage Ratio - ROW                                                            Coverage Ratio - ROW


                                 E: QC                                                                           F: PC



                                                                         100
     80




                                                                                                                                          IND
                                    Coverage Ratio - LIDC




                                                     BRA                                                                                 RUS




                                                                             20 40 60 80
     60




                                                                                                                           TUR
     40




                                               CHN                                                       ARG
                                              IDN RUS
     20




                           TUR                                                                                  JPN
                   MEX                                            ARG
                JPN
                  IND                                                                              MEX
               EUN                                                                             CHN
                                                                                               IDN
                                                                                                 BRA
                                                                                               EUN
                                                                                     0
       0




           0         10         20      30      40                 50                      0        20        40      60      80         100
                           Coverage Ratio - ROW                                                          Coverage Ratio - ROW
Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nation’s COMTRADE database and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s TRAINS (Trade Analysis Information System) database.

Sanitary and phytosanitary regulations in G-20 countries affect mostly LIDC partners. That result
reflects the fact that several LIDCs specialize in agricultural products that are more susceptible to SPS
regulation, whereas non-LIDC partners have a more diversified export basket. Argentina and Brazil are the
only G-20 countries where the trade incidence of SPS measures is greater for non-LIDC partners.

Technical barriers to trade (TBTs) in almost all G-20 countries are balanced between trading
partners. The only exception is Argentina, where 84.5 percent of imports from non-LIDC partners are
affected by TBT measures, whereas only 34.3 percent of LIDC imports are affected by TBT measures.
Smaller deviations in favor of LIDC partners or non-LIDC partners are observed in Brazil and Japan,
respectively.

The use of nontechnical measures among G-20 countries differs greatly, but such regulations are also,
on average, evenly applied across trading partners. Argentina, Brazil, China, Indonesia, and Russia
predominantly use quantitative restrictions, with coverage ratios that are larger than 25 percent. The
incidence of those restrictions is equally applied to imports from LIDC and non-LIDC partners, with the
important exception of Argentina and Brazil. The former imposes significantly more quantity restrictions
to imports from non-LIDC partners, whereas the latter imposes more restrictions on imports from LIDC
partners. Price controls are used predominantly in Argentina, India, Japan, Russia, and Turkey. These
measures are applied evenly across partner countries in all G-20 countries for which data are available.




                                                                        30
Table 2.4: Sectoral Incidence of Group of 20 Nontariff Trade Measures on Low-Income Developing
Country Exports, Average 2010–12)
                                               Share of        Share of Exports Covered by G20 NTMs
                                               Exports         A: SPS    B: TBT      E: QC      F: PC

    01-05 Animals & animal products               1.8            1.6         1.4          0.3          0.4
    06-14 Vegetable products                      7.3            7.1         5.9          1.4          2.2
    15 Fat & oils                                 1.2            1.1         0.6          0.2          0.4
    16-24 Prepared foods & beverages              4.2            3.7         2.8          0.6          1.9
    25-26 Mineral products                        5.6            0.9         2.7          0.5          1.4
    27 Oil minerals                              28.8            0.0         22.5         6.2         14.4
    28-38 Chemical products                       3.2            0.6         2.6          0.5          1.1
    39-40 Rubber & plastic                        2.0            0.4         1.0          0.2          0.6
    41-43 Hides, leather & skins                  0.9            0.4         0.4          0.1          0.2
    44-46 Wood, cork & straw                      2.0            0.9         0.7          0.3          0.4
    47-49 Paper, pulp & printing                  0.4            0.0         0.1          0.0          0.1
    50-63 Textiles & apparel                     11.5            2.1         7.6          2.7          2.9
    64-67 Footwear & headgear                     1.7            0.2         1.0          0.4          0.3
    68-70 Stone, ceramic & glass                  0.4            0.1         0.1          0.0          0.1
    71 Gems & jewelry                             1.0            0.0         0.5          0.3          0.4
    72-83 Metals & metal products                 7.9            0.2         2.8          0.8          2.3
    84-85 Mach. & elec. equipment                16.4            0.0         7.9          3.0          2.2
    86-89 Motor vehicles                          2.0            0.0         1.3          0.5          0.5
    90-92 Optical & medical instruments           0.6            0.1         0.4          0.1          0.1
    90-97 Miscellaneous                           0.9            0.1         0.5          0.1          0.2


    TOTAL                                       100.0           19.4         62.9        18.1         32.0

Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nation’s COMTRADE database and the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s TRAINS (Trade Analysis Information System) database.
Note: G-20 = Group of 20; NTM = nontariff measure; PC = price controls; QC = quantity controls; SPS = sanitary
and phytosanitary (measures); TBT = technical barriers to trade;. Table shows the share of total low-income
developing country exports into the G-20 countries by sector and the share of exports affected by different type of
NTMs. Each cell presents the share of total export value in 2010 –12.

The nature of the products exported by LIDCs to the G-20, relative to other trading partners,
explains some of the differences observed in the incidence measures presented above. Although the
LIDC export basket to G-20 countries contains mostly agricultural products and textiles (see table 2.4),
non-LIDC countries export mainly machinery and electrical equipment. Sanitary and phytosanitary
measures in the G-20, for example, affect mainly trade in vegetables, prepared foods, and beverages from
LIDC partners. About 10.8 percent of total imports from LIDCs belong to these sectors and are affected by
at least one SPS regulation (table 2.4). Another sector that is affected by SPS measures is textiles, whose
SPS-covered imports account for 2.1 percent of total G-20 country imports from LIDCs. Overall, on
average across G-20 countries, about 19.4 percent of LIDC imports are covered by at least one SPS measure.
For imports from non-LIDC partners, it is only 11 percent.

Technical barriers to trade from the G-20 countries fall predominantly on oil minerals, machinery and
electrical equipment, and textiles. Given the importance of textiles (and oil) for LIDC exports into G-20
countries, TBTs are likely to affect imports from LIDC more than imports from non-LIDC countries.


                                                          31
Quantity and price controls targeted mainly G-20 imports of oil minerals (petroleum); imports of textiles
and apparel by G-20 countries are also affected. At the same time, machinery and equipment, which are
imported mostly from non-LIDC partners, face quantitative restrictions (mostly in the form on
nonautomatic licenses).

2.3 Services measures

Services exports by LIDCs to G-20 economies are more heavily affected by general domestic
regulatory policies than by formal trade restrictions. Restrictions to services exports fall into two
categories: (a) barriers that target cross-border trade and investment and mobility of individual services
suppliers, for example, local presence requirements, such as the obligation to establish a commercial
presence to provide a service; and (b) domestic regulatory policies that do not directly aim to restrict trade
and investment in the services sector, but may nonetheless have such an effect. For instance, a licensing
requirement for professionals is meant to overcome information asymmetries between professionals and
consumers, but it may restrict services by foreign professionals whose credentials are not recognized. G-20
economies, especially OECD and EU members, have comparatively few restrictions to trade and investment
in services. Except for India, Indonesia, Saudi Arabia, China, and South Africa, all other G-20 economies
score fewer than 30 points out of a total of 100 in the Services Trade Restrictiveness Index (see figure 2.3).23

Figure
  g    2.3: Services Trade Restrictiveness




Source: World Bank’s Services Trade Restrictiveness Index.

The movement of individual services suppliers (mode 4) stands out as the most restrictive mode of
supply for all G-20 members, often several times more restrictive than the most open mode of service
supply (see figure 2.4). Goswami, Mattoo, and Sáez (2013) offer a comprehensive review of measures that
limit the movement of individual services providers (see box 2.2).




23
     The higher the index, the more restrictive are services in that particular country.


                                                              32
Figure 2.4: Services Restrictiveness of Group of 20 Countries, by Mode of Services Supply




Source: World Bank’s Services Trade Restrictiveness Index.

Nondiscriminatory domestic regulations and administrative conditions, not usually captured by a
restrictiveness index, may also influence the export of services through the movement of individual
suppliers. They include price-based measures, such as entry and exit taxes, visa fees, discriminatory airline
landing fees, and port taxes that may limit entry. In addition, some countries require individuals to show
proof that they will have sufficient financial resources while in the host country. Furthermore,
discriminatory access to information channels and distribution networks may restrict foreign suppliers of
services from gaining access to local markets. The lack of transparency and predictability in government
measures, procedures, and practices can be another major barrier to market access for developing countries.

                     Box 2.2: Limits to Movement of Individual Services Providers

x   Quantitative restrictions: Countries often maintain labor-market regulations that limit the percentage
    of foreign workers firms may employ.
x   Residency and nationality requirements: Several destination countries require such activities as
    legal, insurance, accounting, educational, surveying, or investment advisory services to be provided by
    citizens or residents of the host country. Although nationality requirements are usually focus on
    professionals or high-skilled services, industries such as maritime transport services maintain
    nationality requirements for low-skilled workers.
x   Technical standards and licensing: Professional qualifications, licenses, and training attained in the
    home country are often not recognized in destination countries. Foreign suppliers are often required to
    meet standards that are stricter and more costly to meet than the standards applied to domestic providers
    of similar services (Hoekman and Braga 1997). For instance, foreign nurses with education and practice
    experience that closely match domestic requirements still need to complete several months of learning
    modules in the United Kingdom (Engman 2010). Similarly, Canada, Italy, Spain, the United Kingdom,
    and the United States require foreign engineers to take a local examination to qualify for practice. Even
    when licensing requirements are applied even-handedly and nondiscriminatorily, they may entail a
    restriction to services trade because of the inherent administrative requirements that apply to these
    processes, usually requiring in-person exams.



                                                      33
x   Labor-market tests: Labor-market tests, which require employers to prove the need for a foreign
    supplier, are a prominent restriction used in G-20 countries: all but Japan, Mexico, the Republic of
    Korea, Turkey, and the United Kingdom have labor-market tests in at least one segment. In most cases,
    potential employers must go through extensive bureaucratic processes to prove their needs, making
    temporary movement unattractive except in case of the greatest need (Chaudhuri, Mattoo, and Self
    2004; Winters 2008).
x   Visa and employment permits: Visa requirements and employment permits are perhaps the first and
    main barrier used to restrict foreign suppliers of services, whether temporary or permanent. Trade
    agreements, including the General Agreement on Trade in Services, do not usually address issues
    related to visa requirements for services suppliers (Chaudhuri, Mattoo, and Self 2004). However, a
    dynamic and flexible use of visas may include a mechanism to ensure that services suppliers from low-
    income developing countries, duly accredited and certified, may access temporary visas that allow them
    to provide services.

2.4 Preferential trade and investment policies

LIDCs have benefited from a series of preferential market access schemes, especially in developed
countries. Preferential market access to developed countries has been promoted under the generalized
system of (nonreciprocal) preferences or through bilateral or regional agreements. Some large developing
countries, such as China and India, have also begun granting extensive preferences to LDCs with the
establishment of the Global System of Trade Preferences among Developing Countries (WTO 2014). At
present, of the 273 trade agreements in force (see figure 2.5), 22 percent involve LIDCs and G-20 countries.
More than half of them involve at least one country of the G-20 group. LIDCs are involved in 115 PTAs,
of which 60 also involve G-20 countries.

Figure 2.5: Number of Agreements in Force by Type of Signatories
                  300


                  250


                  200


                  150


                  100


                   50


                    0
                              All             G20             LIDC        LIDC and G20

Source: World Bank calculation based on data from the World Trade Organization’s Regional Trade Agreements
Information System.
Note: G-20 = Group of 20; LIDC = low-income developing country.




                                                    34
Preferential access on dutiable products

The average preferential tariff applied by G-20 countries to goods coming from WTO LDC members
is 7.3 percent, whereas average preferential tariffs are 6.3 percent and 6.1 percent for all WTO
members and for low- and middle-income members, respectively.24 Preferential tariffs are lower than
the MFN tariffs discussed in section 2.1 but follow a similar pattern across partner groups and time. On
average, LDCs face higher tariffs than other countries when exporting to G-20 countries. Effectively
applied tariffs declined slightly faster than MFN tariffs. Tariffs effectively applied by G-20 countries
declined, on average, by 3.5 points between 2001–03 and 2011–13 (see table 2.5).

Table 2.5: Preferential Tariffs Applied by All Group of 20 Members by Partner Group
                                                                                  Preferential tariffs
                                                                                             Change since
                                                                               2011–13          2001–03
          All WTO members                                                         6.3               −3.2
          Low- and middle-income WTO members                                      6.1               −3.5
         WTO least developed country members                              7.3             −3.5
Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s
TRAINS (Trade Analysis Information System) database.
Note: WTO = World Trade Organization.

Preferential tariffs imposed by G-20 developed countries on LDC exports are much lower than
preferential tariffs applied by G-20 developing countries. The average preferential tariff of G-20
developed countries is equal to 2.6 percent, whereas that of G-20 developing countries is 8.1 percent (see
table 2.6). The difference between tariffs effectively applied by developed and developing countries is even
more striking when considering preferences conceded to LDCs. Owing to bilateral and unilateral
liberalization, LDCs face virtually no barriers to entry in G-20 developed countries. On the other hand, they
still face high tariffs when accessing G-20 developing markets. However, G-20 developing countries
lowered their applied rates to LDC exports by almost four points in the past decade.

Agriculture is the sector where LDCs benefit from the largest margin of preference—compared with
other developing countries—in developed-country markets. The preference margin of LDCs relative to
other developing countries in agriculture was equal to 7 percent, on average, in 2014, whereas the margin
was just over 1 percent for textiles and clothing. The margins enjoyed by LDCs across sectors have changed
little in recent years (see figure 2.6).




24
   As in the analysis of MFN tariffs, the country groups used in the analysis of preferential tariffs are those commonly
used at the WTO. Therefore in this section, the group of LDCs is used instead of LIDCs. In this section, preferential
tariffs are defined as the lowest available tariff. If a preferential tariff does not exist, the applied MFN tariff is
considered instead. In reality, the importing country will apply the MFN tariff if the product fails to meet the country’s
rules that determine the product’s country of origin. Therefore, when analyzing the effects of preferential tariffs on
trade flows, additional caution is required regarding the assumptions about which tariff rate is actually applied to a
particular import.



                                                           35
Table 2.6: Preferential Tariffs of Developed and Developing Group of 20 Members by Partner Group
                                                                  Preferential tariffs
                                                                              Change
                                                                               since
                                                                 2011–13      2001–03
                     Rate imposed by developed G-20 members
                     to
                        All WTO members                                2.6          −1.2
                        Low- and middle-income WTO
                        members                                        2.2          −1.4
                        Least developed country WTO members            0.8          −2.6
                     Rate imposed by G-20 developing to:
                        All WTO members                                8.1          −4.0
                        Low- and middle income WTO members             8.1          −4.4
                        Least developed country WTO members            10.5         −3.7
Source: World Bank computation based on data from the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s
TRAINS (Trade Analysis Information System) database.
Note: G-20 = Group of 20; WTO = World Trade Organization.

Figure 2.6: Average Tariffs Levied by Developed Countries on Key Products Exported by
Developing Countries and Least Developed Countries, 1996–2014
              12.0
                                                                                           1996
              10.0                                                                         2000
                                                                                           2005
               8.0
                                                                                           2010
                                                                                           2014
               6.0


               4.0


               2.0


               0.0
                      DVG       LDC               DVG      LDC               DVG         LDC
                         Agriculture               Clothing                     Textile

Source: International Trade Centre, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and World Trade
Organization Millennium Development Goals database, http://www.mdg-trade.org/.
Note: Actual tariffs are weighted on the basis of a fixed 1999 –2001 export structure.

Duty-free treatment

Seventy-nine percent of developing countries’ exports are eligible to benefit from duty-free
treatment, and this ratio rises to 84 percent in the case of LDCs’ products. Almost all (98 percent)
agricultural exports from LDCs are exempt from duties by developed countries, whereas only 74 percent
are exempt in the case of developing countries. For manufactured products, that number is 97 percent for
LDCs compared with 86 percent for developing countries. That difference in market access preferences
should enhance the participation of LIDCs in the world economy.


                                                     36
Preference erosion

Over time, there has been some erosion of the preference margin of duty-free treatment received by
LDCs exports in advanced economies relative to products exported by the other developing countries,
leading to almost similar overall duty-free treatment in 2014 (see figure 2.7). Preference erosion could
result from the reduction of MFN duties or from granting new preferential access to other countries. When
looking at “true” preferences and their use, however, the nature of the competitive advantage remains
significant for LDCs. About 60 percent of LDC exports benefit from true preferential treatment, being
exempt from taxes on items that are normally dutiable. That ratio has steadily increased in recent years,
from 53 percent in 2011. At the same time, most developing country exports that are duty-free in advanced
economies receive such treatment under the MFN status, thereby not gaining any particular competitive
margin over other exporters.25

Figure 2.7: Share of Imports from Least Developed Countries and Developing Countries Entering
Duty-Free into Developed Country Markets, 1996–2014
              100.0
               95.0
               90.0
               85.0
               80.0
               75.0
               70.0
               65.0
               60.0
               55.0
               50.0



                                          Developing Countries         LDCs

Source: International Trade Centre, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, and World Trade
Organization Millennium Development Goals database, http://www.mdg-trade.org/.
Note: Table shows the proportion of the value of total developed country imports (excluding oil and arms) from
developing countries and least developed countries admitted free of duties. This indicator is also subject to the
influence of changes in export structure and relative prices.

Preference utilization

Available preferences may not be fully used by exporters (as shown in table 2.7) for a number of
reasons, ranging from ineligibility—because of nonconformity to some criteria, such as rules of origin
or nontariff measures—to excessive administrative cost to benefit from the preferential scheme. The
specificity, design, and application of rules of origin can make it difficult for LDC exporters to benefit from
preferential access schemes. Strict RoOs (or regional cumulation) were, in principle, designed to promote
an integrated production structure in the recipient country. But with manufacturing production increasingly

25
   Duty-free imports with MFN status have been increasing through time as WTO members reduced their applied
tariffs and entered into sectoral agreements, such as the Information Technology Agreement. Nowadays, 27 percent
of all products imported by the European Union are duty-free under the MFN treatment; that number increases to 48
percent in the case of the United States, 53 percent for Japan, and 73 percent for Canada.


                                                       37
performed in the context of GVCs, strict RoOs are likely to raise costs by forcing firms to switch to more
costly suppliers of intermediate goods within the PTA from lower-cost sources outside (Baldwin 2006;
Krueger 1999). That likelihood is a particular problem in textiles and apparel, which are key exports for
LDCs (Zedillo, Messerlin, and Nielson 2005; Jara and Escaith 2012). In addition, preference utilization
may be inhibited by the high costs incurred to document, administer, and verify compliance—especially
given inputs from many different countries within and outside the PTA in a GVC—for multiple RoOs and
agreements (Brenton and Imagawa 2005; Brenton and Manchin 2003; Kawai and Wignaraja 2011).

Table 2.7: Rate of Use of Preferences, 2011 and 2012
                                             Share of total least
                                             developing country
                                                imports (%)
                                          Eligible for    Entering        Imports entering under
                                              any        under any       preferential regime (% of
             Market                       preference     preference          eligible imports)
             2012
                Canada                        34.9           32.7                   93.7
                European Union
                (low estimate)                47.4           44.8                   93.2
                European Union
                (high estimate)               48.1           46.4                   98.0
                United States                 62.2           45.2                   72.7
             2011
                Canada                        29.8           26.9                   90.3
                European Union
                (low estimate)                45.5           42.4                   91.7
                European Union
                (high estimate)               46.2           43.8                   96.3
                United States                 65.7           54.8                   83.3
Source: World Trade Organization data.

Deep provisions in preferential trade agreements

The scope of PTAs has changed in recent years, extending beyond preferential market access to
include a wide variety of other provisions.26 “Deep” agreements can help improve policy cooperation
across countries on a number of nontariff measures. They can also provide institutional commitments for
LIDCs to improve their business environments, leading to further economic integration (see box 2.3). Deep
PTAs can also have downsides, as discussed in section 3.2.

                           Box 2.3: Deep Agreements and Global Value Chains

The impact of preferential trade agreements (PTAs) on trade has been widely studied, and the main
conclusion of those studies is that PTAs boost trade among members. In fact, the dollar value of trade
between members of PTAs has grown faster than the world average since 1990; as a result, the share of
intra-PTA trade in world trade has increased from 18 percent in 1990 to 35 percent in 2008 (WTO 2011).
PTAs have also increased production sharing among countries. Evidence suggests that preferential trade
agreements increase trade in parts and components by 20 percent among country members (Orefice and
Rocha 2014).


26
   The WTO data set on the content of trade agreements contains information about the inclusion and legal
enforceability of a set of 52 provisions for 100 PTAs covering more than 90 percent of world trade. See World Trade
Report 2011 (WTO 2011) for a detailed description of the data set and its construction.


                                                        38
The expansion of global value chains (GVCs) has generated a demand for deep forms of integration
aimed at covering all dimensions of market access. That demand cannot be easily addressed with existing
WTO rules (Bagwell and Staiger 2002), and negotiating new rules in a multilateral setting is far from
straightforward. PTAs, therefore, provide an opportunity to fill the emerging governance gap between
countries. In fact, empirical evidence suggests that higher levels of trade in parts and components—relative
to total trade—have a positive effect on the depth of a preferential agreement (Orefice and Rocha 2014).

For GVCs to operate smoothly, particularly in the context of North–South production sharing, there
is a need for greater uniformity in regulatory environments and other national policies (Henson and
Reardon 2005; Marucheck et al. 2011). For instance, firms in advanced (G-20) economies may set standards
for their input suppliers in low-income developing countries (LIDCs) to ensure a level of quality, to make
the input compatible with other stages of the production process, or to externalize the management of risk.
Such standards are especially relevant for food supply chains where ensuring the quality and safety of
products is often paramount (Henson and Reardon 2005). PTAs, which specify harmonization or mutual
recognition of such standards, can therefore enable producers in LIDCs to participate in GVCs (Lawrence
1996). Evidence indicates that integration of technical barriers to trade involving mutual recognition,
harmonization of standards, and transparency reduces the costs of production fragmentation (WTO 2011).

Regulatory harmonization is equally important for trade in services, the efficient provision of which
matters greatly for facilitating GVCs. Domestic regulations and foreign investment limitations, which
act as barriers to services trade, are likely to have a negative impact on merchandise trade (Deardorff 2001).
PTA provisions that liberalize market access in logistics and related services are therefore particularly
important for lowering the costs of operating GVCs in LIDCs (Baldwin 2010). Many recent North–South
PTAs, such as the economic partnership agreement between Japan and Vietnam, include deep integration
provisions in the area of services (Pomfret and Sourdin 2009).

More generally, by including provisions related to trade in services, investment, competition policy,
intellectual property, the institutional framework, and product market regulations, PTAs can make
the participation of LIDCs in GVCs more secure and less vulnerable to disruptions or restrictions
(Yeats 2001). Empirical evidence also suggests that “deeper” PTAs increase bilateral trade in parts and
components among member countries. In fact, countries that sign deep agreements trade more than
countries that sign shallow agreements; an additional provision in an agreement increases parts and
components trade by almost 1 percent on average (Orefice and Rocha 2014). Furthermore, Osnago, Rocha,
and Ruta (2015) show that the content of PTAs is relevant for vertical foreign direct investment. As a word
of caution, PTA rules in all these areas may be more suited to the needs of advanced economies (Brou and
Ruta 2006). Furthermore, the proliferation of PTAs may result in divergent regulatory regimes that, in
practice, can segment markets and raise and therefore inhibit GVC trade (WTO 2011).

Trade and investment, including through GVCs, facilitate technology transfer from developed to
developing economies. The channels of transmission include technology embodied in goods, interaction
between foreign multinationals and local subsidiaries through vertical foreign direct investment, and the
movement of people across national boundaries (WTO 2013). Hence, to the extent that PTAs between G-
20 countries and LIDCs promote trade in goods and services, including through GVCs, they can enable the
diffusion of new technologies to the latter.




                                                     39
PTAs between G-20 countries and LIDCs are not as deep as the agreements between G-20 countries
and other non-LIDCs, but their depth has been constantly increasing over time. Figure 2.8 shows that
agreements between G-20 countries are, on average, deeper than all other PTAs across all periods, with the
highest number of provisions included between 2002 and 2006.27 A significantly smaller share of G-20–
LIDC agreements include export taxes, TRIPS, intellectual property rights, movement of capital, state aid,
STE, competition policy, investment, public procurement, environment, and labor-market provisions
(figure 2.9). However, TBT, agriculture, information society, and regional cooperation provisions are
included in relatively more G-20–LIDC agreements.

Figure 2.8: Average Depth of Preferential Trade Agreements by Partner Group and Period
                                                   25
                    Average number of provisions




                                                   20

                                                   15

                                                   10

                                                   5

                                                   0
                                                        1992-1996       1997-2001      2002-2006      2007-2011

                                                        G20-LIDC    Intra G20   G20-non-LIDC   LIDC-non-G20

Source: World Bank computation based on the World Trade Organization Preferential Trade Agreement content
dataset.
Note: G-20 = Group of 20; LIDC = low-income developing country. The number of provisions includes only legally
enforceable provisions.




27
  The average depth is measured as the average number of provisions in trade agreements signed between different
groups of countries during the different periods in which they entered into force.


                                                                                40
Figure 2.9: Share of Group of 20 Agreements That Include Selected Provisions
                                                     0.00   0.20   0.40   0.60   0.80   1.00
                                         Customs
                                   Anti-dumping
                        Countervailing measures
                                     Export taxes
                                              TBT
                                            GATS
                                              SPS
                                            TRIPS
                                               IPR
                            Movement of capital
                                         State aid
                                           TRIMS
                                              STE
                              Competition policy
                                      Investment
                             Public procurement
                                 Visa and asylum
                                    Environment
                        Labor market regulation
                                      Agriculture
                                  Anticorruption
                          Education and training
                                           Energy
                             Information society
                           Regional cooperation
                       Research and technology
                                             SME                      G20-LIDC   All
                                 Data protection
                     Approximation of legislation
                            Cultural cooperation
                          Industrial cooperation

Source: World Bank computation based on the World Trade Organization Preferential Trade Agreement content
dataset.
Note: Calculation of the shares takes into account only legally enforceable provisions.

Bilateral investment treaties

Bilateral investment treaties, which dominate international investment agreements (IIAs) between
LIDCs and G-20 countries (see figure 2.10), can enhance FDI flows to developing countries (including
LIDCs). The mechanism through which BITs can have a positive effect on FDI inflows includes (a) an
international commitment effect, (b) a signaling effect, (c) a shortcut to improved institutional frameworks,
and (d) the inclusion of strong provisions in favor of foreign investors (UNCTAD 2009). The empirical
evidence has been inconclusive with respect to BITs, but it tilts more favorably toward a positive impact of
PTAs on FDI (Büthe and Milner 2009; Egger and Pfaffermayr 2004; Neumayer and Spess 2005; UNCTAD
2014).




                                                            41
Figure 2.10: Proliferation of International Investment Agreements, 1980–2014
          40                                                                                               700
          35                                                                                               600
          30
                                                                                                           500
          25
                                                                                                           400
          20
                                                                                                           300
          15
                                                                                                           200
          10
           5                                                                                               100

           0                                                                                               0
               1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014

                      BITs between LIDCs and G20       Other IIAs between LIDCs and G20       Cumulative

Source: United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
Note: BIT = bilateral investment treaties; G-20 = Group of 20; IIA = international investment agreement; LIDC =
low-income development country.

Unlike “old generation” BITs, “new generation” BITs are more precise in their language (definitions
of investment and investors) and also respond to the needs of the investment regime in the 21st
century. “Old-generation” BITs protect only investment that is already established (and admitted) in the
territory of the host country in accordance with its legislation. They do not provide any protection during
the preestablishment phase, allowing the host country to apply screening mechanisms for determining the
entry of foreign investment (Echandi 2010). “New generation” IIAs (a) combine investment protection with
liberalization of investment (entry guarantees), (b) strike a better balance between investment protection
and other public policy objectives (extremely important for LIDCs), (c) provide greater clarity and
transparency on regulations, (d) outline innovations on investor–state dispute settlement, and (e) establish
greater predictability of rights of establishment for investors.28 LIDCs tend to continue to negotiate “old
generation” IIAs. Consequently, they are not taking advantage of the new possibilities that “new
generation” IIAs bring to connect with the global economy.

3. Designing G-20 trade and investment policies to benefit LIDCs

This section focuses on the role that cooperation among G-20 countries in the areas of trade and investment
policy can play in LIDCs’ development going forward.

3.1 Multilateral trade issues

The WTO has been working to deliver development outcomes since the Doha Development Agenda
was launched in 2001. Although negotiations are ongoing, significant progress has been achieved,
including at the Bali Ministerial Conference in 2013, where some important decisions on development were
agreed upon. Specifically, this work has focused on improving LDCs’ market access opportunities, as well
as allowing them flexibility in the implementation of their commitments, notably under the new Trade
Facilitation Agreement. The promises made in Bali need to be fulfilled by delivering in full on the decisions
made there, and it is crucial to ensure that the interests of developing and least developed countries also
remain at the forefront of the current post-Bali negotiations.

28
   They grant to foreign investors national and MFN treatment with respect to the right of establishment in the host
state.


                                                        42
The Trade Facilitation Agreement

The WTO’s Trade Facilitation Agreement agreed in Bali represents an important step forward in
the effort to reduce the costs of international trade, resulting in a number of benefits, especially for
LDCs. Although traditional trade barriers have come down, trade costs remain particularly high in
developing countries, owing in large part to border procedures that delay the movement, release, and
clearance of goods (see section 1.1). By simplifying those procedures and reducing delays, the
implementation of the TFA can (a) increase the opportunity for LIDCs to integrate into GVCs, (b) enable
them to both increase and diversify their exports (by entering new markets and selling new products), and
(c) improve revenue collection through duties on a larger volume of goods flowing through customs. With
the efficiency of trade procedures being an important signal of the overall investment climate, the TFA
should also help developing countries attract more FDI. Furthermore, as small firms suffer relatively more
from administrative burdens, the TFA is expected to deliver particularly important benefits to small and
medium enterprises, many of which are located in developing countries (OECD and WTO 2015).

Although changes in trade procedures can be implemented unilaterally, a multilateral agreement on
trade facilitation brings added value to developing and least developed countries. First, it provides
greater legal certainty, protecting against sudden changes in reforms. Second, it can help governments
garner support from domestic constituents. Third, it helps with the adoption of similar approaches to trade
procedures, steering domestic reforms in the same direction and avoiding the creation of incompatible trade
facilitation regimes. It further provides donor support for capacity-constrained countries and offers
developing and least developed members the possibility of tailoring their implementation according to their
individual capacities (see box 3.1).

                          Box 3.1: Structure and Implementation of the TFA

The Trade Facilitation Agreement (TFA) has a three-pillar structure: Section I sets out a series of trade
facilitation disciplines, organized in 12 articles. The first 11 represent improvements and clarifications of
articles in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade: Article V (freedom of transit), Article VIII (fees
and formalities connected with importation and exportation), and Article X (publication and administration
of trade regulations). Article 12 of the TFA includes provisions on customs cooperation. Section II
establishes an implementation mechanism. Its innovative architecture allows developing and least
developed countries to self-determine when they will apply the trade facilitation measures and what they
require to build the necessary capacity. The last segment—section III—contains language on the
institutional arrangements (establishment of a World Trade Organization committee and of national
committees on trade facilitation), as well as a series of final provisions.

Of the three parts, section II is most directly focused on developing and least developed countries. Although
all members will have to implement all provisions of the TFA, it is recognized that only developed countries
will be able to do so without extra help. Their developing and least developed counterparts are allowed to
individually tailor their implementation by scheduling their commitments according to three different
categories: measures ready for immediate implementation (category A), measures requiring additional
time—but time alone—(category B), and measures that require both time and capacity building to be
implemented (category C). In addition, the TFA offers a series of additional flexibilities, such as an early-
warning mechanism (designed to alert of the need for additional time requirements), shifting between
categories, and a temporary exclusion from dispute settlement. The TFA will enter into force, once two-
thirds of the members have deposited their instruments of acceptance. As of September 15, 2015, 16
members have completed their ratification process. More are expected to follow shortly.




                                                     43
Core issues in the post-Bali process

The “Bali package”—the first global trade agreement in 20 years—was an important step forward for the
multilateral trading system and the Doha Development Agenda (DDA). One of its key decisions was to
deliver a substantive post-Bali work program that would allow current negotiations to advance and the
Doha Round to be concluded as quickly as possible. Achieving outcomes in the three core areas of
agriculture, nonagricultural market access, and services will be key to securing a substantive outcome, even
as work advances in all areas.

Agriculture

Agriculture negotiations continue to hold the key to the success of the overall Doha negotiations. One
objective is to further discipline and to reduce the use of production- and trade-distorting domestic support.
Such support tends to divert resources away from more productive uses in the country providing the subsidy
and to affect trading partners negatively. Many developing countries, and notably LDCs, lack financial
resources and therefore find themselves in the latter situation. In the field of export competition, the parallel
elimination of all forms of export subsidies and disciplines on all export measures with equivalent effect,
as foreseen in the current DDA negotiation, would therefore also constitute a particularly positive outcome
for developing countries.

On market access, the negotiations aim at substantial improvements. LDCs would be exempt from tariff
reductions and would benefit from duty-free and quota-free market access for at least 97 percent of their
products in developed-country markets. Given the rising share of developing countries in the trade of
agricultural products, LDCs would also benefit from tariff reductions in those markets. For the C-4
countries (Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, and Mali) that launched the cotton initiative in 2003 in the context
of the Doha negotiations, as well as other cotton-producing LDCs, an outcome that would lead to a faster
elimination of all forms of export subsidies, a capping and reduction of cotton-specific domestic support,
and better market access (as close as possible to a quota-free duty-free regime) for cotton imports from
LDCs would be of great value.

Nonagricultural market access

The negotiations on nonagricultural market access (NAMA) seek to reduce or, as appropriate,
eliminate tariffs, including tariff peaks, high tariffs, and tariff escalation, as well as nontariff barriers,
particularly on products of export interest to developing countries. Lowering tariff uncertainty (that
is, reducing currently bound tariffs and increasing binding coverage, even when the new bound rate
is above the applied rate) would contribute to reduced trade costs. Negotiations shall take into account
the special needs and interests of developing and least developed country participants, including through
less than full reciprocity in reduction commitments. Negotiators developed an array of provisions to take
account of the different needs of different groups of countries, including through less than full reciprocity
in reduction commitments. They include special provisions for (a) least developed countries; (b) developing
countries with low binding coverage; (c) small, vulnerable economies; and (d) recently acceded members,
as well as special flexibilities for developing members applying the Swiss formula. Despite considerable
progress in many of these areas, WTO members have been unable to reach consensus on key aspects of the
negotiations, such as the degree to which some members should liberalize their markets, the extent to which
binding coverage should be increased, and the degree to which developed and developing countries should
contribute differently. Efforts are currently under way to explore alternative options that could deliver a
meaningful result while providing a higher degree of comfort to all WTO members.




                                                       44
The large number of PTAs that have been negotiated over the past decade may falsely suggest that
the importance of NAMA to improve market access is decreasing. In reality, evidence suggests that a
higher number of agreements have not been matched by an expansion in trade flows that receive preferential
treatment (see section 2.4). In a report from 2011, the WTO Secretariat concluded that “the share of
preferential trade was surprisingly small,” as only 16 percent of global merchandise trade receives
preferential treatment (WTO 2011). That factor highlights the considerable economic importance of
concluding the NAMA negotiations, as they hold the key for improving market access conditions for
products of export interest to developing countries and LDCs on an MFN basis, where rules of origin would
not constitute a barrier to trade and the associated administrative compliance costs would be lower.

Services

Along with agriculture and NAMA, trade in services is the third key pillar of the DDA. Currently,
members are discussing what the post-Bali work program should contain, taking into account members’
different levels of ambition, the development dimension, and balance within the services topics, as well as
with the other two pillars of the DDA. Should G-20 and other WTO members agree on and conclude an
ambitious services element in the work program, much could be gained for developing countries, including
LDCs. In market access, widening and deepening services commitments, perhaps to levels achieved in
PTAs or as actually applied, would help open services markets for developing-country suppliers, including
through the movement of natural persons (mode 4). At the same time, access commitments that developing-
country members might choose to make could foster growth by encouraging services investment, improving
the quality and reducing the cost of local infrastructure, and facilitating local participation in GVCs.
Similarly, a successfully concluded work program could lead to new disciplines on domestic regulation,
having significant benefits for developing countries. The resulting improvement in transparency and easing
of administrative burdens could help developing-country service suppliers enter and serve export markets
at lower cost, including through mode 4 (see section 2.3).

Progress on specific LDC issues29

The Bali package for LDCs represented an important step in helping LDCs further benefit from the
opportunities being created under the multilateral trading system. It builds on the decisions made by
members earlier on market access for LDCs, to facilitate their greater participation in world trade—in the
areas of both goods and services. Since the adoption of the Bali package, there has been progress in all
areas, which is further described below, and it is clear that development and LDC issues remain central to
the negotiations.

Duty-free and quota-free market access

Achieving full DFQF market access has been a long-standing aspiration of LDCs in the multilateral
trading system. According to the Bali decision on DFQF market access, developed-country members not
providing DFQF market access for at least 97 percent of products originating from LDCs, defined at the
tariff line level, are required to work toward improving their existing DFQF coverage, before the next
Ministerial Conference (that is, the 10th WTO Ministerial Conference). Other developing countries are
encouraged to do the same. Exceptions to DFQF treatment remain in a few sectors and in a limited number
of developed markets. One key trading partner of LDCs—the United States—has yet to provide 97 percent
DFQF access to LDC products. Most of the other developed-country members of the G-20 grant close to
100 percent. Countries should be careful about including products that constitute the bulk of LDC exports

29
  Most of the low-income economies in the LIDC category defined by the World Bank are least developed countries
as recognized by the United Nations. A majority of them are also WTO members. Hence, progress in the WTO on
LDC issues is of direct relevance to the LIDCs.


                                                      45
in the (up to 3 percent) exempted tariff lines. A number of developing countries, including G-20 members
like China, India, the Republic of Korea, and Turkey, also offer comprehensive DFQF access to LDC
products, and there are indications that other developing countries are to follow.

LDC services waiver

WTO members adopted a waiver at the Ministerial Conference in 2011 enabling members to grant
preferential market access to LDC services and services suppliers without providing the same access
to other members. That waiver represented a significant step forward in the multilateral trading system,
since unilateral preferences under the framework of the General Agreement on Trade in Services were not
possible earlier. Regular discussions are now taking place in the Council for Trade in Services aiming to
operationalize the waiver. It also provides the LDC group with a platform to update the membership on
their consultations with potential preference grantors and creates a positive pressure for results.

A high-level meeting of the Services Council took place in February 2015 after the submission of a
collective request by LDCs. That request identified some 56 specific preferential measures in 74
services subsectors. For example, it requested improved access for services supplied through the presence
of natural persons (mode 4). Some of the measures proposed include the easing of quotas, removal of
restrictions on independent professionals or contractual service suppliers, recognition of qualifications of
LDC professionals, and accreditation of LDC institutions. Others include reducing fees and administrative
formalities for LDC suppliers with respect to visas or work permits (see section 2.3).

Some 21 delegations indicated specific sectors and modes where they intend to provide preferences
to LDC services and service suppliers. Several members reiterated their commitment to providing LDCs
with preferential access across a broad range of sectors and promised to notify their preferences in line with
the pronouncements made. Two-thirds of G-20 members have given such indications. At the meeting, some
G-20 members also announced measures that LDCs had specifically identified in their collective request
(for example, India in the case of waiving fees, Canada in the case of facilitating work authorization
procedures, and Japan with respect to resident permit fees). So far, 15 WTO members have submitted
formal notifications on preferences accorded to LDCs; 9 of which are members of the G-20 (Australia,
Canada, China, India, Japan, Mexico, the Republic of Korea, Turkey, and the United States).

The Bali decision recognized the need to strengthen the service capacity in LDCs and already helped
initiate a number of technical assistance and capacity-building activities in favor of LDCs. That
decision recognizes the continued low participation of LDCs in services trade (0.68 percent of global
commercial services exports in 2013) and also reflects their smaller domestic supply base (see box 1.1).

Preferential rules of origin

The Bali decision on preferential rules of origin for LDCs contains a set of multilateral guidelines
that WTO members could consider in developing their rules of origin framework, including
illustrations of how preferential rules of origin can be simplified in order to make it easier for LDCs
to comply. A number of important trading partners of LDCs, and members of the G-20 (for example,
Canada in 2003, the European Union in 2011) have already implemented reforms in their generalized
system of preferences’ RoO criteria with positive results for LDCs (see section 2.4). For instance, the simple
transformation process introduced by the European Union in 2011 in textiles and clothing has helped LDCs
increase their exports to the EU market. Similarly, Canada introduced lower percentage thresholds in
conferring origin along with other flexibilities. In the WTO Committee on Rules of Origin, the LDC group
has specifically noted that in two markets (Japan and the United States), RoO conditions have not
significantly changed since the 1970s.



                                                     46
3.2.    Preferential trade issues

This section examines the implications for LIDCs of G-20 cooperation through preferential trade
agreements. It provides some general observations about potential positive spillovers and risks, as a starting
point for further detailed exploration and discussion of the extent to which those apply, and what strategies
could be employed to address them.

Potential positive spillovers

In a number of areas, PTAs negotiated by G-20 countries (referred to as “G-20 PTAs” hereafter),
such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership or the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, have
potentially positive effects on LIDCs. First, deeper economic integration among G-20 countries can
stimulate global GDP growth. And boosting global demand creates the potential for greater income gains
in LIDCs. Implementation of many of the growth-stimulating trade actions committed to by G-20 leaders
in 2014 at the Brisbane Summit may occur through PTAs. Second, G-20 PTAs are likely to generate
positive spillovers where they result in liberalization that is broadly nondiscriminatory.

“Deep” PTAs, including many either already agreed or under negotiation by G-20 members, tend to
contain numerous features that are effectively nondiscriminatory. First, liberalization in services trade
is often nondiscriminatory in effect. Barriers to services trade removed through PTAs are often regulatory
issues (see section 2.3). The benefits of such regulatory streamlining cannot normally be applied in practice
to PTA parties. Although that is not the case for some forms of liberalization in services—for example,
movement of natural persons, foreign equity restrictions, or foreign direct investment screening—most
service liberalization leads to openness that can benefit LIDCs. In addition, the reduction of services
transaction costs in G-20 economies—for example, in transport and logistics—through G-20 PTAs can also
induce a reduction in costs for LIDC trading partners. Second, many “domestic” policy reforms brought
about through G-20 PTAs are likely to have positive spillovers for LIDCs, as their firms have equal access
to the benefits as those from a G-20 country. That includes reforms to competition, intellectual property
protection, transparency, or anticorruption. Third, reforms to trade facilitation through G-20 PTAs—
complementing implementation of the WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement—lower trade costs in ways that
benefit exporters and importers in LIDCs as well as the participants in the PTA.

Economic integration through G-20 PTAs can also serve as a “laboratory” for reform that can be
applied more widely, including by LIDCs. LIDCs can, in principle, assess the impacts of certain
approaches to economic integration pursued through G-20 PTAs and can then adopt those that have been
most effective.

Potential risks and strategies to address them

The most commonly discussed impact of G-20 PTAs on LIDCs is through trade diversion and
preference erosion, brought about by the lowering of tariffs among PTA partners. Although the low
average tariffs among G-20 members reduce the scale of potential negative impacts, there is a risk that
lowering tariffs on particular products through PTAs could erode competitiveness for LIDCs. The first step
in helping offset that effect is through an analysis of the potential for trade diversion and preference erosion.
That analysis can be a basis for adjusting preference schemes to offset negative spillovers, including
through expanding preferences to a wider range of products, providing deeper tariff preferences, or both.
The extent to which rules of origin limit preference utilization and could be streamlined for LIDCs should
also be considered. Providing certainty of preferential access over a long time horizon is also likely to be
important in this regard (see box 3.2).




                                                       47
                             Box 3.2: Africa and Preferential Market Access

Traditionally, low-income developing countries (LIDCs) in Africa have benefited from nonreciprocal
preferences for their merchandise exports in developed-country markets. The United States and the
European Union, for instance, have provided preferential (duty-free) access to exports from LIDCs through
the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) and the Everything but Arms (EBA) initiative,
respectively. Also, a series of bilateral or regional preferential market access schemes exist between LIDCs
and G-20 countries that are reciprocal. They include several economic partnership agreements with the
European Union. Some G-20 developing economies, such as China and India, are also increasingly granting
preferential market access to least developed countries (LDCs).

The extent to which those preferences really influence the market access of LIDCs to developed-country
markets may be diminished by the fact that oil, metals, and minerals—which constitute a large share of
African exports—are almost duty-free under most-favored-nation treatment. Furthermore, developed
countries often employ policies of tariff escalation, making it more difficult for LIDCs to export agricultural
and mining products in their processed form. Those policies are likely to inhibit preferential market access
for agro-based manufactured goods. Preferential market access for producers from LIDCs is also affected
by the fact that nonreciprocal initiatives often exclude simple manufactured products, such as leather goods,
ceramics, glass, and steel.

Furthermore, AGOA and EBA do not have long time horizons, and piecemeal renewals can hinder
investment in developing LIDCs’ production capacity by creating uncertainty (Nayyar and Nee 2014).
Consider, for instance, AGOA, which was initially enacted in 2000 for eight years—at a time when Africa’s
production capacity was extremely low, with some countries in dire need of foreign investment to enable
the manufacture of AGOA-eligible goods. Investors were reluctant to make large investments, such as in
high-technology processing plants, owing to concerns that they might not recover their capital before the
expiry of AGOA. That reluctance was compounded by other barriers that investors already face in African
countries, including infrastructural and institutional weaknesses. In 2004, the duty-free provisions of
AGOA were extended to 2015. However, that extension was also insufficient to attract investors on a large
scale given the involved risks. The resulting lack of capacity is evidenced by the fact that just a handful of
countries have been able to exploit the opportunity provided by AGOA. To eliminate the uncertainties, the
AGOA Extension and Enhancement Act of 2015 provides another extension of 10 years.

Restrictive rules of origin (RoOs) that require a high percentage of value to be added to a product in the
partner LIDC for it to be eligible for preferential treatment can nullify the value of preferences, especially
given the proliferation of global value chains. AGOA RoOs, for example, are strict, with inputs generally
having to come from the United States or other AGOA countries. The AGOA Extension and Enhancement
Act of 2015, however, allows AGOA countries greater flexibility to combine inputs to meet the RoO for
AGOA-eligible products. It also seeks to simplify the requisite paperwork to verify compliance. That holds
considerable promise given the evidence, which shows that relaxation of strict RoOs for apparel under a
special waiver in AGOA resulted in the rapid growth in exports of participating countries (Collier and
Venables 2007).

The EBA initiative also faces several similar issues, although it has no expiry date—unless the country
graduates from LDC status. By focusing preferences on those that need them the most, the EBA scheme
reduces competitive pressure on LDCs and provides them with greater opportunity to export. At the same
time, reciprocal preferential trade agreements, such as Economic Partnership Agreements between the
European Union and LIDCs in Africa, require the latter to open up their markets to greater import
competition. That may inhibit the growth of a strong industrial sector in LIDCs, which is precisely what
the nonreciprocal preferential access schemes are trying to encourage.



                                                      48
The potential introduction through PTAs of new regulatory standards not found in the WTO
disciplines is often identified as a risk for LIDCs. Although that is not true of all G-20 PTAs, many
include so-called 21st-century issues not covered by existing WTO disciplines. That both influences and is
influenced by trade patterns. For example, some evidence indicates that integration through PTAs—when
it includes “deep” regulatory and other cooperation beyond tariff liberalization—stimulates GVC-related
trade (see box 2.3). To the extent that PTAs among G-20 countries result in standards that are likely to
apply to any trading partner, they could have important consequences for LIDCs. That requires careful
analysis, and the potential implications are likely to be mixed and to vary greatly, depending on specific
approaches taken through PTAs. Where G-20 PTAs result in reduced compliance costs for outsiders—for
example, where LIDCs are required to comply with only one standard set through a PTA, rather than each
party’s standard—that could lead to reductions in trade costs for LIDCs.

Across both tariff and nontariff issues, G-20 members could publish evaluations of the impact of their
PTAs on LIDCs and the wider global economy. Such evaluations would facilitate an open discussion
about the costs and benefits involved. The evaluations could be underpinned by a more intensive effort by
international organizations and other partners to build understanding of the issues involved.

A key systemic risk often identified is that G-20 PTAs potentially undermine the multilateral trading
system, which gives even the smallest developing-country members a voice in setting trade rules, and
are therefore of critical importance for LIDCs. The delivery of the multilateral TFA (along with other
decisions discussed in section 3.1) following active negotiation and conclusion of PTAs by G-20 countries
suggests that it is possible for PTAs and multilateral negotiations to advance in parallel. Leadership by G-
20 members to deliver a post-Bali work program and to conclude the remaining elements of the Doha
Round, as well as to advance more ambitious multilateral liberalization in future, is therefore essential for
LIDCs. Further work to monitor the coverage and implementation of PTAs—with an eye toward
understanding the future potential for “multilateralizing” certain provisions, should WTO members
determine that is an effective path—would also be helpful.

Aid for Trade has a critical role in managing many of those potential risks. It can encompass a
number of approaches, including the following:
   x Building competitiveness in existing and new goods and services to offset any erosion of
       competitiveness brought about through G-20 PTAs, and helping ease adjustment pressures caused
       by preference erosion.
   x Helping LIDCs take advantage of opportunities opened up through nondiscriminatory liberalization
       through G-20 PTAs, with services trade likely to be a fruitful area of focus.
   x Lowering trade costs faced by LIDCs. Although they have fallen in recent decades, trade costs have
       fallen more slowly for LIDCs than for higher-income countries. Addressing the sources of these
       costs would help make LIDCs more competitive (see section 1.1), regardless of developments
       under way in G-20 PTAs.
   x Helping achieve compliance with standards established through G-20 PTAs (as well as existing
       standards), thereby strengthening their capacity to participate in GVCs.
   x Continuing to provide targeted and focused Aid for Trade to the LDCs, including through the
       Enhanced Integrated Framework, to help build their supply-side capacity and strengthen their trade-
       related infrastructure, in order to ensure that the LDCs benefit from the different market access
       opportunities being provided to them.




                                                     49
3.3. Investment issues

G-20 countries can work with LIDCs to help them strengthen domestic policies, which in turn can
create a business environment that enhances foreign direct investment. Focus areas can include
reducing uncertainty, increasing transparency, and opening trade. G-20 countries can also partner with
international organizations in developing a clear agenda to tackle current investment-related issues affecting
LIDCs.

However, the role of G-20 countries in facilitating greater FDI into LIDCs must also focus on
measures that promote outward FDI from the former to the latter, including the following:
      x Targeted incentives to promote internationalization of home firms by promoting expansion in
           LIDCs;
      x Cooperation arrangements between LIDCs’ IPAs and G-20s’ agencies promoting outward
           investment—setting up committees and working groups to address specific and well-targeted
           challenges regarding outward FDI into LIDCs;
      x A review of which locational investment incentives in G-20 countries generate investment
           diversion away from LIDCs (see box 3.3) and exploration of avenues for their reform;
      x Initiatives, perhaps in collaboration with multilateral institutions, that provide insurance or
           guarantees against political risk, which continues to be perceived as an important constraint30
           to investment into LIDCs; and
      x Development of materials, databases, communication activities, and workshops to provide
           investors with information on key geographic, political, macroeconomic, sectoral, legal, and
           regulatory characteristics of LIDCs.

G-20 countries can develop clear, transparent, and participatory mechanisms to promote responsible
business conduct by their investors abroad, in particular to ensure that they comply with the
legislation of the host country. Responsible business conduct means above all complying with the laws in
important areas like human rights, labor regulation, environmental questions, and financial accountability.
It also involves managing relations with local organizations, local communities, trade unions, and the
media, among others. At times, FDI ventures in developing countries even aspire to higher standards (for
example, with respect to labor and environment) than those embodied in local regulations (WTO 2014). In
fact, despite difficulties associated with monitoring suppliers (and subcontractors), evidence suggests that
leading multinational enterprises in GVCs are becoming more successful in ensuring that developing-
country suppliers meet their standards (Hofstetter and Mueller 2013).

G-20 countries can also support LIDCs in designing frameworks that underpin responsible business
conduct. Governments in LIDCs need to design and implement good laws and regulations. But beyond
that, they have to support that private sector conduct by (a) setting clear policy frameworks, (b) combining
public resources with business resources, and (c) supporting publicly responsible business conduct (OECD
2011). G-20 governments can support LIDCs in designing those efficient frameworks to facilitate
responsible business conduct from international investors. The OECD, for instance, designs guidelines for
multinational enterprises; those guidelines are a comprehensive instrument to which governments have
committed to promote globally.




30
     Second most important constraint to FDI in developing countries, according to MIGA (2013).


                                                         50
           Box 3.3: Incentives and Investment Diversion from LIDCs to G-20 Economies

Financial incentives lower the operational costs of companies investing in G-20 countries. At the same
time, most low-income developing countries (LIDCs) cannot afford the costs related to the creation of
attractive incentives plans and packages for investors. Hence, incentives offered for investment in G-20
economies can divert investment away from a priori more cost-competitive LIDCs. Such incentives are
likely to be especially important for export-oriented efficiency-seeking investments compared with those
for sectors like mining. Some international experts, however, have argued that there is little evidence that
such incentives are effective in diverting investment away from low-income countries.

The following are a few (nonexhaustive) examples of tax and nontax incentives that have been commonly
used to promote investment in several G-20 countries:

•    The Czech Republic’s incentive packages between 2010 and 2013 amounted to more than one-third of
     the capital expenditures for the relevant projects.
• Regarding the cost of incentives per job created by project, governments in Brazil, India, and the United
     States have all paid about $200,000 per job position.
• In the case of the European Union, investments by Dow Chemicals in Germany and General Motors in
     Hungary cost US$800,000 and US$300,000, respectively, per position.
• The state of Goiás in Brazil gave a US$125 million subsidy to Usina Canada for a US$25 million
     investment in an ethanol facility in 2009, which came to over US$200,000 per job.
• In India, the state of Gujarat won a 2008 competition for the right to produce the Tata Nano. Although
     subsidy estimates vary widely, they start at about US$800 million, far above the cost of Tata’s
     investment.
• In the United States, Tesla’s investment in Nevada would include (a) a 100 percent real and personal
     property tax abatement through June 2024, (b) a 100 percent state and local sales tax abatement on
     equipment purchases and construction materials for 20 years, (c) a 100 percent modified business tax
     abatement through June 2024, and (d) transferrable tax credits valued at US$195 million.
Taking into account the problems and risks associated with the use of investment incentives in advanced
economies, international experts have searched policies to somehow control and regulate them. One of the
most interesting examples is the EU regional aid policy. It sets a maximum level of subsidy for every region
in the European Union. Under this EU framework, the highest subsidies are allowed only in the poorest
regions, and some richer areas are even banned from providing regional aid to companies.




                                                    51
Annex I
Low-income developing economies

                                   Low-Income Economies
Afghanistan                  Gambia, The                    Nepal
Bangladesh                   Guinea                         Niger
Benin                        Guinea-Bissau                  Rwanda
Burkina Faso                 Haiti                          Sierra Leone
Burundi                      Kenya                          Somalia
Cambodia                     Korea, Dem. People’s Rep.      Tajikistan
Central African Republic     Liberia                        Tanzania
Chad                         Madagascar                     Togo
Comoros                      Malawi                         Uganda
Congo, Dem. Rep.             Mali                           Zimbabwe
Eritrea                      Mozambique
Ethiopia                     Myanmar

                             Low- and Middle-Income Economies
Armenia                       Kiribati                      São Tomé and Príncipe
Bhutan                        Kosovo                        Senegal
Bolivia                       Kyrgyz Republic               Solomon Islands
Cameroon                      Lao PDR                       South Sudan
Cabo Verde                    Lesotho                       Sri Lanka
Congo, Rep.                   Mauritania                    Sudan
Côte d’Ivoire                 Micronesia, Fed. Sts.         Swaziland
Djibouti                      Moldova                       Syrian Arab Republic
Egypt, Arab Rep.              Mongolia                      Timor-Leste
El Salvador                   Morocco                       Ukraine
Georgia                       Nicaragua                     Uzbekistan
Ghana                         Nigeria                       Vanuatu
Guatemala                     Pakistan                      Vietnam
Guyana                        Papua New Guinea              West Bank and Gaza
Honduras                      Paraguay                      Yemen, Rep.
                              Philippines                   Zambia
                              Samoa




                                           52
                                             References

Amin, Mohammad, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2006. “Can Guest Worker Schemes Reduce Illegal Migration?”
       Policy Research Working Paper 3828, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Anderson, Robert D., Anna Caroline Müller, Kodjo Osei-Lah, Josefita Pardo De Leon, and Philippe
       Pelletier. 2010. “Government Procurement Provisions in Regional Trade Agreements: A Stepping
       Stone to GPA Accession?” In The WTO Regime on Government Procurement, edited by Sue
       Arrowsmith and Robert D. Anderson, 561–656. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Arvis, Jean-François, Yann Duval, Ben Shepherd, and Chorthip Utoktham. 2013. “Trade Costs in the
        Developing World: 1995–2010.” Policy Research Working Paper 6309, World Bank, Washington,
        DC.

Arvis, Jean-François, Gaël Raballand, and Jean-François Marteau. 2007. “The Cost of Being Landlocked:
        Logistics Costs and Supply Chain Reliability.” Policy Research Working Paper 4258, World Bank,
        Washington, DC.

Bagwell, Kyle, and Robert W. Staiger. 2002. The Economics of the World Trading System. Cambridge,
       MA: MIT Press.

Baldwin, Richard. 2006. “Globalisation: The Great Unbundling(s).” In Globalisation Challenges for
       Europe, chap. 1. Helsinki: Secretariat of the Economic Council, Finnish Prime Minister’s Office.

———. 2010. “21st Century Regionalism: Filling the Gap between 21st Century Trade and 20th Century
    Trade Rules.” CEPR Policy Insight 56, Centre for Economic Policy Research, London.

Baldwin, Richard, Simon Evenett, and Patrick Low. 2009. “Beyond Tariffs: Multilateralizing Non-tariff
       RTA Commitments.” In Multilateralizing Regionalism: Challenges for the Global Trading System,
       edited by Richard Baldwin and Patrick Low, 79–141. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
       Press.

Bessen, James, and Eric Maskin. 2000. “Sequential Innovation, Patents, and Imitation.” RAND Journal of
        Economics 40 (4): 611–35.

Biadgleng, Ermias T., and Jean-Christophe Maur. 2011. “The Influence of Preferential Trade Agreements
       on the Implementation of Intellectual Property Rights in Developing Countries: A First Look.”
       Issue Paper 33, International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development, Geneva.

Borchert, Ingo, Batshur Gootiiz, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2012. “Guide to the Services Trade Restrictions
       Database.” Policy Research Working Paper 6108, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Branstetter, Lee, Raymond Fisman, and C. Fritz Foley. 2006. “Do Stronger Intellectual Property Rights
        Increase International Technology Transfer? Empirical Evidence from U.S. Firm-Level Panel
        Data.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 121 (1): 321–49.




                                                  53
Brenton, Paul, and Hiroshi Imagawa. 2005. “Rules of Origin, Trade, and Customs.” In Customs
       Modernization Handbook, edited by Luc De Wulf and José B. Sokol, 183–213. Washington, DC:
       World Bank.

Brenton, Paul, and Miriam Manchin. 2003. “Making EU Trade Agreements Work: The Role of Rules of
       Origin.” World Economy 26 (5): 755–69.

Brou, Daniel, and Michele Ruta. 2006. “Special Interests and the Gains from Political Integration.”
       Economics and Politics 18 (2): 191–218.

Büthe, Tim, and Helen V. Milner. 2009. “Bilateral Investment Treaties and Foreign Direct Investment: A
        Political Analysis.” In The Effect of Treaties on Foreign Direct Investment: Bilateral Investment
        Treaties, Double Taxation Treaties, and Investment Flows, edited by Karl P. Sauvant and Lisa E.
        Sachs, 171–224. New York: Oxford University Press.

Chaudhuri, Sumanta, Aaditya Mattoo, and Richard Self. 2004. “Moving People to Deliver Services: How
      Can the WTO Help?” Policy Research Working Paper 3238, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Coe, David T., Elhanan Helpman, and Alexander W. Hoffmaister. 2009. “International R&D Spillovers
       and Institutions.” European Economic Review 53 (7): 723–41.

Collier, Paul, and Anthony J. Venables. 2007. “Rethinking Trade Preferences: How Africa Can Diversify
         Its Exports.” World Economy 30 (8):1326–45.

Deardorff, Alan V. 2001. “International Provision of Trade Services, Trade, and Fragmentation.” Review
       of International Economics 9 (2): 233–48.

Echandi, Roberto. 2010. “Bilateral Investment Treaties and Investment Provisions in Regional Trade
       Agreements: Recent Developments in Investment Rulemaking.”               In Arbitration under
       International Investment Agreements: A Guide to Key Issues, edited by Katia Yannaca-Small, 24–
       41. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press

Egger, Peter, and Michael Pfaffermayr. 2004. “Distance, Trade, and FDI: A Hausman-Taylor SUR
       Approach.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 19 (2): 227–46.

Engman, Michael. 2010. “Exporting Information Technology Services: In the Footsteps of India.” In
      International Trade in Services: New Trends and Opportunities for Developing Countries, edited
      by Olivier Cattaneo, Michael Engman, Sebastián Sáez, and Robert M. Stern, 177–218. Washington,
      DC: World Bank.

Fink, Carsten, and Martin Molinuevo. 2008. “East Asian Preferential Trade Agreements in Services:
       Liberalization Content and WTO Rules.” World Trade Review 7 (4): 641–73.

Freund, Caroline, and Nadia Rocha. 2010. “What Constrains Africa’s Exports?” Policy Research Working
        Paper 5184, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Goswami, Arti Grover, Aaditya Mattoo, Sebastián Sáez, eds. 2012. Exporting Services: A Developing
      Country Perspective. Washington, DC: World Bank.



                                                   54
Handley, Kyle. 2014. “Exporting under Trade Policy Uncertainty.” Journal of International Economics 94
       (1): 50–66.

Henson, Spencer, and Thomas Reardon. 2005. “Private Agri-food Standards: Implications for Food Policy
       and the Agri-food System.” Food Policy 30 (3): 241–53.

Hoekman, Bernard, and Carlos Braga. 1997. “Protection and Trade in Services: A Survey.” Open
      Economies Review 8 (3): 285–308.

Hofstetter, Joerg S., and Marc Mueller. 2013. “Achievement Study: 10 Years of the BSCI.” Business Social
        Compliance Initiative, Foreign Trade Association, Brussels.

Hufbauer, Gary Clyde, Jeffrey J. Schott, Cathleen Cimino, Martin Vierio, and Erika Wada. 2013. Local
       Content Requirements: A Global Problem. Washington, DC: Peterson Institute Press.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2015. Regional Economic Outlook: Sub-Saharan Africa. Washington,
       DC: IMF.

Jara, Alejandro, and Hubert Escaith. 2012. “Global Value Chains, International Trade Statistics, and
        Policymaking in a Flattening World.” World Economics 13 (4): 5–18.

Kawai, Masahiro, and Ganeshan Wignaraja. 2011. Asia’s Free Trade Agreements: How Is Business
       Responding? Cheltenham, U.K.: Edward Elgar.

Krueger, Anne O. 1999. “Are Preferential Trade Arrangements Trade-Liberalizing or Protectionist?”
       Journal of Economic Perspectives 13 (4): 105–24.

Lawrence, Robert Z. 1996. Regionalism, Multilateralism, and Deeper Integration. Washington, DC:
      Brookings Institution.

Lerner, Joshua. 2002. “Patent Protection and Innovation over 150 Years.” NBER Working Paper 8977,
        National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Limão, Nuno, and Anthony J. Venables. 2001. “Infrastructure, Geographical Disadvantage, Transport
       Costs, and Trade.” World Bank Economic Review 15 (3): 451–79.

Luckey, John R. 2012. “Domestic Content Legislation: The Buy American Act and Complementary Little
       Buy American Provisions.” Congressional Research Services, Washington, DC.

Marucheck, Ann, Noel Greis, Carlos Mena, and Linning Cai, eds. 2011. “Product Safety and Security in
      the Global Supply Chain: Issues, Challenges and Research Opportunities.” Journal of Operations
      Management 29 (7–8): 707–20.

McLinden, Gerard. 2012. “Collaborative Border Management: A New Approach to an Old Problem.”
      Economic Premise 78, World Bank, Washington, DC.

MIGA (Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency). 2013. World Investment and Political Risk 2013.
      Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                  55
Musungu, Sisule, and Cicelia Oh. 2005. “The Use of Flexibilities in TRIPS by Developing Countries: Can
      They Promote Access to Medicines?” Commission on Intellectual Property Rights, Innovation, and
      Public Health, Geneva.

Nayyar, Gaurav, and Coleman Nee. 2014. “Regional Integration: How Africa Can Diversify Its Exports.”
       World Trade Organization, Geneva.

Neumayer, Eric, and Laura Spess. 2005. “Do Bilateral Investment Treaties Increase Foreign Direct
      Investment to Developing Countries?” World Development 33 (10): 1567–85.

Nordås, Hildegunn Kyvik, and Roberta Piermartini. 2004. “Infrastructure and Trade.” WTO Staff Working
        Paper ERSD-2004-04, World Trade Organization, Geneva.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 2011. Promoting Responsible
     Business Conduct. Paris: OECD.

OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) and WTO (World Trade
     Organization). 2015. Aid for Trade at a Glance 2015: Reducing Trade Costs for Inclusive and
     Sustainable Growth. Paris: OECD.

Orefice, Gianluca, and Nadia Rocha. 2014. “Deep Integration and Production Networks: An Empirical
        Analysis.” World Economy 37 (1):106–36.

Osnago, Alberto, Roberta Piermartini, and Nadia Rocha. 2015. “Trade Policy Uncertainty as a Barrier to
       Trade.” WTO Staff Working Paper ERSD-2015-05, World Trade Organization, Geneva.

Osnago, Alberto, Nadia Rocha, and Michele Ruta. 2015. “Deep Trade Agreements and Vertical FDI: The
       Devil Is in the Details.” World Bank, Washington, DC.

Park, Albert, Gaurav Nayyar, and Patrick Low. 2013. Supply Chain Perspectives and Issues: A Literature
        Review. Geneva: World Trade Organization; Hong Kong SAR, China: Fung Global Institute.

Pomfret, Richard, and Patricia Sourdin. 2009. “Have Asian Trade Agreements Reduced Trade Costs?”
       Journal of Asian Economics 20 (3): 255–68.

Portugal-Perez, Alberto, and John S. Wilson. 2009. “Why Trade Facilitation Matters to Africa.” World
        Trade Review 8 (3): 379–416.

Raballand, Gaël, Patricia Macchi, and Carly Petracco. 2010. Rural Road Investment Efficiency: Lessons
       from Burkina Faso, Cameroon, and Uganda. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Sáez, Sebastián, Daria Taglioni, Erik van der Marel, Claire H. Hollweg, and Veronika Zavacka. 2014.
        “Valuing Services in Trade: A Toolkit for Competitiveness Diagnostics.” World Bank,
        Washington, DC.

Sakakibara, Mariko, and Lee Branstetter. 2001. “Do Stronger Patents Induce More Innovation? Evidence
       from the 1988 Japanese Patent Law Reforms.” RAND Journal of Economics 32 (1): 77–100.




                                                 56
Scherer, Frederic M., and Sandy Weisburst. 1995. “Economic Effects of Strengthening Pharmaceutical
        Patent Protection in Italy.” International Review of Industrial Property and Copyright Law 26 (6):
        1009–24.

Teravaninthorn, Supee, and Gaël Raballand. 2009. Transport Prices and Costs in Africa. Washington, DC:
       World Bank.

UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2009. The Role of International
        Investment Agreements in Attracting Foreign Direct Investment to Developing Countries. Geneva:
        UNCTAD.

———. 2014. The Impact of International Investment Agreements on Foreign Direct Investment: An
        Overview of Empirical Studies 1998–2014. Geneva: UNCTAD.

UN-MDG Gap Task Force. Forthcoming. The State of the Global Partnership for Development. New York:
     United Nations.

Van der Marel, Erik. 2012. “Trade in Services and TFP: The Role of Regulation., World Economy 35 (11):
       1387–429.

Wells, Jill, and John Hawkins. 2008. “Increasing Local Content in the Procurement of Infrastructure
        Projects in Low Income Countries.” Briefing note, Engineers against Poverty and Institution of
        Civil Engineers, London.

Winters, Alan L. 2008. “The Temporary Movement of Workers to Provide Services (GATS Mode 4).” In
       A Handbook of International Trade in Services, edited by Aaditya Mattoo, Robert M. Stern, and
       Gianni Zanini, 480–96. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

WTO (World Trade Organization). 2011. World Trade Report 2011: The WTO and Preferential Trade
     Agreements: From Co-existence to Coherence. Geneva: WTO.

———2013. World Trade Report 2013: Factors Shaping the Future of World Trade. Geneva: WTO.

———2014. World Trade Report 2014: Trade and Development—Recent Trends and the Role of the WTO.
    Geneva: WTO.

Yeats, Alexander J. 2001. “Just How Big Is Global Production Sharing?” In Fragmentation: New
       Production Patterns in the World Economy, edited by Henryk Kierzkowski and Sven W.Arndt,
       108– 43. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.

Zedillo, Ernesto, Patrick Messerlin, and Julia Nielson. 2005. Trade for Development: Achieving the
        Millennium Development Goals. London : Earthscan.




                                                   57
