    Report No: ACS15092
.




    Georgia
    Assessing Economy Wide Indirect Impacts of
    East-West Highway Investments through CGE
    Modeling

.
    August 2015
    Transport and ICT Global Practice
    EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not
imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission
may be a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank
encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
                   CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

             (Exchange Rate Effective May 30, 2015)

                  Currency Unit – Georgian Lari
                   Georgian Lari 2.30 = 1 USD

                   WEIGHT AND MEASURES
                        Metric system

                         FISCAL YEAR
                     January 1 – December 31




       Regional Vice President:    Cyril Muller
       Acting Country Director     Anna Bjerde
Senior Global Practice Director:   Pierre Guislain
             Practice Manager:     Juan Gaviria
            Task Team Leader:      Carolina Monsalve
              ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS


AADT      Average Annual Daily Traffic
ADB       Asian Development Bank
CET       Constant Elasticity of Transformation
CGE       Computable General Equilibrium
CRTS      Constant Returns to Scale
CTC       Caucasus Transit Corridor
EIB       European Investment Bank
EWH       East-West Highway
GAMS      General Algebraic Modeling System
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
GEL       Georgian Lari
GIZ       Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)
GoG       Government of Georgia
HIS       Integrated Household Survey
IFI       International Financial Institution
ISET      International School of Economics at Tbilisi State University
JICA      Japan International Cooperation Agency
KM        Kilometer
MPGSE     Mathematical Programming System for General Equilibrium Analysis
NPISH     Non-Profit Organizations Serving Households
ROW       Rest of the World
SAM       Social Accounting Matrix
TC        Transport Costs
TRACECA   Transport Corridor Europe Caucasus Asia
USD       United States Dollars
VAT       Value Added Tax
VOC       Vehicle Operating Cost
                                      ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS




This paper is based on a study carried out by ISET Policy Institute led by Lasha Labadze and Veronika
Movchan and has been prepared by Carolina Monsalve (Senior Transport Economist). Special thanks go to the
team comprising Rodrigo Archondo-Callao (Senior Road Engineer), Ari Kalliokoski (Transport Specialist),
and Mustapha Benmaamar (Senior Transport Specialist), and Steven Farji Weiss (Poverty and Social
Development Specialist). The team would also like to thank Henry Kerali (Country Director), Juan Gaviria
(Practice Manager), Eavan O’Halloran (Country Program Coordinator), and peer reviewers Baher El-Hefnawy
(Lead Transport Specialist), Maryla Maliszewska (Senior Economist), and Jean-François Arvis (Senior
Transport Economist). The team would also like to acknowledge the support and contributions from the Roads
Department of Georgia and the Ministry of Infrastructure and Regional Development.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY


The objective of this study was to assess the economy wide indirect benefits of investments in the
East West Highway (EWH). This study has used a computable general equilibrium (CGE) model,
which simulates indirect benefits associated with the completion of the upgraded road corridor. The
transmission channel modeled is the reduction in transportation costs—reduction in vehicle
operating costs and time savings—resulting from the investments in the EWH. This reduction in
transportation costs is normally assessed when conducting cost-benefit analysis of road projects, but
without assessing the indirect impacts their reduction has on the wider economy. Explicitly
excluded from the analysis are the direct impacts associated with the civil works of the EWH
investment program, which would have large impacts on real GDP and employment.

The model results reveal that the indirect benefits from the EWH investment program have an
overall positive impact on key macroeconomic and welfare variables over the medium and long-
term. Real GDP is assessed to increase by 1.5 percent over medium-term horizon and 4.2 percent
over a long-term horizon. Both exports and imports are expected to expand in the long-run, with
exports growing on average faster in the long-run. Infrastructure development contributes to growth
in welfare of all categories of households, although the first two quintiles with the lowest income
gain relatively less than other household groups. On average, rural households are expected to gain
more than urban households, in line with a priori expectations. Sensitivity analysis suggests the
results are robust to parameter changes.

             Table E1: EWH Indirect Impacts, Cumulative Percentage Change from 2013 Baseline

                                                            Medium-Term                         Long-term
                                                         Macroeconomic
   Real GDP                                                       1.5                              4.2
   Real household consumption                                     1.5                              4.4
   Real government consumption                                    0.7                              1.1
   Real exports                                                   -0.4                             4.7
   Real imports                                                   -0.3                             1.6
   Unemployment                                                   -2.8                            -4.4
                                                           Distributional
   Household income quintile 1                                    1.8                              2.6
   Household income quintile 2                                    2.1                              3.2
   Household income quintile 3                                    2.3                              3.8
   Household income quintile 4                                    2.5                              4.0
   Household income quintile 5                                    2.8                              4.4
   Note: Household income quintile 1 has the lowest income level, and quintile 5 the highest.
   Sources: World Bank, ISET Policy Institute.




                                                                  i
1.      Located at the crossroads of Europe and Central Asia, Georgia is a transit country
connecting several important economic regions with a total population in excess of 800 million
people, including the EU (503 million), CIS (277 million), Turkey (75 million) and the Caucasus
Region (17 million). The Caucasus Transit Corridor (CTC) is a key transit route between Western
Europe and Central Asia for transportation of oil and gas as well as dry cargo. CTC is part of the
international and regional corridor TRACECA. The TRACECA corridor is the shortest route
between Europe and the Caucasus and Central Asian countries through the Black sea ports.
TRACECA is an alternative to the north corridor running through the Russian Federation and
Belarus and the southern corridor running through Turkey and Iran, the latter has become less
competitive due to international sanctions imposed on Iran. The East-West Highway (EWH)
traversing Georgia is part of the CTC.

2.      The EWH carries over 60 percent of total foreign trade and is seen as a central piece in the
Government's strategy of transforming Georgia into a transport and logistics hub for trade between
Central Asia and the Far East on the one hand and Turkey and Europe on the other hand.1 The EWH
runs from the Red Bridge at the Azerbaijan Border to the Poti Port at the Black Sea coast for around
392 kilometers—2 percent of the Georgian road network length, and slightly less than a quarter of
the international road network—with an average traffic of around 7,800 vehicles per day and traffic
annual growth rate of around 7.0 percent. The EWH accounts for 23 percent of vehicle utilization in
Georgian roads and 47 percent of vehicle utilization of Georgian international roads. The
investments will improve connectivity between the Caspian and Black Sea, lower the cost of
transport and logistics, and improve Georgia’s connection to global markets.

3.      The Government of Georgia is committed to completing the EWH investment program by
2020. The Government has in recent years accorded high priority to completing the upgrading of
the EWH (392 km) to international motorway standards (2x2 lanes). In addition to the time savings
generated from the upgrade to international motorway standard, which raises the travel speed, the
introduction of new alignments in some sub-sections of the EWH will reduce the overall length of
the corridor and further contribute to reduce travel time. The Government has opted to financing
this important investment program using its own budget and significant support of the international
financing institutions (IFIs). The total estimated cost of upgrading the EWH is USD 2.265 billion,
which is equivalent to 13.7 percent of Georgia’s GDP in 2014.2 The World Bank has financed four
road improvement projects along the EWH to complement the Government's initial investment from
Tbilisi, and financing is also being provided by other IFIs (Table 1). Approximately 130 kilometers
of the EWH have already been upgraded, of which 70 km were funded by the World Bank through
the first two highway improvement projects (Highway Improvement Project 1 and 2). Works are

1
  The East West Highway is part of the European route E-60, which is the second longest E-road running from Brest,
France (on the Atlantic coast), to Irkeshtam, Kyrgyzstan (on the border with People's Republic of China).
2
  As per the IMF’s World Economic Outlook database of April 2015, Georgia’s estimated GDP in 20 14 was USD 16.5
billion.



                                                        1
on-going to complete an additional 177 km by 2015 with the support of the World Bank (32 km),
the Asian Development Bank (33 km), the European Investment Bank (55 km), and the Japanese
International Cooperation Agency (58 km).

4.     The objective of this study is to provide an analytical foundation of the economy wide
benefits of investment in the East West Highway (EWH), through the assessment of indirect
impacts of cumulative investments. Explicitly excluded from the analysis are the direct impacts
associated with the civil works, which would have large impacts on real GDP and employment. In
order to assess the medium and long term economy-wide benefits of the EWH this study has used a
computable general equilibrium (CGE) model, which simulates indirect benefits associated with the
completion of the upgraded road corridor. In their most basic form, CGE models characterize a
target economy (in this case, Georgia) using detailed consumption and production functions,
together with a depiction of the market prices and price distortions (e.g., taxes or regulatory
controls), providing a depiction of the economy “as is” in a static framework and then applying a
shock. Such a depiction is contained in the Social Accounting Matrix (SAM), a comprehensive,
economy-wide data table which represents how the different sectors of the economy interact.

5.     Partial equilibrium models usually focus only on one part or sector of the economy,
assuming that the impact of that sector on the rest of the economy is either non-existent or small,
ignoring interactions with other sectors. A partial equilibrium model also does not take into account
the resource constraints of the economy; that to increase production in one sector resources need to
be pulled away from other sectors. A partial equilibrium model is most suited for policy analysis
when the policy-maker is only interested in sectoral policies, or when the sector under study
represents only a small share of total income, or policy changes are likely to change the price in
only one market, while prices in other markets will remain constant. In contrast, CGE modeling is
an established method for studying economy-wide impacts.

6.     A CGE model is a simultaneous equation system that consists of equations representing
various economic relationships for different economic agents, such as producers and households.
The analytical process includes parameter calibration and policy simulation. Key parameters in the
equilibrium model are calibrated through inverse equations based on initial economic information
from the SAM. The calibration is conducted under equilibrium given all the information from the
SAM representing a real equilibrium economy. Then a new equilibrium is computed through
simultaneous equations and by adopting calibrated parameters. Impacts on output variables are
calculated after adjusting some of the input variables—in this case transportation costs. Impact
changes are measured by the difference between the values of new output variables vis-à-vis
original output variables.




                                                 2
                       Table 1: Overview of EWH Costs, Financing, and Completion by Road Section

                                                Length          Cost Estimate
              Road Section                                                                     Source of Funding            Completion date
                                                 (km)           (USD million)

 Rustavi – Red Bridge                             36                  110                 Project under consideration

 Rustavi – Tbilisi. lot 1, lot 3                  11                   50                           GoG-ADB                 Ongoing, 2015
 Rustavi – Tbilisi. lot 2                         6.4                  55                           GoG-ADB                 2017-2018

 Natakhtari – Aghaiani                            16                  37.5                             GoG                       2009

 Aghaiani – Ruisi                                 52                  240                       GoG-World Bank                   2013
 Ruisi – Agara                                    19                   43                       GoG-World Bank              Ongoing, 2015

 Agara – Zemo Osiauri                             12                   55                       GoG-World Bank              Ongoing, 2017

 Zemo Osiauri – Chumateleti                       14                  202                         GoG-EIB-WB                 Current Phase
                                                                                                                             Future Phases
 Chumateleti – Argveta                            54                  800                Feasibility Study (GoG-WB)
                                                                                                                                (2020)
 Zestafoni – Samtredia                            57                  212                           GoG-JICA                Ongoing, 2016
 Samtredia – Grigoleti                            51                  260                            GoG-EIB                Ongoing, 2017
 Choloki – Kobuleti bypass                        33                  200                           GoG-ADB                 Ongoing, 2016
 Total                                           361.4              2,264.5
Note: The total length of the completed corridor is expected to be less than the length of the sections prior to upgrade.
Sources: Roads Department of Georgia, World Bank.


    7.      CGE models are commonly used by countries and international financial institutions to
    simulate policy interventions to determine economy-wide impacts. The model allows for an
    assessment of the impact of transport investments on intra-country economic and social indicators.
    A large and growing body of evidence suggests that indirect effects arising from policy changes are
    not only substantial but may in some cases even outweigh direct benefits. Only a model that
    consistently specifies economy-wide interactions can fully assess the implications of economic
    policies or business strategies.3 The analysis will be confined to impacts at the national level, even
    though the project can have significant trans-boundary spillover effects benefiting Georgia’s trading
    partners. The construction of a CGE model for Georgia has already been undertaken by ISET Policy
    Institute, with support from the University of Warwick’s Institute for Employment Research,
    through technical assistance financed by Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
    (GIZ) GmbH.4 This study involved modifying the existing SAM and CGE model in order to carry
    out simulations to answer the question of economy wide impacts of the EWH investments,



    3
      Norojono O., David Roland-Holst, and Guntur Sugiyarto (2010), Macroeconomic Effects of Road Corridor Investment
    in Kazakhstan, General Equilibrium Perspective, Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Transportation
    Research Board, No. 2162, Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, Washington, DC, pp. 90-97.
    4
      Further information on this project can be found at: http://www2.warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/ier/research/georgia/ A working
    paper presenting the CGE model is currently under preparation.



                                                                            3
including impacts on real GDP growth, jobs, and trade, as well as impacts on households
disaggregated by income. It aims to answer the following questions:
        How will the EWH lower the transportation costs for producers of goods and services?
        What are the economy wide impacts of the EWH on employment, real GDP growth, trade,
         and household income?
        Could the EWH help bridge the existing economic divide between rural and urban areas in
         Georgia?
The study is aims to simulate quantitatively how the EWH as a large-scale infrastructure investment
program can bring significant stimulus to foster economic growth and welfare in Georgia.




8.      General equilibrium analysis allows researchers to obtain a comprehensive understanding of
transportation infrastructure’s impacts given its consideration of interactions between the demand
and the supply, in contrast to partial equilibrium analysis. A large and growing body of evidence
suggests that indirect effects arising from policy changes are not only substantial but may in some
cases even outweigh direct benefits, but these are not captured in standard cost-benefit analysis.
There is an extensive literature on the application of equilibrium modeling to the transport sector,
including evaluation of impacts of infrastructure, investment, pricing, and other types of transport
policies. CGE models are a class of economic models that use actual economic data to estimate how
an economy might react to changes in policy, technology or other external factor. There are
alternative types of CGE models, single country, multi-country and global models, as well as spatial
CGE models, which in turn can be static or dynamic.

9.      Many CGE models are comparative static as they model the reactions of the economy at one
point in time.5 For policy analysis, results from such a model are often interpreted as showing the
reaction of the economy in some future period to one or a few external shocks or policy changes.
That is, the results show the difference (usually reported in percent change form) between two
alternative future states—in this case, with and without EWH investments.6 The process of
adjustment to the new equilibrium is not explicitly represented in such a model. By contrast,
dynamic CGE models explicitly trace each variable through time—often at annual intervals. These
models are more realistic, but more challenging to construct and solve —they require for instance
that future changes are predicted for all exogenous variables, not just those affected by a possible

5
  These models are known as comparative static or comparative static CGE models.
6
  In comparative static frameworks temporal aspects are generally not addressed; the model is calibrated to data for a
benchmark year generating a benchmark equilibrium. Then, policy analysis is performed by applying the policy or shock
in the model and the model then computes a counterfactual equilibrium. The results from the two static equilibria are
compared to reveal the impacts of the policy or shock. For an overview of comparative static and dynamic approaches to
CGE modeling, see Sundberg, Marcus (2005), Spatial Computable General Equilibrium Modeling- Static and Dynamic
Approaches. October 2005, Div. of Transport and Location Analysis, Dept. of Transport and Economics, Royal Institute
of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden. Available at:
 http://www.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:14187/FULLTEXT01.pdf



                                                          4
policy change. The approach taken under this study was to assess impacts using a comparative static
CGE model.

10.     A steady-state formulation of an otherwise comparative static model was used instead as a
proxy for a dynamic modeling approach. The steady-state model allows adjusting capital stock to a
new steady state equilibrium in response to the changes in return on capital.7 An increase in the rate
of return on capital (relative to the cost of investment) due to policy shock results in increasing
investments and thereby expansion of the capital stock. This in turn leads to reduction in the return
on capital. Investors will continue expanding the stock of capital up until a new equilibrium is
reached. Steady-state equilibrium results are considered as upper bound estimates, as they ignore
the foregone consumption required to obtain the larger capital stock.

11.    In addition to the static-dynamic dimension CGE models can be developed for a single
country, region, or as global models. Single-country models tend to be more detailed in terms of
sectors and household types, and they are in general used for analyses of country-specific policy
issues and proposals.8 Regional and global models, tend to have less sector detail, and in the case of
global models are often designed for analysis of multilateral policies such as free-trade agreements
and in the case of regional models, to assess the wider regional impacts of larger international
transport infrastructure across countries or regional impacts within a single country. Lastly, while
the demand for transport services reflects the location of production and consumption activities,
most CGE models do not have a spatial dimension. Spatial CGE models models are specifically
designed to account for the spatial dimension of the modeled intervention and have been used
extensively when modeling infrastructure.

12.    Despite their ability to measure policy effects on the economy, CGE models, as is the case
with other classes of models, have limitations. As with any complex quantitative model, the aim is
to model the real economy, but the dynamic and complex nature of real economic relationships
mean that the models are at best an approximation and only as good as the underlying model
specification, data and assumptions. A second limitation is related to the rationale of equilibrium
modeling, which is to compare a simulated outcome from a policy variable with the base outcome
without the shock. The results are sensitive to exogenous parameters, structure of equations, and the
SAM. In practice, this means that the results should be treated with caution and used cautiously.
These caveats also apply to other models—the results are only as good as the strength of the
structure of equations, data, and underlying assumptions.

13.    The modeling approach adopted is that of a static single country CGE model, with impacts
confined to the national level, without modeling regional impacts within Georgia or broader trans-


7
  Jensen, Jesper, Thomas Rutherford, and David Tarr (2003). "Economy-wide and Sector Effects of Russia’s Accession to
the WTO." Allied Social Science Meetings, Washington DC.
8
   Lars Bergman (2005), CGE Modeling of Environmental Policy and Resource Management in Handbook of
Environmental Economics: Economywide and International Environmental Issues, Vol 3, Karl-Göran Mäler and Jeffrey
R. Vincent (eds), Elsevier B.V.: The Netherlands.




                                                         5
boundary spillover effects benefiting Georgia’s trading partners. The latter point means that the
modeling results should be treated as a lower bound, with impacts likely to be considerably larger.
The decision to use a single country comparative static CGE model, without regional, spatial or
dynamic dimensions was driven by the existence of an already developed country-level comparative
static CGE model. The objective of this study was to simulate what indirect impacts, if any, the
completed EWH could have on the Georgian economy and households, using the existing CGE
model for Georgia, and depending on the outcome of the study, to propose modifications to the
model as part of a potential second phase of modeling EWH impacts.




14.     The basic structure of the CGE core module comprises three main blocks of equations
determining demand and supply relations, and market clearing conditions. In addition, various
regional and national aggregates, such as aggregate employment, aggregate price level, and balance
of trade, are defined here. Nested production functions and household demand functions are
employed. For production, firms are assumed to use fixed proportion combinations of intermediate
inputs and primary factors in the first level while, in the second level, substitution is possible
between domestically produced and imported intermediate inputs, on the one hand, and between
capital and labor, on the other. The modeling procedure adopted uses a constant elasticity of
substitution (CES) specification in the lower levels to combine goods from different sources and
primary factors. Given the property of standard CES functions, non-constant returns are ruled out.
The model is realized in GAMS MPSGE.9

15.     Two formulations of the CGE model were developed to assess the impact of the reduction in
transportation costs on the economy as a whole, as well as distributional and sectoral effects —
comparative static and comparative steady state. Both formulations are built on assumption of full
mobility of primary factors– capital and labor. Thus, although the model does not contain an
explicit time horizon, its results are typically considered as medium-term (comparative static) or
long-term (comparative steady-state). Within the comparative static model, it is assumed that the
stock of capital is constant and the return on capital changes in response to the policy shock. The
comparative steady-state formulation of the model allows adjusting the capital stock to a new steady
state equilibrium in response to the changes in return on capital. As the model is a comparative
static as opposed to a dynamic CGE, it does not define a trajectory of movement of the economy to
a new equilibrium point. The results of the model should not be considered as a forecast, but as
simulations ignoring impact of all other economic shocks affecting the economy of Georgia. Further
details on the model can be found in Annex 1.



9
  The General Algebraic Modeling System (GAMS) was the program used for the modeling. GAMS is a high-level
modeling system for mathematical programming and optimization. It consists of a language compiler and a stable of
integrated high-performance solvers. GAMS is tailored for complex, large scale modeling applications, and allows
building large models that can be adapted quickly to new situations. For more information see www.gams.com.



                                                       6
16.    Consumers treat imported and domestically produced goods as imperfect substitutes and
producers consider sales on domestic markets or exports as imperfect alternatives, a standard
structure knows as an Armington assumption. On the consumption side, the model distinguishes
between public, investment and intermediate consumption as well as final household consumption
for 5 or 20 categories of households: five household groups represent the structure of Georgian
households by level of income, and 20 groups distinguish households by 10 regions of Georgia and
two residential characteristics (urban and rural).

17.     A SAM is a particular representation of the macroeconomic accounts of a socio-economic
system, which captures the transactions and transfers between all economic agents in the system,
recording transactions taking place during an accounting period, usually one year.10 There are three
main features of a SAM. First, the accounts are represented as a square matrix; where the
incomings and outgoings for each account are shown as a corresponding row and column of the
matrix. The transactions are shown in the cells, so the matrix displays the interconnections between
agents in an explicit way. Second, it is comprehensive, in the sense that it portrays all the economic
activities of the system (consumption, production, accumulation and distribution), although not
necessarily in equivalent detail. Thirdly, the SAM is flexible, in that, although it is usually set up in
a standard, basic framework there is a large measure of flexibility both in the degree of
disaggregation and in the emphasis placed on different parts of the economic system.

18.     As it is an accounting framework not only is the SAM square but also the corresponding row
and column totals must be equal. A key aspect of a SAM is that households and household groups
are at the heart of the framework; only if there exists some detail on the distributional features of the
household sector can the framework truly be a ‘social’ accounting matrix. Also, a SAM typically
shows much more detail about the circular flow of income, including transactions between different
institutions (including different household groups) and between production activities, and in records
the interactions between both these sets of agents via the factor and product markets.

19.    The SAM for Georgia developed by ISET Policy Institute has 15 activities and 15
commodities, two factors of production and five or 20 representative household groups,
representing the Georgian economy. Production in each activity uses intermediate inputs of goods
and services as well as primary factors of production, namely capital and labor, the latter split into
self-employment and hired labor. Aggregate output can either be exported or sold domestically.
Together with imports from all trade partners, it forms the total aggregate of goods and services
available for domestic consumption.




10
  Pyatt G., and J. I. Round (eds), 1985, Social Accounting Matrices: A Basis for Planning, The World Bank, Washington,
D.C.



                                                          7
20.   The impact of the reduction in transportation costs was modeled using the CGE model for
Georgia with base year 2013. Comparative static and comparative steady-state versions of the
model were specified, with the model applied to two different set of SAMs:

         SAM 15x15x5: 15 activities, 15 commodities, 5 household groups split by income level;
         SAM 15x15x20: 15 activities, 15 commodities, 20 household groups split by 10 regions
          and 2 types of residence, urban and rural.

21.    A counterfactual scenario was developed based on the projected reduction in transportation
costs associated with the upgrading of the EWH. Further details can be found in Annex 2.




22.     The transmission channel that has been modeled is the reduction in transportation costs
derived from the cumulative investments in the EWH.11 While the choice between different modes
of transport depends to a significant extent on the amount of time that the user has to spend, time is
usually not treated as a scarce factor in CGE models, but in this approach, time savings and
reduction in vehicle operating costs (VOC) are the transmission mechanisms that lead to changes in
key macroeconomic variables and welfare. The reduction in transportation costs through a reduction
in VOC and time savings are the ones normally modeled in cost-benefit analysis of road projects,
including the EWH investment projects. This study aims to assess the wider impacts of the
reduction in transportation costs in the wider economy.12

23.     Figure 1 provides a schematic representation of the main causal relations underlying the
simulation of the reduction in the transportation costs associated with the investments along the
EWH. Time savings and VOC related cost reduction enter into the model differently. Time savings
are considered as the reduction in the costs of transportation services to users, firms and households.
Lower VOC are treated as the reduction in costs of the transport sector per se, that is, the sector can
now produce each unit of output more cheaply. The reduction in transportation costs related to time
savings implies a reduction in the use of transportation services per unit of output in all sectors, thus
causing a direct reduction in the output of the transportation sector (Figure 1). As shipments become
less resource-intensive, primary factors are freed, generating excess supply of labor and capital,
resulting in a reduction in primary factor price (wages and capital return on capital). This stimulates


11
   The direct impacts of the investments associated with the EWH program have not been modeled given the manner in
which the SAM has been developed. Capital enters into the SAM as capital earnings (based on input-output or supply-use
tables). This is a standard approach which allows estimating the increase in the capital endowment as a shock on this
variable given that the shock is comparable with the size of the variable. However, it is not applicable in this case as the
shock (EWH investments) is very large. This would require estimating the annualized increase of capital equivalent to the
multi-year EWH construction spending. Also, it would be necessary to model the increase in investments not as an
exogenous shock, but as an increase or redirection of public spending and foreign aid to better represent the economic
effects of the shock.
12
   Details of the data used for calculating VOC and time savings can be found in Annex 3.



                                                             8
reallocation of primary factors into other sectors demanding additional labor and capital supply as a
result of production rising due to the lower cost of transportation.13

                      Figure 1: Reduction in Transport Cost Transmission Mechanism


                                          Reduction in transport cost




       Decrease the price of composite goods                         Reduction in transport requirement per unit of output




     Change (+/-) in real regional income: firms,                              Output of transport sector declines
               investors, households



       Firms change (+/-) in competitiveness /                          Free capital and labor resources from transport
          Households: "richer" ("poorer")                                 sector (shipments less resource-intensive)




                                                                                Excess supply of primary factors
       Change (+/-) in domestic and external
                      demand




               Change (+/-) of output




      Change (+/-) demand for primary factors




     Pressure on primary factor prices to change                               Decrease prices of primary factors
                       (+/-)



                 Prices change (+/-)                                                      Prices decline



13
   The model considers the reduction in both final and intermediate consumption of transport services, as well as the
transport margin. Thus it captures both freight and passenger transportation. More detailed study of impacts on freight and
passenger transportation would require additional data.



                                                            9
Source: ISET Policy Institute.



24.     At the same time, the reduction in the VOC results in a decrease in price of transportation
services, boosting competitiveness of this sector and increasing demand for its services. It
stimulates increase in transportation sector output, acting just oppositely to previously described
channel, namely generating excess demand for primary factors of production, resulting in growth of
primary factor prices. Cheaper transportation services boost economic activity in other sectors and
competition for primary factors further boosts wages and return on capital (or stimulates an increase
in the capital stock in the steady state as a response to higher capital returns).

25.    Lower transport costs also result in a reduction in the domestic price level and—together
with changes in primary factor prices—affect real income of agents in the model, including
households and producers (Figure 1). Changes in income generate changes in demand and output,
once again affecting prices in the real economy. It is expected that the net effect of these changes
will be positive. Freed resources will be used to boost economic production. Downward pressure to
domestic prices will make products more affordable to consumers and is expected to boost exports.
Higher government revenue collected through taxes is expected to positively affect the welfare of
households depending on social transfers, thereby helping to alleviate poverty.

26.    In order to calculate the indirect overall economic benefit of EWH using the CGE model, the
reduction in transport cost is estimated assuming completion of civil works along the EWH.
Transport cost saving consists of two major parts that are considered in the analysis, time saving
and VOC saving. For evaluation purposes the EWH is divided into nine sections.14 Each section has
different average traffic—2013 annual daily traffic (AADT) provided by the Roads Department of
Georgia—and the transport intensity of the sections varies by vehicle type: cars, microbus, bus and
trucks, and trailers. Based on the usage of EWH in terms of vehicle-kilometers, vehicle operating
cost (VOC) savings were calculated, comparing VOC before and after the civil works have been
completed. An average VOC value of GEL 850.0 (USD 512) before works and GEL 688.6 (USD
414.9) after works was used for all road sections of the EWH, and given the relatively similar
condition of the sections prior to the civil works this was considered to be a reasonable assumption,
as opposed to section level VOC.15

27.    Time savings were estimated using data from the World Bank feasibility studies where these
were available, and in other sections, design speeds were compared to the current maximum
allowed speed of the corresponding section. To calculate total time savings by person, it is
necessary to have information on the number of vehicles travelling on the EWH, as well as vehicle
occupancy figures. Vehicle occupancy data was available for Chumateleti-Argveta and Samtredia-

14
   The nine road sections are as follows: (i) Tbilisi-Natakhtari (11 km); (ii) Natakhari-Ruisi (66 km); (iii) Ruisi-
Chumateleti (45 km); (iv) Chumateleti-Argveta (51 km); (v) Argevta-Samtredia (59 km); (vi) Samtredia-Choloki (70km);
(vii) Choloki-Kobuleti (33km); (viii) Tbilisi-Rustavi (21 km); and (ix) Rustavi-Red Bridge (36 km).
15
   The GEL-USD exchange rate used in the modeling exercise was the annual average rate for 2013, with USD1 = GEL
1.66 as per the National Bank of Georgia. The exchange rate as of May 30, 2015 was 2.30, reflecting a 44 percent
depreciation in the intervening period.



                                                        10
Choloki sections, and for other sections it was assumed that occupancy was the average of these
two sections. 16 By multiplying average occupancy on average number of cars on a given section,
for each category of vehicle, it is possible to derive the total number of persons travelling along
each section of the EWH. In order to monetize time savings, it was assumed that 75 percent of trips
are work related, and the value of time used was GEL 6.35 per hour (USD 3.83 per hour) for car
passengers and GEL 4.23 per hour (USD 2.55 per hour) for minibus and bus passengers. The value
of non-working time is assumed to be GEL 1.88 per hour (USD 1.33 per hour) for car passengers
and GEL 1.25 per hour (USD 0.75 per hour) for minibus and bus passengers. These measures are
based on the estimated value calculated by the World Bank in its economic analysis of the East-
West Highway Improvement project currently under preparation.

28.     Based on the above considerations it was estimated that VOC savings equal GEL 161
million (USD 97 million), while time savings equal GEL 322 million (USD 194 million). The next
step was to assess how significant these transport cost savings are for land transportation.17
According to information from national official statistics, the land transportation sector is equal to
GEL 714 million (USD 430 million), including GEL 324 million (USD 195 million or 45 percent of
total) for used in intermediate consumption, GEL 68 million (USD 41 million or 10 percent) as
transport margin (that is to say, the cost of product delivery—the transportation margin together
with trade margin and indirect taxes explain the difference between basic and consumer prices),
GEL 306 million (USD 184 million or 43 percent) as households’ consumption of transport
services, and GEL 17 million (USD10 million or 2 percent) as exported. In other words, transport
costs explicitly appear in the SAM as firm’s expenditures for transportation of goods and for
business travel and as households’ costs of private passenger travel.18

29.    The reduction in VOC is modeled as the reduction in intermediate goods costs for the land
transportation sector. For SAM 15x15, GEL 162 million (USD 97 million) cost saving translates
into an 11 percent reduction in intermediate goods costs of the transport and communication sector.

30.     The reduction in transportation costs associated with monetized time savings is distributed
over firms and households, covering costs of product delivery, firms’ travel costs and private travel
costs. It was assumed that GEL 32 million (USD 19 million) are reduced through transportation
margin, and the rest GEL 290 million (USD 174 million) through lowered costs of travels. For
SAM 15x15, GEL 322 million (USD 193 million) time-related cost saving translates into a two and
a half percent reduction in aggregate transportation margin, a 13 percent reduction in firms’ travel
costs and an 11 percent reduction in households’ travel costs.

16
   Data is taken from feasibility studies for these two sections made by Kocks Consult GmbH in association with BT
Designing and Consulting Company in 2009.
17
   As per Geostat, this is classified as other land transportation services; water transport services”. This category excludes
railway transportation, air transportation, pipelines, cargo handling and storage services, other transport supporting
services, post and courier services, travel agency and tour operator services, and telecommunications services.
18
   For a good review of how transport costs could enter the CGE model see Johannes Bröcker (2002), Passenger Flows in
CGE Models for Transport Project Evaluation, Institute for Regional Research, Christian-Albrechts-Universität Kiel, May
2002. Paper to be presented to the ERSA Congress 2002, August 2002, Dortmund. Available at:
 http://www-sre.wu-wien.ac.at/ersa/ersaconfs/ersa02/cd-rom/papers/163.pdf



                                                             11
Macroeconomic, Distributional, and Regional Impacts

31.     Table 2 shows how real GDP increases over the medium and long-term, as a result of the
EWH investments, presenting macroeconomic simulations results stemming from the reduction of
transportation costs. These results clearly indicate the importance of indirect project costs. Real
GDP is assessed to increase by 1.5 percent over a medium-term horizon (the comparative static
formulation of the model) and 4.2 percent over a long-term horizon (steady-state). Steady-state
results should be taken with caution as they represent an upper bound of the potential impact of
reduction in transport costs. Real household consumption increases due to lower expenditures on
transportation, allowing reallocation of household resources and purchases of other goods,
increased income and higher supply due both to the expansion of domestic production and in the
long-term, imports, while government consumption also increases but at lower rate.

32.      Both exports and imports are expected to expand in the long-run, with exports growing on
average faster due to the strong expansion of transportation and manufacturing sectors, accounting
together for over two thirds of exports—Annex 4 provides details on the simulation results of the
sectoral impact of the EWH. In the medium-term, exports will fall driven primarily by reduced
output in manufacturing and other sectors, which in turn is explained by a reallocation of primary
factors of production to now relatively more competitive sectors like transportation and mining. In
addition, as the price for domestic transport services goes down, domestic supply becomes more
competitive compared to imported services, driving down imports, first of all transport sector
imports. In the long-run, imports of the transportation sector will also decline, ceteris paribus, but
total trade will grow amid expansion of other sectors.

        Table 2: Indirect Macroeconomic Impact, Cumulative Percentage Change from 2013 Baseline

                                                    Medium-Term
                                                                        Long-term (steady-state)
                                                 (comparative-static)
   Real GDP                                              1.5                      4.2
   Real household consumption                            1.5                      4.4
   Real government consumption                           0.7                      1.1
   Real exports                                          -0.4                     4.7
   Real imports                                          -0.3                     1.6
   Unemployment                                          -2.8                     -4.4
   Sources: World Bank, ISET Policy Institute.




                                                        12
           Table 3: Distributional Impacts on Welfare, Cumulative Percentage Change from 2013 Baseline

                                                                            Medium-Term
            Quintile                     Level of income, GEL                                      Long-term (steady-state)
                                                                         (comparative-static)
Household income quintile 1                         0-500                       1.8                          2.6
Household income quintile 2                        500-1000                      2.1                         3.2
Household income quintile 3                    1000-1500                         2.3                         3.8
Household income quintile 4                    1500-3000                         2.5                         4.0
Household income quintile 5                  more than 3000                      2.8                         4.4
      Source: World Bank, ISET Policy Institute.


33.     In the comparative static formulation of the model, the first two quintiles with the lowest
income—the bottom 40 percent with annual income up to GEL 1000 (USD 602)—gain relatively
less than other household groups (
34.
35.     Table 3). In the comparative steady-state formulation of the model, this effect is reinforced,
most likely because households with higher levels of income tend to own more capital, the stock of
which increases in the steady-state formulation of the model. The reduction in unemployment in the
long-term arises from the expansion of the capital stock, allowing use of unemployed labor. There
are several transmission mechanisms allowing households to gain income in case of transport cost
reduction. First, the expansion of production results in higher demand for primary factors and thus
household income. Secondly, wages increases for both the self-employed and hired labor and
unemployment declines. Higher households’ income results also increase households’ consumption
(Table 2).

36.    Regional welfare-increasing effect of construction of the EWH was estimated (Table 4). On
average, rural households gain more than urban households, in line with a priori expectations, as
rural households’ income is more affected by transportation costs as they need to purcha se and
deliver goods on longer distances both for consumption and for sale.

    Table 4: Regional Household Welfare Impact Change, Cumulative Percentage Cumulative from 2013
                                               Baseline
                                                  Urban                                         Rural
                                      Medium-Term         Long-term                                        Long-term
                                                                               Medium-Term
                                      (comparative-     (steady-state)                                   (steady-state)
                                                                            (comparative-static)
                                         static)
 Kakheti                                   2.00               4.28                  2.15                     4.07
 Tbilisi                                   2.43               5.48                  3.42                     5.75
 Shida Kartli                              1.91               4.74                  2.31                     4.77
 Kvemo_Kartli                              2.27               4.66                  2.26                     4.81
 Samtskhe                                  1.84               4.45                  2.29                     4.62
 Adjara                                    2.13               5.22                  2.57                     5.23
 Guria                                     1.71               3.56                  2.27                     4.58



                                                              13
                                                 Urban                                         Rural
                                     Medium-Term         Long-term                                         Long-term
                                                                               Medium-Term
                                     (comparative-     (steady-state)                                    (steady-state)
                                                                            (comparative-static)
                                        static)
 Samegrelo                                1.99               4.40                   2.31                      5.06
 Imereti                                  2.21               4.92                   2.44                      4.63
 Mtskheta                                 3.33               5.90                   2.47                      4.59
 Urban                                    2.14               4.72                   N/A                       N/A
 Rural                                    N/A                N/A                    2.38                      4.79
Note: Welfare as proxied by household consumption.
Sources: World Bank, ISET Policy Institute.




37.     Sensitivity analysis of the simulated indirect impacts of the reduction in transportation costs
associated with the EWH reveal that results are robust to changes in elasticity parameters of the
model. The model results are the most sensitive to changes in elasticity of substitution between
leisure and consumption/saving bundles (Tables 5 and 6). The reduction of elasticity by 0.25 points
results in a drop in real GDP and households’ consumption both in the static and steady-state
formulation of the model, as people become less interested in sacrificing their leisure. The logic is
as follows: the reduction in transportation costs stimulates economic activity that means more
demand for labor and thus pressure for unemployed to be employed. If people value leisure so that
leisure and work are poor substitutes, impact of reduced costs on the economy would be less
positive. The opposite is also true. If work and leisure are better substitutes, the increased
opportunities in case of cheaper transportation stimulate employment and thus economic growth,
especially in the long-run when the capital stock is also adjustable. So, a 0.25 point increase in this
elasticity parameter boosts real GDP and households’ consumption.

38.     Another elasticity parameter affecting real GDP and households’ consumption patterns is the
elasticity of substitution between primary factors of production: a higher elasticity allows more
variability in technology and thus boosts production, real GDP, as well as consumption. Armington
elasticity related to substitution between exports and domestic supply and between domestic supply
and imports affects mainly trade patterns, producing minor impact on other macroeconomic
variables.19




19
  An Armington elasticity represents the elasticity of substitution between products of different countries, and is based on
the assumption that products traded internationally are differentiated by country of origin. The Armington assumption has
become a standard assumption of international CGE models, generating smaller and more realistic responses of trade to
price changes than implied by models with homogeneous products.



                                                            14
Table 5: Sensitivity Analysis of Indirect Macroeconomic Impact, Cumulative Percentage Change from 2013
                                Baseline, Medium-Term (comparative-static)

                                                                            Elasticity of         Elasticity of         Elasticity of
                                                      Elasticity of
                                                                        substitution between      substitution          substitution
                                                    transformation
                                                                             leisure and            between           between primary
                                                  between domestic
                                     Baseline                           consumption/saving      domestic supply          factors of
                                                 supply and exports,
                                                                               bundle,            and imports,          production,
                                                   baseline value is
                                                                          baseline value is     baseline value is     baseline value is
                                                       equal to 1
                                                                            equal to 0.5           equal to 1            equal to 1
                                                       0       2          0.25        0.75        0            2          0          2
 Real GDP                              1.50        1.5        1.5         0.9         1.8        1.5       1.5         1.3        1.6
 Real household consumption            1.47        1.5        1.5         0.9         1.8        1.5       1.5         1.2        1.6
 Real government
 consumption                            0.7        0.7        0.7         0.0         0.7        0.7       0.7         0.6        0.8
 Real exports                           -0.4       -0.4       -0.5        -1.0        -0.1     -0.2        -0.5       -0.7        -0.3
 Real imports                     -0.3             -0.3       -0.4        -0.8        -0.1      -0.2       -0.4       -0.5        -0.2
 Sources: World Bank, ISET Policy Institute.


Table 6: Sensitivity Analysis of Indirect Macroeconomic Impact, Cumulative Percentage Change from 2013
                                     Baseline, Long-Term (steady-state)

                                                                           Elasticity of         Elasticity of        Elasticity of
                                                     Elasticity of
                                                                       substitution between      substitution         substitution
                                                   transformation
                                                                            leisure and            between          between primary
                                                 between domestic
                                    Baseline                           consumption/saving      domestic supply         factors of
                                                supply and exports,
                                                                              bundle,            and imports,         production,
                                                  baseline value is
                                                                         baseline value is     baseline value is    baseline value is
                                                      equal to 1
                                                                           equal to 0.5           equal to 1           equal to 1
                                                   0          2         0.25        0.75         0         2          0          2
 Real GDP                              4.2        4.1        4.3         1.9         6.5        4.1       4.3        3.8        4.6
 Real household consumption            4.4        4.4        4.5         1.8         7.1        4.4       4.5        4.3        4.5
 Real government
 consumption                           1.1        1.1        1.1         1.1         1.1        1.1       1.1        1.1        1.1
 Real exports                          4.7        3.1        6.3          2.1        7.3        3.9       5.5        4.3        5.1
 Real imports                          1.6        2.1        1.2         -0.9        4.1        2.5       0.7        1.1        2.1
 Note: Results based on 15 x 15 SAM.
 Sources: World Bank, ISET Policy Institute.




39.    This study has presented results from a single country general equilibrium assessment of the
indirect impacts of the reduction in transportation costs arising from the EWH investment program
in Georgia. This approach is well-suited to estimate the extensive indirect effects of the project.
Estimations of different components of the project’s indirect effects are important in order to have a
comprehensive impact evaluation. While only the indirect impacts of reduced transportation costs
has been modeled, other indirect effects can be modeled, which would lead to much larger indirect
impacts. In particular, trans-boundary spillover will support higher economic growth in neighboring


                                                              15
countries, reflecting the impact of improved infrastructure in an international corridor for enhanced
regional integration.

40.     This assessment was carried out with the construction of the CGE model for Georgia based
on the existing model code, already developed by ISET Policy Institute. For this study, the existing
code was revised and elaborated. In particular, (a) the steady-state formulation was added allowing
variability of the level of capital stock and thus approximating the results of the model with a
dynamic formulation; and (b) the model code was developed for two different SAM matrices:
15x15 matrix with 20 households representing Georgian regions, and 15x15 matrix with five
household categories split by income levels. The counterfactual scenario was run to assess the
reduction of transportation costs following completion of the EWH investment program, using
official statistics, as well as data provided by the Roads Department of Georgia, and the World
Bank team working on the East West Highway projects.

41.    It was estimated that monetized time saving and vehicle operational cost saving associated
with the EWH project amounted to an estimated GEL 483 million (USD 291 million). This amount
is higher than the transport margin of road transportation, and thus the counterfactuals were run
assuming a reduction in both the transportation margin and in travel costs. The simulations show
positive economy wide effects of the reduction in transportation costs associated with the EWH
investments. Real GDP is estimated to increase by 1.5 percent in the comparative static formulation
of the model and by 4.2 percent in the steady state formulation. Total output, exports and imports
are expected to grow. The works on the EWH and associated fall in transportation cost will
positively affect all types of households, contributing to a reduction in absolute poverty. The
reduction in transportation costs will be more beneficial for the rural population, as the former are
much more reliant on transportation and thus much more sensitive to price changes.

42.     CGE models are not without their detractors and have been subject to a number of criticisms.
One criticism is that they are inaccessible to non-economists and expensive and difficult to change
and some economists argue that the indirect economic relationships that CGE analyses seek to
represent can be captured in simpler and more transparent models. The complexity of the model
structure and underlying assumptions means that model results are less accessible to a wider
audience than other econometric modeling approaches. Like all models, CGE models are limited by
the data used, both in term of the quality of the data and the availability of the data. 20 A CGE model
needs quantities and prices of all goods, services, factors of production, and any other variables for
the initial state of the economy; as well as elasticities describing how they respond to a change.
These elasticities are used to calculate the remaining parameters, check the model design, and for
comparing with the post-change results. Elasticities are usually parameters in a CGE model; the
results of the model are the changes in prices and quantities and their effects on macro variables



20
  This discussion on data limitation is taken from King, Anita (2002), Economy-Wide Impacts of Industry Policy, New
Zealand Treasury Working Paper 12/05, Available at: http://www.treasury.govt.nz/publications/research-
policy/wp/2012/12-05/twp12-05.pdf



                                                         16
such as GDP. Data limitations are the main constraint on the number of sectors and the level of
detail of a CGE model can attain.

43.    Comparative static CGE models have some particular limitations. Firstly, these class of
models do not specify the transition required to move from the initial equilibrium to the final one,
and may fail to capture some of the costs and benefits associated with the transition, and therefore
can overstate or understate the benefits from the policy change or shock being modeled. Secondly,
comparative static CGE models are used as scenario-based tool. They are designed to perform
policy experiments to help understand the potential economic results of a particular policy change
or shock. They are not designed for forecasting, where many changes occur simultaneously.

44.     With these caveats in mind, there are several possible extensions to the model to capture
indirect effects. First, the international spillovers related to the construction of the EWH could be
modeled to assess the impact on neighboring countries. This could be done both in a single-country
framework and in multi-county formulation of the model. Second, the regional disaggregation of
the model could be developed to assess the spatial effects of infrastructure development within
Georgia. However, this extension faces significant data requirements as regional input-output
matrices would need to be developed. Lastly, a dynamic model could be constructed to capture the
trajectory of annual changes to key economic parameters as a result of constructing the EWH,
including assessing the direct impacts of the investments themselves, as well as the impact of the
VOC reduction and value of time on freight, an important consideration for trade impacts.




                                                 17
In their most basic form, CGE models characterize a target economy (in this case, Georgia) using
detailed consumption and production functions, together with a depiction of the market prices and
price distortions (e.g., taxes or regulatory controls). This provides a depiction of the economy “as
is” in a static framework, or using a “business as usual” projection, in a dynamic framework. Such
depiction is contained in the SAM, a comprehensive, economy-wide data table which represents
how the different sectors of the economy interact.

The basic SAM in Georgia has 15 activities and 15 commodities, 2 types of factors of production
and 20 representative households groups. The project relies on the CGE model already developed
by the ISET. The model was developed following Mathiesen (1985)21 and Rutherford (1995;
1999)22 and setting up an Arrow–Debreu equilibrium as a mixed complementarily problem. Three
types of weak inequality conditions are satisfied simultaneously: zero profit, market clearance and
income balance.

Households exchange labor effort for wages, and labor is assumed to be fully employed and mobile
across sectors with flexible real wages. They transfer (receive) funds from the government and the
rest of the world, and pay tax to the government. The government receives income from collecting
taxes and tariffs, and also receives (transfers) funds from domestic households and the rest of the
world. The government then purchases commodities to distribute public goods and services, and
saves a fixed proportion of the income.

In the initial formulation of the model, firms produce a single good using a multi-level,
differentiable, constant return to scale production function that combines factor inputs23 (Figure
A1.1) with intermediate goods. The capital and labor bundle assume a Cobb-Douglas function,
while the combination of capital and labor is combined with intermediate inputs using the Leontief
function. Similar to Hosoe et al. (2010)24 and Rutherford et al. (2002), a constant elasticity of
transformation (CET) function has been used to split production into export and domestic
consumption. Then, domestic consumption and imports are aggregated to form the Armington final
good (Armington 1969).25



21
   Mathiesen, Lars. 1985. “Computational Experience in Solving Equilibrium Models by a Sequence of Linear
Complementarity Problems.” Operations Research 33 (6) (November 1): 1225–1250. doi:10.2307/170635.
22
   Rutherford, Thomas F. (1995) “Extension of GAMS for Comp lementarity Problems Arising in Applied Economic
Analysis.” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 19 (8) (November): 1299–1324. doi:10.1016/0165-
1889(94)00831-2. Rutherford, Thomas F. (1999) “Applied General Equilibrium Modeling with MPSGE as a GAMS
Subsystem: An Overview of the Modeling Framework and Syntax.” Computational Economics 14 (1-2): 1–46.
23
   Elasticity of substitution between self-employed and hired labor is assumed to be 0.5, with the exception of the
agricultural sector where we assume that self-employed and hired types of labor are perfect substitutes.
24
   Hosoe, Nobuhiro, Kenji Gasawa, and Hideo Hashimoto, 2010, Textbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling:
Programming and Simulations. Palgrave Macmillan.
25
   Armington composite goods are used to account for cross hauling (two-way trading) of the same good, i.e. the same
type of goods are both imported and exported. See Armington, P, 1969, “A Theory of Demand for Products Distinguished
by Place of Production”. IMF Staff Papers 16. New York: International Monetary Fund.



                                                        18
The rest of the world (ROW) is modeled as a simple agent that demands foreign savings (in the
domestic economy). Its budget is equal to ownership of domestic capital (if any), net remittances,
and demand for net imports. In the model, all of these agents operate in a small open economy
environment in which the country cannot affect world prices. Export and import prices quoted in
foreign currency are exogenously given.

                                 Figure A1.1: Production Functions




Source: ISET Policy Institute.


Households maximize a multi-level utility function (Figure A1.2) taking into account their
disposable income. Households derive utility from leisure time, saving and consumption of
commodity bundles, including imported or domestically produced products. A Cobb-Douglas
function of consumption of goods is used, which is assumed to be in fixed proportion with savings.
The elasticity of substitution between leisure and the consumption-saving bundle is assumed to be
0.5.

The government levies taxes and receives transfers from the ROW, and makes transfers to
households and to the ROW. The remainder is used to purchase commodities (government
consumption) and save/invest. Income tax revenue is allowed to endogenously adjust so that the
level of government services is fixed to its baseline level for all counterfactual scenarios. The ROW
demands foreign savings and its budget comes from ownership of domestic capital, net remittances,
and demand for net imports.




                                                 19
                                 Figure A1.2: Utility functions




In the framework of this paper, the model was modified, with the following changes introduced in
the code:
      The steady-state formulation was added allowing variability of the level of capital stock and
       thus approximating the results of the model to dynamic formulation;
      Model code was realized for two different SAM matrixes: 15x15 matrix with 20 households
       representing Georgian regions, 15x15 matrix with 5 households split by the level of their
       income.
      A counterfactual scenario was run to assess the reduction of transportation costs. The
       magnitude of reduction was assessed by the project team based on available information
       from open sources and provided by the World Bank team (Annex 3).
The model was realized in GAMS/MPGSE.




                                                20
Overview of Social Accounting Matrix
This annex documents the construction of a Social Accounting Matrix for Georgia for the year
2013. The SAM is based on Supply-Use tables, national accounts, government budget, balance of
payments and integrated household survey data. In our analysis we use two types of SAMs. Both
SAMs for Georgia provide information about 15 activities and 15 commodities of the economy and
they contain 3 types of production factors. The difference between the two matrices is that the first
SAM consists of 20 representative household groups by regions and rural-urban areas, whereas the
second SAM splits households by 5 income level.

The SAM is a comprehensive, economy-wide data table which represents how the different sectors
of the economy interact. A SAM is a square matrix in which each row and column is called an
“account” and SAM shows incomes and expenditures of each account. Each cell in the matrix
represents, by convention, a flow of funds from a column account to a row account. For each
account total revenues equal total expenditure, this means that an account’s row and column totals
must be equal, only in this case is the SAM balanced. The information needed to build a SAM
comes from a variety of sources and placing these data within the SAM framework inevitably
reveals inconsistencies between the incomes and expenditures of each account. A number of
statistical estimation techniques exist to “balance” these small inconsistencies.

Each cell in the SAM shows the payment from the account of its column (expenditures) to the
account of its row (incomes). For example in the aggregated SAM of 2013 (Table A2.1), different
economic activities (economic sectors), grouped in Activity (A) column, use different commodities
purchased at factor markets as intermediate inputs worth GEL 17,216 million (USD 10,371 million;
cell C-A26) and these are used to produce goods and services with value added of GEL 23,335
million (USD 14,047 million; cell F-A), consisting of labor and capital value added. These goods
and services are then sold through commodity markets to households, government, investors (gross
capital formation) and foreigners (export).27 The overall revenue received by the commodity market
(row C) was GEL 65,563 million (USD 39,496 million), of which foreign exports total GEL 11,998
million (USD 7,228 million; cell C-R). In 2013, Households’ expenditure on commodities was GEL
19,193 million (USD 11,562 million; cell C-H), final government consumption expenditure equaled
GEL 4,479 million (USD 2,698 million; cell C-G), and gross capital formation was GEL 6,653
million (USD 4,008 million; cell C-S).

On the other hand, the commodity account consists of following expenditures: GEL 40,551 million
USD 24, 428 million; cell A-C) for activities, GEL 6,024 million (USD 3,629 million; cell TTM-C)
is transaction costs, GEL 3,512 million (USD 2,116 million; cell T-C) is taxes less subsidies and
imports constituted GEL 15,475 million (USD 9,322 million; cell R-C). Data about activities and

26
     In the notation used, the row name is followed by the column name.
27
     Households in this context means households and non-profit organizations serving households (NPISH).



                                                            21
commodities accounts come from 2013 GeoStat supply-use tables of 2013. Total output was
measured in basic prices, in order to transform it into market prices, trade and transportation
margins were added (cells TTM-C and C-TTM). Table A2.2 explains briefly the meaning of each
cell.

To check the correctness of the SAM, the GDP of Georgia for 2013 was calculated using three
different approaches:

       Production approach. GDP = Total output (cell A-C) – Intermediate Inputs (cell C-A) +
        Net Taxes (cell T-C) = GEL 26,847 million (USD 16,173 million).
       Expenditure approach. GDP = Household consumption (cell C-H) + Government
        consumption (cell C-G) + Gross capital formation (cell C-S) +exports (cell C-R) - imports
        (cell R-C) = GEL 26,847 million.
       Income approach. GDP= Employment Income + Other income from self-employment +
        Total profit from companies (cell F-A) + Net Taxes (cell T-C) = GEL 26,847 million.

In the model, household and government purchases of commodities provide the income that
producers need to continue the production process. In addition, inter-institutional transfers, such as
taxes and savings, ensure that the circular flow of incomes is closed. Overall, consolidated budget
revenue was GEL 7,434 million (USD 4,478 million) or the sum of the row or column of
Government account), out of which (a) GEL 239 million (USD 144 million; cell G-R) was grants;
(b) GEL 6,659 million (USD 4,011 million) was revenue from taxes; and (c) the rest (GEL 536
million; USD 323 million) was other income including income from property, dividends received
from government owned companies’ profits, among others. This value was assigned to
Government’s factor income from capital (cell G-F). Part of the money on tax account comes from
commodities which includes value added tax of GEL 2,848 million (USD 1,716 million), excise tax
of GEL 722 million (USD 435 million), import tax of GEL 89 million (USD 54 million) and
subsidies GEL 147 million (USD 89 million) which enters in the SAM with negative sign. Thus,
overall we have GEL 3,512 million (USD 2,116 million) of net taxes (cell T-C) from commodities.
The rest of the revenue comes from households (including income tax, profit tax, property tax and
other taxes, having in mind the wide definition of households), which is GEL 3,147 million (USD
1,896 million; cell T-H).




                                                 22
Table A2.1: Macro SAM for Georgia (GEL million), 2013
               A                  C                 TTM             F                  H                     G                   T           S              R
A                                 40,551                                                                                                                                      40,551
C               17,216                               6,024                              19,193                   4,479                         6,653        11,998            65,563
TTM                                 6,024
F               23,335                                                                                                                                                        23,335
H                                                                     22,292               1,260                 2,244                                          2,461         26,997
G                                                                        536                                              6,659                                   239          7,434
T                                   3,512                                               3,147                                                                                  6,659
S                                                                                       4,398               711                                             1,543              6,653
R                                   15,475                              507               259                                                                                 16,241
                40,551              65,563           6,024           23,335            26,997             7,434           6,659            6,653           16,241
Note: A is activities (economic sectors), C is commodities, TTM is Trade and Transport Margins, F is factors of production (Capital, Labor), H is households, G-is government, T is taxes, S is
saving-investment, and are R is rest of the world.
Source: ISET Policy Institute.

Table A2.2:         SAM description
                   A                 C                  TTM                F                       H                     G               T              S                 R

A                                    Total Output

C                  Intermediate                         Transaction                                Household             Government                     Gross Capital     Exports
                   demand                               costs                                      consumption           consumption                    Formation
TTM                                  Transaction
                                     costs
F                  Factor Value
                   Added
H                                                                          Factor Income           Inter-household       Transfers to                                     Foreign
                                                                           to households           transfers             households                                       remittances
                                                                                                                                                                          received
G                                                                          Factor Income                                                 Government                       Grants received
                                                                           to Government                                                 revenue from                     by Government
                                                                                                                                         taxes
T                                    Net Taxes                                                     Taxes paid by
                                                                                                   households
S                                                                                                  Households            Net Operating                                    Current
                                                                                                   savings               Balance                                          Account
                                                                                                                                                                          (Foreign
                                                                                                                                                                          savings)
R                                    Imports                               FDI Value               Foreign
                                                                           Added                   remittances
                                                                                                   paid
Source: ISET Policy Institute.




                                                                                               23
Household income consists of inter household transfers of GEL 1,260 million (USD 759 million; cell H-H),
which was derived from integrated household survey data28, social transfer payments from the government (cell
H-G) and remittances (cell H-R). Value added to households was assigned as they are owners of factors (cell H-
F), excluding FDI value added (cell R-F) and capital value added of government (cell G-F).

According to the consolidated budget of 2013, social assistance amounted to GEL 2,295 million (USD 1,378
million), which includes pensions, social aid, social rehabilitation, childcare, healthcare programs and other
transfers. Part of which is already reflected in government expenditure on goods and services (cell C-G). Thus, a
lower value of GEL 2,244 million (USD 1,347 million) is used as government transfers to households. As for
the remittances, official data comes from the National Bank of Georgia, according to which remittance inflows
in 2013 were USD 1,477 million and outflows USD 155 million—equivalent to GEL 2,461 million and GEL
259 million respectively.29

Other government expenditures (column G) include spending on goods and services, as mentioned above, and
savings, which is net operating balance of GEL 711 million (USD 428 million) or the difference between
consolidated revenues and expenditures (cell S-G). Overall, Government expenditure (sum of column G),
including savings, is GEL 6,441 million (USD 3,880 million), which equals total Government income (row G).

The current account deficit is depicted in the cell S-R in 2013, according to official data, the current account was
negative USD 926 million, which is about GEL 1,543 million.30

Household savings-investment, for which official data does not exist, is straightforward to obtain. Official data
on net operating balance (cell S-G) and current account deficit (cell S-R) were used. In addition, the value of
gross capital formation of GEL 6,653 million (USD 4,008 million) is also known (cell S-total). Therefore, the
household saving-investment comes out to be GEL 4,398 million (USD 2,640 million) this is a “plug in”
number which balances the SAM.

The rest of the world also receives income from FDI value added GEL 507 million (cell R-F), which simply
includes dividends received by foreigners and part of profit which is not reinvested. In other words, this is
estimated outflow of capital value added of FDI in 2013. The value for this cell is plug-in number, while all
other values for R account are official data from different sources. In the less disaggregates SAM, there are 15
economic activities and 15 commodities as described in Table A2.3.

It is important to note that in the initial SAM the rule that one activity produces one commodity did not hold,
several activities producing more than a single commodity. The SAM was rebalanced the SAM to enforce this
rule. The rebalancing was applied to both SAMs.




28
   GeoStat: http://geostat.ge/index.php?action=meurneoba&mpid=1&lang=eng
29
   Calculated by using average annual exchange rate of 1.6659 in 2013
30
   Source: GeoStat, 2013




                                                             24
                                            Table A2.3: Economic Activities of the SAM 15x15
1       Agriculture, hunting and forestry
2       Fishing and fish farming
3       Mining and quarrying
4       Manufacturing
5       Electricity, gas and water supply
6       Construction
7       Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles, motorcycles and personal and household goods
8       Hotels and restaurants
9       Transport and communication
10      Financial intermediation
11      Real estate, renting and business activities
12      Public administration
13      Education
14      Health and social work
15      Other community, social and personal service activities, services of domestic staff employed by households
Source: ISET Policy Institute.



Household Income and Expenditure

To desegregate household expenditure (cell C-H) by sectors, the Integrated Household Survey (IHS) data of
2013 produced by GeoStat was used. Data is disaggregated at the level of ten regions: Kakheti, Tbilisi, Shida
Kartli, Kvemo Kartli, Samtskhe Javakheti, Adjara, Guria, Samegrelo Zemo Svaneti, Imereti Kvemo Svaneti
Racha Lechkhumi, Mtskheta Mtianeti. In turn, each region has been disaggregated into rural and urban areas,
which means that there are in total 20 household categories.

The SAM uses a variable showing income in foreign currency to calculate the percentage distribution of
remittances across regions, and within rural and urban areas in each region. To disaggregate transfers from the
government to households (cell H-G), proxy variables from household survey data are used, which aggregate
pensions and aid paid by government to households. Labor factor income is fully allocated to households, but
capital factor income was allocated between households, government and the rest of the world.

For disaggregating factor income (cell H-F) labor value added among rural and urban areas of each region was
derived from monetary income of households from self-employed and hired employment. Approximately the
same weights are then used to calculate capital value added for each group of households. Taxes are split into
value added tax (VAT), import tax, excise tax, subsidies, and other taxes. The redistribution of these taxes
among sectors we obtained from GeoStat. Overall, there were GEL 2,847.8 million (USD 1,716 million) VAT,
GEL 722.3 million (USD 435 million) of excise tax, GEL 89.4 million (USD 54 million) of import tax and GEL
147 million (USD 86 million) of subsidies.31 The rest of taxes paid by households (GEL 3,147 million; USD
1,896 million) was redistributed based on income from hired employment for different household groups.


31
     Redistribution of subsidies by sector was given in a supply table.




                                                                          25
Money sent abroad (cell R-H) we disaggregated proportionally to population size in rural and urban areas for
each regions.
Transfers from households to other households (cell H-H) were disaggregated by using the variable which
captures income from relatives. First, for each group of households, the total amount of money they get from
other households was calculated in order to derive the total for row account (incomes). Second, population
shares were used to redistribute these amounts across column household accounts, in order to estimate amount
transferred from each type of household to another.

Finally, trade and transport margins for each commodity were disaggregated proportionally according to values
of import, export and domestic use.

Structure of Consumption

Transport and communication sector services have different importance for other sectors of the economy
(TableA2.4). For example, for sector 11 “Real estate, renting and business activities” transportation services
(business travels) and communication services constitute 19.8 percent of sectors’ expenditures on goods and
services for intermediate consumption. For mining and quarrying, the share is 11.5 percent, while for agriculture
– only 4.2 percent.

          Table A2.4: Structure of Intermediate Consumption of Sectors, % of total sector intermediate consumption
                                  1      2      3      4      5       6     7      8      9     10     11      12    13     14     15
 1    Agriculture, hunting       49.3   5.3    11.6   21.4   0.2     0.5   0.7    1.9    0.1    0.5    0.5    11.6   8.7    4.3    1.7
      and forestry
  2   Fishing and fish           0.1    1.4    0.1    0.8    0.0     0.0   0.0    0.5    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.6    0.7    0.1    0.0
      farming
  3   Mining and quarrying        1.6    0.2    4.8    7.7   23.1    0.4    0.3    0.1    0.5    0.1    0.3    1.7    0.2    0.7    0.1
  4   Manufacturing              39.5   67.9   50.2   52.3    7.4   62.4   33.4   44.1   52.4   17.8   23.5   59.5   52.9   57.3   24.1
  5   Electricity, gas and        1.4    2.7    6.9    6.2   14.7    0.7    5.5    8.0    2.3    3.4    7.0    2.2    7.4    5.9    7.1
      water supply
  6   Construction               0.6    4.5    0.7    1.7    2.7    26.4   2.4    3.5    2.8    1.6    1.4    0.0    1.8    5.6    3.8
  7   Wholesale and retail       0.4    0.7    2.0    0.6    2.5     0.9   5.2    0.3    5.4    3.7    2.1    2.2    0.5    0.6    4.0
      trade; repair of motor
      vehicles, motorcycles
      and personal and
      household goods
  8   Hotels and                 0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.1     0.1   0.2    0.5    7.5    1.7    0.5    0.6    4.7    1.1    4.6
      restaurants
  9   Transport and              4.2    0.3    11.5   3.0    11.3    1.4   9.1    12.4   18.9   6.1    19.8   4.8    1.4    11.5   7.4
      communication
 10   Financial                  0.6    12.0   3.5    2.5    16.4    2.6   7.0    18.9   3.4    0.5    15.2   0.0    0.5    0.7    1.8
      intermediation
 11   Real estate, renting       1.3    4.9    8.6    3.5    7.6     4.3   34.8   5.3    5.8    57.3   21.7   4.1    20.1   8.4    41.8
      and business
      activities
 12   Public administration      0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0   0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0
 13   Education                  0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.2     0.0   0.0    0.8    0.2    2.5    5.3    0.1    0.3    1.0    0.5
 14   Health and social          0.9    0.0    0.0    0.0    0.0     0.0   0.1    3.4    0.2    0.4    0.3    6.8    0.0    1.7    0.2
      work
 15   Other community,           0.1    0.0    0.1    0.2    13.8    0.1   1.2    0.3    0.7    4.4    2.3    5.7    0.8    1.2    2.9
      social and personal
      service activities,
      services of domestic
      staff employed by
      households
Source: ISET Policy Institute.




                                                                    26
Manufacturing products account for the largest share of final consumption for all categories of households.
Transport and communication expenses are higher for high income households (HH5), while the low-income
households spend the larger share of their income on agriculture products.

     Table A2.5: Structure of Final Consumption of Households (Income Groups), % of total household final consumption
                                                                                                                                                             HH1                           HH2                        HH3                          HH4                          HH5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               more than
                        Level of income, GEL                                                                                                                 0-500                        500-1000                  1000-1500                    1500-3000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                3000
      1     Agriculture, hunting and forestry                                                                                                                16.4                           12.4                       9.6                            7.3                         4.1
      2     Fishing and fish farming                                                                                                                          0.0                            0.0                       0.0                            0.0                         0.0
      3     Mining and quarrying                                                                                                                              2.8                            1.5                       1.8                            1.5                         2.7
      4     Manufacturing                                                                                                                                    48.1                           55.6                      53.6                           52.8                        38.2
      5     Electricity, gas and water supply                                                                                                                 4.1                            3.5                       3.0                            2.3                         1.5
      6     Construction                                                                                                                                      0.7                            0.4                       0.5                            0.4                         0.7
      7     Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles,
            motorcycles and personal and household goods                                                                                                      1.6                           0.8                        1.1                               0.9                             1.6
    8       Hotels and restaurants                                                                                                                            3.9                           2.0                        2.5                               2.1                             3.8
    9       Transport and communication                                                                                                                       3.6                           5.4                        6.7                               8.2                            10.8
   10       Financial intermediation                                                                                                                          4.1                           2.1                        2.7                               2.2                             4.0
   11       Real estate, renting and business activities                                                                                                      1.0                           1.6                        2.9                               7.6                            17.1
   12       Public administration                                                                                                                             0.0                           0.0                        0.0                               0.0                             0.0
   13       Education                                                                                                                                         1.1                           2.9                        4.4                               3.9                             2.9
   14       Health and social work                                                                                                                            7.5                           6.3                        5.7                               4.9                             7.4
   15       Other community, social and personal service
            activities, services of domestic staff employed by
            households                                                                                                                                        4.9                           5.5                        5.6                               5.8                                 5.3
Source: ISET Policy Institute.

In regional breakdown, transportation services account for the largest share of consumption of households living
in rural Tbilisi (Table A2.6).

     Table A2.6: Structure of Final Consumption of Households (Regional Groups), % of total household final consumption
                                                                                                          Kvemo_Kartli_U


                                                                                                                             Kvemo_Kartli_R
                                                                    Shida_Kartli_U


                                                                                       Shida_Kartli_R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Samegrelo_U


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Samegrelo_R
                                                                                                                                                Samtskhe_U


                                                                                                                                                                Samtskhe_R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mtskheta_U


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mtskheta_R
            Kakheti_U


                          Kakheti_R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Imereti_U


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Imereti_R
                                                                                                                                                                               Adjara_U


                                                                                                                                                                                             Adjara_R
                                        Tbilisi_U


                                                      Tbilisi_R




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Guria_U


                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Guria_R




 1        13.5          13.1           8.0          15.5           7.8               10.6                9.3               13.3                9.9            10.3            8.4          15.3         16.0         15.8        10.1             9.4             9.4          12.4                 7.4           14.8
 2         0.0           0.0           0.0           0.0           0.0                0.0                0.0                0.0                0.0             0.0            0.0           0.0          0.0          0.0         0.0             0.0             0.0           0.0                 0.0            0.0
 3         2.6           2.6           1.6           3.0           1.5                2.1                1.8                2.6                1.9             2.0            1.6           3.0          3.1          3.1         2.0             1.8             1.8           2.4                 1.4            2.9
 4        48.5          57.5          44.4          12.7          58.4               64.9               44.3               58.7               62.9            60.4           42.0          39.3         59.8         57.2        66.0            66.4            55.0          57.2                49.4           39.6
 5         3.6           3.4           3.3           6.4           2.2                2.2                2.8                3.5                2.8             2.9            3.9           2.5          3.1          2.4         2.2             1.6             2.1           2.5                 3.1            4.0
 6         0.4           0.2           0.7           0.7           0.5                0.2                0.7                0.2                0.4             0.3            0.6           0.6          0.1          0.2         0.2             0.2             0.4           0.2                 0.4            0.3
 7         1.0           0.5           1.6           1.6           1.1                0.4                1.6                0.5                0.9             0.6            1.5           1.3          0.3          0.4         0.5             0.5             1.0           0.5                 1.0            0.7
 8         2.5           1.2           3.8           4.0           2.7                0.9                3.8                1.1                2.1             1.5            3.6           3.2          0.7          1.0         1.3             1.1             2.5           1.2                 2.4            1.6
 9         4.7           7.2           7.4          22.1           3.0                6.8                6.8                5.8                2.3             6.9            4.7           8.2          2.8          6.8         4.7             6.1             6.5           8.5                15.2            9.6
10         2.7           1.2           4.0           4.2           2.9                1.0                4.0                1.2                2.3             1.6            3.8           3.4          0.8          1.1         1.3             1.2             2.6           1.3                 2.5            1.7
11         5.2           2.4           7.7           8.1           5.6                1.8                7.7                2.2                4.4             3.1            7.3           6.5          1.5          2.1         2.6             2.3             5.1           2.4                 4.8            3.2
12         0.0           0.0           0.0           0.0           0.0                0.0                0.0                0.0                0.0             0.0            0.0           0.0          0.0          0.0         0.0             0.0             0.0           0.0                 0.0            0.0
13         3.0           1.4           4.5           4.8           3.3                1.1                4.5                1.3                2.6             1.8            4.3           3.8          0.9          1.2         1.5             1.3             3.0           1.4                 2.8            1.9
14         5.8           2.7           8.7           9.1           6.3                2.1                8.6                2.5                4.9             3.5            8.2           7.3          1.7          2.3         2.9             2.5             5.7           2.7                 5.4            3.6
15         6.3           6.6           4.5           7.7           4.5                6.0                4.2                7.0                2.7             4.9           10.0           5.7          9.3          6.3         4.5             5.6             4.8           7.2                 4.3           16.2
Source: ISET Policy Institute.

Land transportation

Land transportation accounts quite a low share of entire transportation and communication sector that is
considered in SAM 15x15. Total use of land transportation is GEL 646 million (USD 388 million), that is 13




                                                                                                                                                               27
percent of the transportation and communication sector.32 Sector’s output is used primarily in intermediate and
final consumption. Slightly more than a quarter of supply of land transportation services in Georgia is imports,
and the rest is produced domestically (Table 2.8).

                            Table A2.7: Land Transportation: Uses, 2013 (at current prices, GEL million)
                                                                         Intermediate       Final      Exports       Gross         Use,
                                                                         consumption    consumption                  capital       Total
                                                                                        expenditure                formation
                                                                                         (Gov + HH)
 1    Agriculture, hunting and forestry                                       2,145         1,920       1,003         695           5,763
 2    Fishing and fish farming                                                 57             4            2            1            65
 3    Mining and quarrying                                                     614           370         481           49           1,515
 4    Manufacturing                                                           7,950         9,786       6,090        2,945         26,771
 5    Electricity, gas and water supply                                        829           559          55            0           1,444
 6    Construction                                                             900           91           64         2,920          3,976
 7    Wholesale and retail trade                                               316           213          92            0            620
 8    Hotels and restaurants                                                   198           511         494            0           1,203
 9    Transport and communication (including land transportation)             1,185         1,335       2,277           0           4,797
                                          Land Transportation Services         323           306          17            0            646
10    Financial intermediation                                                 727           541          92            0           1,359
11    Real estate, renting and business activities                            1,870         1,050        230           42           3,192
12    Public administration                                                     0           3,122        203            0           3,326
13    Education                                                                86           1,441         77            0           1,604
14    Health and social work                                                   111          1,658         20            0           1,790
15    Other community, social and personal service activities                  228          1,070        817            0           2,115
Source: ISET Policy Institute.




                                   Table A2.8: Land Transportation: Resources, 2013 (GEL million)
                                                                              Output    Trade and      Net       Imports       Resources,
                                                                                        transport     Taxes                      Total
                                                                                         margins
 1    Agriculture, hunting and forestry                                       3,732        1,468       -26         588          5,763
 2    Fishing and fish farming                                                  20           9           3         33             65
 3    Mining and quarrying                                                     355          211        98          851          1,515
 4    Manufacturing                                                           8,702        4,335      2,374      11,359         26,771
 5    Electricity, gas and water supply                                       1,134          0         260         50           1,444
 6    Construction                                                            3,732          0         230         14           3,976
 7    Wholesale and retail trade                                              5,228       -4,795       182          5            620
 8    Hotels and restaurants                                                  1,167          0         36           0           1,203
 9    Transport and communication (including land transportation)             3,994       -1,229       140        1,892         4,797
                                         Land Transportation Services          531          -68          0         183           646
10 Financial intermediation                                                   1,131          0           0         228          1,359
11 Real estate, renting and business activities                               2,955          0         79          159          3,192
12 Public administration                                                      3,172          0          -3         157          3,326
13 Education                                                                  1,462          0         27          116          1,604
14 Health and social work                                                     1,745          0         41           3           1,790
15 Other community, social and personal service activities                    2,022          0         73          20           2,115
Source: ISET Policy Institute.




32
  The transport and communication sector comprises railway, land, water, and air transport, as well as telecommunications, post and
courier services, and travel agency and tour operator services.




                                                                         28
                              Table A3.1: Vehicle Fleet Basic Characteristics and Economic Unit Costs
                                                           Car                                     2 Axles     3 Axles     4+ Axles
                                                           4X4       Van       Minibus     Bus      Truck       Truck       Truck
Economic Unit Costs
New Vehicle Cost (USD/vehicle)                            20,454        22,727   22,727   65,909     29,545     38,636     100,000
New Tire Cost (USD/tire)                                    55           273       91      341         182        273        364
Fuel Cost (USD/liter)                                      0.75          0.75     0.75     0.75       0.75       0.75        0.75
Lubricant Cost (USD/liter)                                 6.18          6.18     6.18     6.18       6.18       6.18        6.18
Maintenance Labor Cost (USD/hour)                          0.72          1.64     1.64     1.64       2.10       2.10        3.00
Crew Cost (USD/hour)                                       0.00          2.55     2.55     2.55       2.55       2.55        2.55
Overhead (USD/year)                                        640           640      640      640        1280       1280       1280
Interest Rate (%)                                           12            12       12       12          12         12         12
Passenger Working Time (USD/hour)                          3.83          3.83     2.55     2.55       0.00       0.00        0.00
Passenger Non Working Time (USD/hour)                      1.13          1.13     0.75     0.75       0.00       0.00        0.00
Cargo Time (USD/hour)                                      0.00          0.00     0.00     0.00       2.68       2.68        2.68
Basic Characteristics
Kilometers Driven per Year (km)                           23000         23000    30000    70000      40000      86000       86000
Hours Driven per Year (hr)                                 550           550      750      1600       1000       2000        2000
Service Life (years)                                        10            10        8        7          12         14          14
Percent Private Use (%)                                    100            0         0        0          0          0           0
Number of Passengers (#)                                   2.35          0.00    15.00    40.00       0.00       0.00        0.00
Work Related Passenger-Trips (%)                            75           100       75       75         100        100         100
Gross Vehicle Weight (tons)                                1.20          1.50     2.20    10.00       2.00       7.50       28.00
Equivalent Standard Axels (ESA)                            0.02          0.14     0.02     1.51       0.84       2.50        3.50


                                            Table A3.2: Unit Road User Costs (USD per vehicle-km)
                                                 Car                                    2 Axles       3 Axles        4+ Axles
                                                4X4        Van    Minibus     Bus        Truck         Truck           Truck
Without       Vehicle Operating Costs           0.24      0.33      0.30      0.46        0.34          0.54            1.05
Project       Travel Time Costs                 0.15      0.00      0.65      1.76        0.06          0.06            0.06
              Road User Costs                   0.39      0.33      0.96      2.22        0.40          0.60            1.11
With          Vehicle Operating Costs           0.21      0.28      0.27      0.40        0.33          0.50            0.93
Project       Travel Time Costs                 0.10      0.00      0.42      1.19        0.04          0.03            0.04
              Road User Costs                   0.31      0.28      0.70      1.58        0.36          0.53            0.97
Savings       Vehicle Operating Costs           0.02      0.04      0.03      0.06        0.02          0.04            0.12
with the      Travel Time Costs                 0.06      0.00      0.23      0.57        0.02          0.02            0.02
Project       Road User Costs                   0.08      0.04      0.26      0.64        0.04          0.06            0.14
Note: Assumes a roughness of 4 IRI and   a speed of 50 km/hour without project, and a roughness of 2 with project and a speed of 80
km/hr.




33
   This data was based on existing Feasibility Studies and analysis made by Rodrigo Archondo-Callao. The underlying assumptions are in
line with the transportation costs used by the World Bank in the economic analysis of its East West Highway projects.




                                                                   29
                                             Table A3.3: Traffic With and Without EWH Project

                                                     Length       Traffic (vehicles per day)
                                                     Without
                                                     Project                                   Bus and       Trailer
                                                                                                             and > 3
Section                                               (km)         Cars      Microbus          Truck           axis               Total
Tbilisi-Natakhtari                                    11.0        24201       2175             1992           1154                29522
Natakhtari-Ruisi                                      66.0        11390       3172             1520           1105                17187
Ruisi-Chumateleti                                     45.0         7671       2245              683            651                11251
Chumateleti-Argveta                                   51.0         9084        852              757            944                11637
Argveta-Samtredia                                     59.0         9888       1895              842           1375                13999
Samtredia-Choloki                                     70.0         3433        947              329            397                 5107
Choloki-Kobuleti BP                                   33.0        11341       1360              569           1050                14320
Tbilisi-Rustavi                                       21.0        13129       2843              957            546                17475
Rustavi-Red Bridge                                    36.0         3649         98              255            312                 4314
Total                                                392.0
                                                     Length       Traffic (vehicles per day)
                                                      With
                                                    Project34                                  Bus and       Trailer
                                                                                                             and > 3
Section                                               (km)         Cars      Microbus          Truck           axis               Total
Tbilisi-Natakhtari                                     9.9        24201       2175             1992           1154                29522
Natakhtari-Ruisi                                       59.4       11390       3172             1520           1105                17187
Ruisi-Chumateleti                                      40.5        7671       2245              683            651                11251
Chumateleti-Argveta                                    45.9        9084        852              757            944                11637
Argveta-Samtredia                                      53.1        9888       1895              842           1375                13999
Samtredia-Choloki                                       63         3433        947              329            397                 5107
Choloki-Kobuleti BP                                    29.7       11341       1360              569           1050                14320
Tbilisi-Rustavi                                        18.9       13129       2843              957            546                17475
Rustavi-Red Bridge                                     32.4        3649         98              255            312                 4314
Total                                                 352.8

                                     Table A3.4: Unit Vehicle Operating Costs With and Without Project

            Unit VOC Costs (USD/km)                                                                Bus and             Trailer
                                                                                                                       and > 3
                                                         Cars               Microbus               Truck                 axis
Unit VOC without project                                        0.15                   0.65                0.91            0.06
Unit VOC with project                                           0.10                   0.42                0.61            0.04




34
     Length with project assumes 10 percent reduction in length of each road section.




                                                                       30
                                        Table A3.5: Total VOC without Project

                                          Length     Total VOC Without the Project (USD million)
                                          Without
                                          Project                           Bus and          Trailer
Section                                    (km)      Cars        Microbus    Truck         and > 3 axis              Total
Tbilisi-Natakhtari                          11.0     23.0           2.7        3.2             3.7                    32.6
Natakhtari-Ruisi                            66.0     65.0          23.3       14.7            21.2                   124.2
Ruisi-Chumateleti                           45.0     29.9          11.2        4.5             8.5                    54.1
Chumateleti-Argveta                         51.0     40.1           4.8        5.6            14.0                    64.5
Argveta-Samtredia                           59.0     50.5          12.4        7.3            23.6                    93.7
Samtredia-Choloki                           70.0     20.8           7.4        3.4             8.1                    39.6
Choloki-Kobuleti BP                         33.0     32.4           5.0        2.7            10.1                    50.2
Tbilisi-Rustavi                             21.0     23.9           6.6        2.9             3.3                    36.8
Rustavi-Red Bridge                          36.0     11.4           0.4        1.3             3.3                    16.4
Total                                      392.0                                                                     512.0

                                          Table A3.6: Total VOC with Project

                                          Length     Total VOC With the Project (USD million)
                                          Without
                                          Project                               Bus and        Trailer
                                                                                               and > 3
Section                                    (km)         Cars        Microbus       Truck         axis                Total
Tbilisi-Natakhtari                          9.9         18.7          2.1           2.6          3.0                  26.4
Natakhtari-Ruisi                            59.4        52.7          18.8          11.9        17.1                 100.6
Ruisi-Chumateleti                           40.5        24.2          9.1           3.7          6.9                  43.8
Chumateleti-Argveta                         45.9        32.5          3.9           4.6         11.3                  52.3
Argveta-Samtredia                           53.1        40.9          10.0          5.9         19.1                  75.9
Samtredia-Choloki                           63.0        16.9          6.0           2.7          6.5                  32.1
Choloki-Kobuleti BP                         29.7        26.3          4.0           2.2          8.1                  40.7
Tbilisi-Rustavi                             18.9        19.3          5.4           2.4          2.7                  29.8
Rustavi-Red Bridge                          32.4        9.2           0.3           1.1          2.6                  13.3
Total                                      352.8                                                                     414.8


VOC Savings (USD Million)                                                                                                97.2
VOC Savings (GEL Million)                                                                                               161.7


                                  Table A3.7: Unit Time Costs without the Project

                                                         Unit TC Without the Project (USD/veh-km)

Unit Transport Costs                                                                   Bus and            Trailer
                                                                                                          and > 3
                                                             Cars       Microbus           Truck            axis
Unit TC without the EWH Project                                0.15         0.65                0.91          0.06
Unit TC with the EWH Project                                   0.10         0.42                0.61          0.04




                                                            31
                               Table A3.8: Total Transportation Costs without the Project

                                             Length         Total TC Without the Project (USD million)
                                             Without
                                             Project                                    Bus and       Trailer
                                                                                                      and > 3
Section                                       (km)             Cars      Microbus           Truck       axis    Total
Tbilisi-Natakhtari                             11.0            14.9         5.7              7.3        0.3      28.1
Natakhtari-Ruisi                               66.0            42.0        50.0              33.3       1.5     126.8
Ruisi-Chumateleti                              45.0            19.3        24.1              10.2       0.6      54.2
Chumateleti-Argveta                            51.0            25.9        10.4              12.8       1.0      50.1
Argveta-Samtredia                              59.0            32.6        26.7              16.5       1.6      77.4
Samtredia-Choloki                              70.0            13.4        15.8              7.6        0.6      37.5
Choloki-Kobuleti BP                            33.0            20.9        10.7              6.2        0.7      38.6
Tbilisi-Rustavi                                21.0            15.4        14.3              6.7        0.2      36.6
Rustavi-Red Bridge                             36.0            7.3          0.8              3.0        0.2      11.5
Total                                         392.0                                                             460.6



                                  Table A3.9: Total Time Costs with the EWH Project

                                             Length         Total TC With the Project (USD million)
                                             Without
                                             Project                                    Bus and       Trailer
                                                                                                      and > 3
Section                                       (km)             Cars      Microbus           Truck       axis    Total
Tbilisi-Natakhtari                             9.9             8.4          3.3              4.4        0.1      16.2
Natakhtari-Ruisi                               59.4            23.6        29.1              20.2       0.8      73.7
Ruisi-Chumateleti                              40.5            10.8        14.1              6.2        0.3      31.4
Chumateleti-Argveta                            45.9            14.6         6.0              7.8        0.6      28.9
Argveta-Samtredia                              53.1            18.3        15.6              10.0       0.9      44.8
Samtredia-Choloki                              63.0            7.6          9.2              4.6        0.3      21.7
Choloki-Kobuleti BP                            29.7            11.8         6.2              3.8        0.4      22.2
Tbilisi-Rustavi                                18.9            8.7          8.3              4.0        0.1      21.1
Rustavi-Red Bridge                             32.4            4.1          0.5              1.8        0.1       6.6
Total                                         352.8                                                             266.8

TC Savings (USD Million)                                                                                        193.8
TC Savings (GEL Million)                                                                                        322.3

VOC+TC savings (USD Million)                                                                                     291
VOC+TC savings (USD Million)                                                                                     484




                                                             32
                        Table A4.1: Sectoral Impact, Percentage Cumulative Change from 2013 Baseline
                                                                            Medium-Term (static)        Long-term (steady-state)
  1     Agriculture, hunting and forestry                                            0.20                        3.33
  2     Fishing and fish farming                                                     -2.01                       2.71
  3     Mining and quarrying                                                         4.14                        2.57
  4     Manufacturing                                                                -1.61                       4.58
  5     Electricity, gas and water supply                                            0.47                        4.31
  6     Construction                                                                 0.73                        1.60
        Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles,
  7     motorcycles and personal and household goods                                 0.31                        3.70
  8     Hotels and restaurants                                                       0.26                        4.05
  9     Transport and communication                                                  0.19                        6.25
 10     Financial intermediation                                                     0.42                        3.89
 11     Real estate, renting and business activities                                 0.88                        4.23
 12     Public administration                                                        -0.16                       -0.12
 13     Education                                                                    0.81                        2.18
 14     Health and social work                                                       1.61                        3.68
        Other community, social and personal service activities,
 15     services of domestic staff employed by households                            1.42                        4.87
Sources: World Bank, ISET Policy Institute.

                                  Table A4.2: Export, Percentage Cumulative Change from 2013 Baseline


                                                                                               Medium-Term
                                                                                                                    Long-term
                                                                                               (comparative-
                                                                                                                  (steady-state)
                                                                                                  static)
  1     Agriculture, hunting and forestry                                                          -0.74                 2.10
  2     Fishing and fish farming                                                                   -3.33                 1.21
  3     Mining and quarrying                                                                        3.80                 2.73
  4     Manufacturing                                                                              -2.22                 4.84
  5     Electricity, gas and water supply                                                          -0.23                 4.26
  6     Construction                                                                               -0.22                 1.24
        Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor vehicles, motorcycles, personal and
  7     household goods                                                                            -1.01                 3.26
  8     Hotels and restaurants                                                                      0.30                 4.99
  9     Transport and communication                                                                 3.32                 10.79
 10     Financial intermediation                                                                   -0.53                 2.98
 11     Real estate, renting and business activities                                                0.31                 5.07
 12     Public administration                                                                      -1.51                 -1.13
 13     Education                                                                                  -0.75                 0.71
 14     Health and social work                                                                      0.37                 3.47
 15     Other community, social and personal service activities, services of domestic staff         0.63                 5.09




                                                                   33
                                                                                                 Medium-Term
                                                                                                                      Long-term
                                                                                                 (comparative-
                                                                                                                    (steady-state)
                                                                                                    static)
          employed by households
Sources: World Bank, ISET Policy Institute.

                                   Table A4.3: Imports, Percentage Cumulative Change from 2013 Baseline


                                                            Medium-Term (comparative-
                                                                                             Long-term (steady-state)
                                                                     static)
   1      Agriculture, hunting and forestry                             1.79                          5.41
   2      Fishing and fish farming                                      -0.34                         4.60
   3      Mining and quarrying                                          0.44                          4.32
   4      Manufacturing                                                 1.18                          3.41
   5      Electricity, gas and water supply                             1.24                          4.38
   6      Construction                                                  1.71                          1.98
          Wholesale and retail trade; repair of motor
          vehicles, motorcycles and personal and
   7      household goods                                               1.70                          4.16
   8      Hotels and restaurants                                        0.00                          0.39
   9      Transport and communication                                   -11.02                        -9.94
  10      Financial intermediation                                      1.56                          4.98
  11      Real estate, renting and business activities                  1.55                          3.24
  12      Public administration                                         1.38                          1.03
  13      Education                                                     2.58                          3.84
  14      Health and social work                                        2.89                          3.90
          Other community, social and personal service
          activities, services of domestic staff
  15      employed by households                                        3.31                          4.37
Sources: World Bank, ISET Policy Institute.




                                                                   34
