                                             ACS13859



Professionalization Contracts
 for Small Municipal Water
 Service Providers in India:


Business Model Development

             Final Report



 David Ehrhardt, Josses Mugabi and William
                  Kingdom



                June 2015
Table of Contents

Executive Summary                                Error! Bookmark not defined.
1      Introduction                                                         1
2      Target Market and Need for Professionalization Contracts            2
3      The Professionalization Contract Concept                            6
       3.1    What the Professionalization Contractor Would Do             6
       3.2    How the Professionalization Contract Differs from
              Traditional Capacity Buildings or PPPs                       8
4      Complementary Policy and Institutional Reforms                      9
       4.1    Corporatization and Governance Reform at ULB-level           9
       4.2    State-Level Reform Program                                  11
5      Political Economy of Professionalization Contracts                 12
6      Indicative Costs                                                   15
7      Funding Sources                                                    17
8      Payment and Incentive Structures                                   19
9      Potential Contractors and their Incentives to Participate          23
10     Steps in Developing the Concepts                                   26



Appendices
Appendix A : Indicative Plan for a Pilot in One State                       1



Tables
Table 2.1: Performance of Three Maharashtra ULBs                           5
Table 5.1: Stakeholders’ Incentive Analysis                               13
Table 8.1: Government of India Minimum Performance Standards              20



Figures
Figure 2.1: Distribution of ULB Sizes in Maharashtra, and Reform
Options                                                                    3
Figure 3.1: Role of the Professionalization Contractor                     6


                                           i
Figure 3.2: Comprehensive Capacity Building, not Delegated
Management                                                           8
Figure 4.1: Structure of a Typical Indian ULB                       10
Figure 4.2: The Corporatized Provider                               10
Figure 4.3: State-Driven Reform Program                             11
Figure 8.1: Causation Chain and Payment Structure                   19
Figure 8.2: Meeting Targets Triggers a Performance Bonus            21
Figure A.1: Professionalization Contract Phases of Implementation    2



Boxes
Box 6.1: Port-Au-Prince Comprehensive Management Assistance
Contract                                                            16
Box 9.1: JUSCO Feedback on the Model                                23
Box 10.1: Which State or Region to Implement in First               27
Box A.1: NWSC Recommendations for Improvement                        3




                                          ii
List of Acronyms

AMMP— Asset Management and Maintenance Plan
CEO—Chief Executive Officer
GIS—Geographic Information System
ISO—International Organization for Standardization
JUSCO— Jamshedpur Utilities and Services Company
NRW— Non-Revenue Water
NWSC—National Water and Sewerage Corporation
PHED—Public Health and Engineering Department
PPP—Public-Private Partnership
ULB—Urban Local Body




                                           iii
Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by a team comprising Josses Mugabi (Senior Water and Sanitation
Specialist. World Bank), William Kingdom (Lead Water and Sanitation Specialist, World
Bank) and David Ehrhardt (Chief Executive, Castalia Strategic Advisors).

The report draws on sector work undertaken in India to inform the design of a possible
urban water supply and sanitation project. The original sector work, and the subsequent
activities leading to the preparation of this report, were supported by the Government of
Australia, through the AusAid Policy and Decentralization Trust Fund.
This report builds on fieldwork and consultations in the State of Maharashtra (India) — in
particular the cities of Thane, Nashik and Mira Bhayander. The team would like to thank
city corporation officials in each of the cities, as well as the Government of Maharashtra for
their support in conducting the study. The National Water and Sewerage Corporation of
Uganda conducted most of the background studies on which this report is based.
The report benefited from peer reviews by Iain Menzies (Senior Water and Sanitation
Specialist, World Bank) and Jane Jamieson (Senior Industry Specialist, World Bank).




                                              iv
Executive Summary
Water utilities in India are in need of assistance to improve their services. The key to better
service is generally better management systems, not just more capital expenditure on assets,
yet for hundreds of mid-sized urban local bodies across the country there is no clear route to
management reform. Traditional training and capacity building approaches have not worked
well in the past, while public private partnerships may not be feasible or politically acceptable
in many of these towns.
One way to fill this gap would be through Professionalization Contracts. Under a
Professionalization Contract, a private firm would be contracted to help municipal water
utilities to implement a comprehensive and standardized ‘Utility Operating System’. This
system would include Standard Operating Procedures for each functional area of the utility,
such as network management, commercial functions, administration and finance, and capital
planning and management. The Contractor would also provide (or procure) the necessary
management tools (such as billing systems and asset management software) as well as
operating assets, such as leak detection equipment and transport for maintenance gangs. The
Contractor would assist the utility to implement all these Standard Operating Procedures and
systems. The Contractor would then provide training and on-going management advice.
Actual management control of the utility would remain in public hands. However,
governance reforms would be needed. In most cases, water departments in Urban Local
Bodies (ULBs)1 would need to be transformed into corporatized municipal utilities, with
their own accounts and boards. To encourage and guide reform at the local level, State
Governments would need to create Change Management Units for their water sectors. These
Change Management Units would use the Benchmarking System developed by the
Government of India to monitor service performance of ULBs. State funding of water
services at the local level would be progressively tied to Service Improvement Plans designed
to bring service standards in line with targets. This tying would create incentives for ULBs to
reform their water systems, through Professionalization Contracts or other means.
The cost of a five year Professionalization Contract for a single ULB could be around US$8
million. This would include provision of the Standard Operating Procedures, training and
management assistance, equipment such as trucks and leak detection gear, and specialized
utility software, as well as computers to run the software on. In addition, Contractors might
need to be funded to prepare the Standard Operating Systems, at a cost which could be in
the order of US$1 million. The Systems so created could then be applied in any number of
ULBs.
Contractors would need to have their costs covered through milestone payments based on
deliverables, such as installing new management systems, or training staff. However, to
provide incentives, performance payments should be made both to the Contractor, and to
the management and staff of the utility. The first set of performance payments would be for
achieving ISO 9000 or similar certification for the utilities. This certification would provide
independent verification that quality operating procedures had been adopted. Staff would be
encouraged to seek professional certification, and this would similarly show that the training
is working, and could also trigger bonus payments.

1
    Note that this concept has been developed for application in Indian States that have devolved water service responsibility
     to Urban Local Bodies in accordance with the 73rd amendment to the Constitution.



                                                               v
The second set of performance payments would be for achieving performance targets as set
out in the Benchmarking System. For example, there could be a bonus paid for every
thousand households brought on to a sustainable 24/7 water supply. While such an
achievement is not within the sole control of the Contractor, providing incentives to the
Contractor, the utility management and the staff to achieve these goals will increase the
likelihood that all parties work together to make the program succeed.
Potential Professionalization Contractors include India conglomerates, such as the Tata
group, whose water subsidiary (known as JUSCO) has already expressed interest in
participating. Indian and international engineering and management consulting firms will
likely also be interested. Large international water operators will not necessarily welcome the
concept, which they may see as threatening their traditional PPP business. However, if these
operators understand that the program is a new PPP model targeting different market
segments than traditional PPP models, then they are likely to see it as in their interest to
participate.
A good way forward would be to pilot Professionalization Contracts in a reform-oriented
State or States. Under a pilot program, donors would assist the State Government to set up
the necessary State level reforms. Nine ULBs in the State(s) would opt in to the program.
Then three Professionalization Contractors would be selected competitively, each serving
three ULBs. Funding of around US$75 million for the Contractors’ fees, and perhaps
US$180–360 million in complementary capital works, would be needed. The capital funding
could come from a World Bank loan, from other donors, or from the Government itself.
The Contractors’ fees would ideally be covered largely by bilateral donors, during this proof
of concept phase.




                                              vi
1          Introduction
Professionalization Contracts are a new concept. The aim of these Contracts is to enlist the
support of specialized private firms in turning public water utilities into competent
professional operators. This report looks at how the Business Model for such Contracts
might work.
To set the scene, the report first describes briefly the need for Professionalization Contracts
in India, and the target market (Section 2). It then summarizes what the Contractor would
do2, and how this differs from traditional capacity building, as well as from traditional Public
Private Partnership (PPP) concepts such as Management Contracts (Section 3). The report
then describes the complementary policy and institutional reforms that would be needed at
the State and Local Government levels to make Professionalization Contracts successful
(Section 4). Section 5 looks at the political economy of Professionalization Contracts,
identifying risks, and how these risks could be mitigated through design of the institutional
reforms and the Business Model. All this is needed as background to understand the
Business Model recommended and how it would work.
Section 6 then turns to the true Business Model aspects by describing indicative costs of the
Professionalization Contract and the complementary investments required. Section 7
considers what the sources of funding for these costs would be, and Section 8 goes on to
explain how the Contractor would be paid, and hence the incentives under which it would
operate. This Section also describes complementary incentives for managers and staff of the
public utility. Crucial to the success of this model will be attracting good quality
Professionalization Contractors. Section 9 looks at the market of potential Contractors, and
examines their incentives to participate.
Finally, Section 10 sets out some considerations for developing the Concept. Appendix A
then sketches out how Professionalization Contracts could be rolled out on a pilot basis in a
particular state.
This report builds on fieldwork and consultation in India. The study team traveled to
Mumbai, Kolkata, and Delhi, meeting with water sector professionals in the World Bank,
Government, and private industry. The model described in this report reflects two weeks of
meetings with water sector stakeholder in India, including a workshop held at the World
Bank country office in Delhi on 22 March 2011.




2
    A separate report prepared by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation of Uganda, as consultants to the World
    Bank, provides more detail on this.



                                                          1
2      Target Market and Need for Professionalization
       Contracts
Most water providers in India fall short of government benchmarks for service quality,
efficiency and cost recovery. Traditional approaches of training and technical assistance have
often failed. Public Private Partnerships (PPPs) are increasingly of interest to some State and
Local Governments, and offer real opportunities to improve water provider performance.
However, many water providers will not be able to avail of this reform route, either because
they are too small or financially weak to attract the interest of private operators, or because
the public authorities do not consider PPP suitable for their situation.
The Professionalization Contract concept has been developed with the needs of mid-sized
towns and cities in mind, in particular those to which water service responsibilities have been
devolved to the municipalities (Urban Local Body or ULB) in line with the requirements of
the 73rd and 74th Amendments to the Constitution of India. It is not intended that the
Professionalization Contract model should be adopted by all such ULBs. Rather, it would be
one among a number of improvement options they could consider. Nor is it intended that
the concept would be used only by such bodies—larger and small water providers, including
State Water Boards and PHEDs, may also find it useful. However, the target market for
which the concept has been developed is underperforming ULB water departments in mid-
sized towns and cities, which are not pursuing a PPP reform route.
The need for improvement, and the category of towns and cities targeted, may be illustrated
by reference to Maharashtra. Figure 2.1 shows the distribution of ULB sizes in Maharashtra
(excluding Mumbai). Populations of Maharashtra ULBs range widely from 1,000 to 2.5
million. The ULBs at the larger end—above about one million in population—are good
candidates for PPP. The ones below 100,000 in population are probably too small for
professionalization or PPP on their own, at least in the pilot phase. The middle group,
between 100,000 and 1,000,000 in population, could make good candidates to pilot
Professionalization Contracts. In Maharashtra’s case, there are 31 towns in this group. Of
course, as the concept develops, it may be that larger and smaller towns and cities are also
suitable for inclusion in the target group.




                                               2
Figure 2.1: Distribution of ULB Sizes in Maharashtra, and Reform Options




The towns of Thane, Mira Bhayander, and Nashik were visited by consultants from the
Uganda National Water and Sewerage Corporation to assess their current levels of service
performance and benchmark them against professional utility management practices. While
Thane and Nashik fall into the largest population category, all three ULBs exhibit
performance problems that are typical of ULBs in general, regardless of size. Table 2.1
shows the service and efficiency levels of these three towns judged against Government of
India benchmarks. Important areas for improvement include:
        24/7 supply—The ULBs surveyed only had two to three hours of water supply
         daily, compared to the Government’s benchmark of 24/7 supply
        Coverage—Up to 20 percent of households in the ULBs surveyed are not
         covered by the water supply network. The benchmark for water coverage is 100
         percent
        Cost-Recovery—Two of the three ULBs surveyed cover only about three-
         quarters of their costs, despite the Government target of 100 percent cost
         recovery. Some of the reasons for low cost recovery are:
          – High non-revenue water—Two of the three ULBs surveyed are above the
            Government’s benchmark of no more than 15 percent non-revenue water. The
            town of Thane is slightly above, with 25 percent non-revenue water, and the
            town of Nasik is far above, with 57 percent non-revenue water
          – Metering—In Thane only four percent of connected households are metered,
            compared to a benchmark of 100 percent metering


                                            3
          – Collection efficiency—Thane only collects about 72 percent of water supply-
            related charges, compared to a benchmark of 90 percent collection.
All three of these towns are interested in improving their management. Two of them are
considering PPPs as an improvement route. For the third—and for the many other similar
towns in Maharashtra and other states—the Professionalization Contract could be a suitable
reform route.




                                            4
Table 2.1: Performance of Three Maharashtra ULBs

                                                                                           Performance

                                                                   Government              Thane               Mira Bhayander     Nashik
Indicator                                                                                  Municipal           Municipal          Municipal
                                                                   Benchmark
                                                                                           Corporation         Corporation        Corporation
                                                                                           (pop. 1,262,551 )   (pop. 520,388 )    (pop. 1,077,236 )

Coverage (percentage of households connected)                                     100%               82.88%               80%                  88%

Per capita supply of water (liters per day)                                         135                  167                80                  140

Extent of metering                                                                100%                3.96%              100%                  95%

Extent of non-revenue water                                                        20%               24.82%               20%                57.1%

Continuity of water supply                                                      24 hours             2 hours            2 hours             3 hours

Quality of water supplied                                                         100%               91.52%               95%                96.2%

Efficiency in addressing customer complaints                                       80%                  80%               95%               89.22%

Cost recovery in water supply services                                            100%               75.44%              100%               77.46%

Efficiency in collection of water supply-related charges                           90%               72.71%               92%                92.4%

Source: Analysis by Uganda National Water and Sewerage Corporation. March 2011.
Note:    Population data is from 2001, most recent available




                                                                            5
3          The Professionalization Contract Concept
The Professionalization Contractor would boost the capacity of a ULB-owned water
provider in a comprehensive way. The Contractor would provide a standard set of
management tools and systems, experts to help implement these and train staff, and also
equipment and software, such as leak-detection gear, trucks for transport, billing systems,
asset management systems, and the like. This would go far beyond a traditional twinning or
capacity building system. However, it would also differ from a traditional management
contract or other form of PPP, in that the public utility would retain management control.
3.1        What the Professionalization Contractor Would Do
The Professionalization Contractor would create and implement the “standard utility
operating system”—a set of well-defined processes and systems to turn around utility
management and embed sustainable, professional working practices throughout the
organization.
Figure 3.1 shows the services that would be provided, and the various functional areas of
utility management to which they would be applied. In the initial period of engagement with
ULBs, the Contractor would provide turn-around experts to tailor and implement standard
processes and systems.


Figure 3.1: Role of the Professionalization Contractor
                              Provides these services…



      Organizational      Standard operating            Software and IT                       In-house turn-around
                                                                          Training programs
      restructuring           procedures                   systems                                  experts




                              …to turn around these
                               functions of utility
                                  management



 Utility administration   Commercial system         Distribution system                           Capital projects
                            management                 management
     Human Resources                                                                             Planning
                              Billing/collection      Repairs
     Accounting/                                                          Treatment plant        Implementation
      financial               Meter reading           Maintenance           operation
      management                                                                                  Financing
                              Customer service        NRW reduction
     Procurement




                                                              6
The full details of the services and equipment to be provided are set out in a separate
technical report prepared by the National Water and Sewerage Corporation of Uganda. To
give a flavor of it though, some highlights would include:
        Commercial System Management—the Contractor will provide:
          – The billing system, and the hardware to run it on
          – Management of a customer cadastre exercise to ensure that customer records
            are accurate and up-to-date
          – Manuals describing the Standard Operating Procedures for all commercial
            functions including adding customers, meter-reading, billing, collections and
            disconnections
          – Training for all staff in the Standard Operating Procedures
          – Guidance and on-going management coaching for the utility’s Commercial
            Manager
        Distribution System Management—the Contractor will provide:
          – A GIS-based Asset Management and Maintenance Planning Software Package
            (AMMP), as well as an Hydraulic Modeling Package
          – Assistance in populating the AMMP and calibrating the Hydraulic Model
          – Standard Operating Procedures for routine and reactive maintenance
          – A Standard Non-Revenue Water Management system and procedures
          – Equipment needed for Non-Revenue Water Reduction and Distribution
            Management, including trucks for transport, leak-detection equipment, and any
            specialized equipment needed for distribution system repairs
          – Training for staff in leak detection and maintenance
          – Guidance and on-going coaching for the Distribution Manager and for the
            NRW Management Cell
        Capital Project Management—the Contractor would provide:
          – Standard planning techniques for the identification and prioritization of a
            capital expenditure program. These would include identification of service
            needs, and establishment of least cost ways to meet those needs
          – Standard Operating Procedures for stakeholder consultation prior to finalizing
            plans
          – Standard Operating Procedures governing procurement of capital projects, as
            well as construction supervision
          – Standard interfaces between the creation of new assets and the asset
            management and maintenance processes
          – Training of staff in use of the above Procedures
          – Help with creation of the first Capital Expenditure Program


                                            7
                 – On-going coaching to the Manager responsible for planning and implementing
                   capital projects.
Similar assistance would be provided in all other areas of the utility, creating a
comprehensive and integrated management assistance package that includes not just
provision of advice, but fully documented Standard Operating Procedures, management
systems, and operating assets such as trucks and leak detection equipment needed to make
the utility function professionally.
3.2        How the Professionalization Contract Differs from Traditional
           Capacity Buildings or PPPs
It should be clear from the foregoing that the Professionalization Contract is a kind of
capacity building contract. However it differs from the traditional capacity building contract
in its comprehensive and integrated nature, and in the provision of complementary tools and
equipment. The idea is that over a three to five year period the Professionalization
Contractor will provide all the inputs (other than actual infrastructure investments) that are
necessary to turn the utility into a well-managed, well trained and properly equipped utility,
providing good service to its customers.
At the same time the Professionalization Contract is not a PPP. The key difference is that
management control remains with the publicly-appointed Chief Executive of the utility, and
his or her management team. Management is not delegated to the Professionalization
Contractor. In this way the Professionalization Contract may be seen as a point on a
spectrum of private involvement in public utilities that maximizes the assistance provided,
without transferring management control, as Figure 3.2 illustrates.


Figure 3.2: Comprehensive Capacity Building, not Delegated Management
      Public sector reform (capacity building models)                     PPP: Control by private sector partner




                                                                              Increased private involvement




  Classroom      Twinning     Knowledge      Technical Professional       Management   Operations    Concession
  training       arrangement transfer       assistance   -ization           contract   outsourcing
  by public or    with public partnership   agreement Contract
  private         or private
  institutions   providers




                                                                      8
4      Complementary Policy and Institutional Reforms
For the professionalization concept to work, the ULBs will need to be restructured to create
town water utilities. In States which have devolved water provision to towns, this is typically
the responsibility of one department in the ULB. However some functions, like accounting
and procurement, may involve other departments. To be professionalized, the water
provider will first need to exist as a discrete entity.
Because the changes at the local level will be quite innovative and far-reaching, ULBs may
not have the confidence or desire to take them on alone. Reforms will likely need to be
driven by the State Government.
4.1    Corporatization and Governance Reform at ULB-level
Ring-fencing of ULB water functions is needed to prepare local water utilities for
professionalization. This is because administrative arrangements at most ULBs do not
provide accountability for water sector outcomes. Simply put, there is no water utility
currently, and so no distinct entity to professionalize.
Deficiencies in the current arrangements include:
        Officials exclusively responsible for water do not have enough power to
         execute decisions—In a typical ULB management hierarchy, managers
         exclusively responsible for water service might be several rungs below where
         decisions are made. They might lack control over hiring and firing, funding,
         business planning related to water utility functions
        Officials with the power to execute decisions are distracted by other
         considerations—Similarly, the ULB managers with the power to make decisions
         are distracted by various other priorities competing for their attention. Water
         service outcomes are only a fraction of what the typical District Manager is
         responsible for
        Critical functions are dispersed throughout ULB—Figure 4.1 shows the
         organizational structure of a typical ULB. In this ULB, the chief engineer might
         be responsible for water engineering functions; the chief town planner might be
         responsible for network expansion planning; the finance officer and chief
         municipal auditor might be responsible for billing, funding the utility and auditing
         its spending; and the health officer might be responsible for monitoring water
         quality. With water functions dispersed in this way, coordination between
         different functions is difficult, and accountability for overall sector performance is
         lacking.




                                               9
Figure 4.1: Structure of a Typical Indian ULB




Source: "Audit Report on ULBs for the year ending 31 March 2008." Comptroller and Auditor General of
        India. saiindia.gov.in/cag/sites/default/files/LB/wb07_08/ulb_chap1.pdf (accessed March 29,
        2011).


Ring-fencing and corporatization of water management functions is the best way for ULBs
to overcome the obstacles mentioned above. The ULB would need to corporatize its water
service provision functions, appoint a Board, hire a CEO and sign a performance agreement
with the newly corporatized entity. The CEO would be accountable for the new entity’s
performance. The managers of various utility functions would all report to the CEO. This
structure should improve accountability, and coordination between different functions
responsible for the water sector.
The utility’s Board would comprise independent directors, state representatives and ULB
appointees. The CEO would be an experienced manager recruited through a competitive
hiring process. Similarly, managers of functional departments would be competitively
recruited, from among both external and internal candidates, on terms comparable to what
similar professionals would be offered in the private sector.
The Professionalization Contractor would assist the CEO with the human resource
restructuring plan, providing job descriptions and hiring protocols for the hiring of various
professionals. Figure 4.2 shows the corporatized ULB, with the Professionalization
Contractor providing support.


Figure 4.2: The Corporatized Provider
                                                                                                       Professionalization




                                              Board
                                                                                                           Contractor




                                              CEO




                                                        Human
                                                                     Non-Revenue
   Technical     Commercial                           Resources &                     CAPEX planning
                              Financial Manager                     Water Reduction
   Manager        Manager                              Logistics                         manager
                                                                       Manager
                                                       Manager




                                                            10
4.2      State-Level Reform Program
Change at the local level will be most effective and widespread if driven from the State level.
Ideally, the State Government would create a Change Management Unit to lead the water
reform process. This leadership would involve setting performance standards, requiring
service improvement plans, and tying grants to performance—as illustrated in Figure 4.3.


Figure 4.3: State-Driven Reform Program
                                         State Government

                                         Change Management
                                                Unit




                                                                              Options:

                                 Setting benchmarking standards               PPP
                                                                              Professionalization
                               Requiring service improvement plans            contract
                                                                              Public sector
                                Tying grant funding to performance            capacity building




   ULB       ULB        ULB        ULB        ULB       ULB          ULB     ULB          ULB



The Change Management Unit would be a State Government agency with a mandate to
bring about service improvements at ULBs. The Change Management Unit would develop
service and efficiency standards, based on Government of India benchmarks.
State funding of ULBs would be made contingent on ULBs meeting the service standards.
Where ULBs do not meet these standards, they would need to prepare and follow an
approved Service Improvement Plan to be eligible for funding.
The Service Improvement Plan would need to include a credible program for
professionalizing the management of the water utility. Opting into a Professionalization
Contract would be among the options considered credible. (ULBs might also be able to opt
into a PPP reform track, or develop their own reform program, which would need to be
assessed to see if it was credible.)




                                               11
5      Political Economy of Professionalization Contracts
As we have seen, Professionalization Contracts will involve significant institutional reforms
at both local and State levels. These reforms will not necessarily be easy to implement. There
is political economy equilibrium in the current system. To put that another way—vested
interests will want the system to stay the way that it is. Among the important political
economy risks are:
        A triangle of corruption among staff, managers, and politicians—Most of
         these stakeholders stand to lose from professionalization as by definition it would
         cut off the corrupt flows that currently are valuable to them
        Political control of water allocations—Because of perceived water scarcity,
         allocation of water between areas of the towns is a big political issue. Political
         battles are fought over which part of town gets supply when. This culture is so
         entrenched that telling people ‘that will no longer be an issue when we have 24/7
         supply’ simply does not get through—it is too far from people’s experience for
         anyone to believe
        Political control of connections—Related to the above point, the ability of
         politicians to decide who gets water connections, and to allow free water to some,
         is another important part of the political economy in urban India which the
         political decision-makers will not want to give up
        Patronage—Politicians can influence who gets jobs and certain groups expect
         jobs as of right. Loss of these employment-gifting opportunities will be bitterly
         contested
        Unions—Unions compete for union dues and influence by demonstrating their
         value to workers. Demonstration effects and competition between unions leads to
         a tendency to focus on short term gains and confrontation rather than
         cooperating for long-term win-win solutions. Things that are good for workers
         will still be opposed by unions if the reform is bad for the union. For example,
         generous early retirement packages reduce union membership, performance-based
         pay weakens union control, so these things will be fought, and especially so in
         places with a culture of strong union activism. Table 5.1 gives an overview of the
         incentives of various stakeholders in the water sector related to the
         Professionalization Contract, what their position is likely to be on reform, and
         how potential opposition to reform might be mitigated.
In order for reform to succeed, we need a coalition of stakeholders to believe that they are
better off because of reform. Veto-players in the political system need also to be persuaded
to at least acquiesce in the reforms. Table 5.1 reviews which stakeholders could be expected
to support the reforms, which to oppose, and how the opposition of key groups could
possibly be overcome.




                                              12
Table 5.1: Stakeholders’ Incentive Analysis

Stakeholder     Natural Wins           Losses          Likely         Mitigants and Design
                                                      Position              Features

                More reliable     Free illegal        Support     Identify key voting blocs (e.g.
                service           connections                     slum dwellers) and include
                Greater access                                    specific benefits for them
Customers       Better
of ULB          customer
                service
                More efficient
                utility

                Performance       Autonomy            Oppose      Recruit new people from
                pay               Free time                       outside system for key positions
                Training          Corrupt income                  Total pay package must match
Utility         Job                                               private sector salaries, or exceed
managers        satisfaction                                      public salaries + corrupt
                                                                  income
                                                                  Professional Certification of
                                                                  staff to add value to them

                Performance       Corrupt income      Oppose      Must be able to ‘park’ poor
                pay               Undemanding                     staff elsewhere in ULB
                Training          work                            Performance pay must exceed
Utility staff   Right tools for                                   loss of corrupt income
                job                                               Professional certification
                Job
                satisfaction

                Citizens vote     Corrupt income      Oppose      Certification provides a seal of
                for politicians   Patronage                       credibility that helps politicians
                who deliver       opportunities                   State and federal funds—some
                better water      Control of                      need to be put under political
Local           service                                           control?
                                  connections and
politicians
                                  water allocation                Strong supervision from State
                                                                  Govt. / World Bank /
                                                                  Independent actors introduced
                                                                  to governance system


As the Professionalization Contracts are developed, more detailed governance and political
economy analysis will be needed. It is worth noting two points in the above analysis:
         1. The winners and losers in the professionalization approach, and their
            gains/losses, are not dissimilar to those that will arise in any attempt to introduce
            reform that leads to demands for better and more transparent service delivery in
            the sector




                                                 13
2. Within each category there will be those that would oppose the “likely position”
   presented above, for example staff and managers who would see opportunities for
   professional improvement through the professionalization approach, or
   politicians who would support improved service delivery to their constituents.




                                    14
6      Indicative Costs
Achieving the professionalization of ULB service providers will entail a mix of costs
comprising the equipment, software, training and support needed to upgrade the
performance of the public sector service providers. These costs will include:
        Cost to the Contractor of creating the Standard Operating Systems for a utility—
         this is mostly the cost of documenting a master set of standard operating
         procedures that can be applied in each utility with small variations. We
         guesstimate this at US$1 million in one-off costs to create
        Consulting time in helping the utility to implement the Standard Operating
         System, including staff training, and provision of the equipment and software
         needed. This could be around US$5 million per utility, implemented over a two
         year period
        On-going advice and coaching over a five year contract could cost around US$3
         million in total.
If one assumed a ‘pilot program’ in which three Contractors were engaged, and each
Contractor worked with three ULBs, then the total cost over five years, across nine ULBs,
would be around US$75 million. Note that the assumption of three Contractors at the pilot
stage reflects an intention to create three firms with capacity in this area, so that the
subsequent market is competitive.
After the pilot program, cost per ULB served would go down. It would no longer be
necessary to fund creation of the Standard Operating Systems. Moreover, economies of
scale, and learning by doing would probably push down the cost of implementation and
coaching in each ULB.
Reference points for the costings
The costings above are derived from expert judgment and familiarity with the cost of similar
models. A Castalia review of management contracts in 2005 showed that US$1 million per
year was a typical all-in cost. For this fee, the management Contractor would typically
provide three to four senior expatriate staff to manage the utility, as well as limited shorter-
term specialist inputs and training.
The Professionalization Contract will likely involve a greater quantity of staff time, and also
the provision of IT tools. These factors suggest that the total cost could be higher than for a
typical management contract. On the other hand, if the services can be provided largely or
entirely by Indian specialists, the labor costs and travel expenses would be lower than for a
typical expatriate team.
Another data point is the fee one French water utility charged to Czech water utilities in
which it was a strategic but minority shareholder. This fee was around 2 percent of revenue.
In exchange the Czech utility was provided with the French utility’s ‘standard utility
operating system’ in the form of a thoroughly documented set of processes for each
functional area of the utility, as well as a single long-term resident advisor.
Finally, Castalia recently develop a comprehensive Management Assistance Contract for the
water utility in Port-au-Prince, Haiti. This contract is similar to the Professionalization
Contract in that the private partner provides management advice but does not actually


                                               15
assume management control. Box 6.1 gives an overview. An international water utility won
the contract, and will be paid around US$3 million per annum to provide a comprehensive
set of management improvement services, and to manage a sizeable capital expenditure
program.


    Box 6.1: Port-Au-Prince Comprehensive Management Assistance Contract
    In 2010 an earthquake ravaged the capital city of Haiti, Port-au-Prince. The local water
    utility, CAMEP (Centrale Autonome Métropolitaine d’Eau Potable et d’Assainissement)
    was already very weak before the earthquake, with water losses estimated at over 60
    percent, and only 55,000 connections, only 32,000 of which were active (for a city with
    more than 700,000 inhabitants). After the earthquake, the utility required immediate
    rehabilitation in order to be able to continue providing water to damaged city.
    Castalia was engaged by the Inter-American Development Bank and Government of Haiti
    to develop a contract for technical assistance to rehabilitate the city. The contract, called a
    Management Assistance Contract, is a hybrid between technical assistance and a
    management contract. As such it provides a useful benchmark for the Professionalization
    Contract, which sits on the spectrum of public utility reform between technical assistance
    capacity building and management contract PPP (see Figure 3.2 on page 8).
    Under the Haiti Management Assistance Contract the Contractor, an international water
    engineering firm, will oversee a program of investments of about $30 million and will assist
    in managing the utility. The costs of the contract are about $3 million per year.
    Source: Castalia
            Haiti Project Profile. Inter-American Development Bank




                                                  16
7      Funding Sources
The indicative costs outlined in the previous section will need to be funded through grants
from State and Union Governments, and from bilateral and multilateral support. This grant
funding will likely be made available in separate streams to fund operating and capital costs.
Some of these grants can be financed as a component of existing urban development
projects in India, or as a standalone urban water supply project developed specifically to
operationalize the professionalization model presented in this report. To promote efficient
management and accountability under the reforms, financial flows from State Governments
to the water providers would need to be reformed to allow performance-based disbursement
of funds. Below we discuss the capital investment support required, and the operating
support required.
Payment of the Professionalization Contractor
The target ULBs lose money on their water operations currently, and are generally short of
cash. Irrespective of the benefits they will reap, it is not realistic to expect the ULBs to be
able to pay the costs of the Professionalization Contractors in the short term. During the
pilot phase, and for some time after, these costs will need to be covered by someone else. A
workable approach would be for bilateral donors to cover the costs as the program starts up.
After success was demonstrated, State governments might be expected to pick up much of
the cost, with ULBs covering some part from other resources.
Capital investment support
In order to meet service improvement targets, capital investment would be required. The
water provider, with assistance from the Professionalization Contractor, would develop the
capital improvement plan required to meet service standards. The State Government would
then need to commit to fund the investment program on a multi-year basis.
At this stage the level of capital investment required is not clear. However, if one assumes
that $20–40 million over five years would be enough, then this $180–$360 million would be
needed to support nine municipalities.
Operating support
Many of the utilities that use Professionalization Contracts will not be able to cover their
operating costs. Moreover in the short term, the professionalization process may worsen
their operating position: salary costs may go up, for example.
Providers that are not covering operating costs are already subsidized by ULB or State
Governments. Accountability would be improved, and the professionalization process made
more effective, if the operating subsidies were better structured. This should be done
through setting a fixed, multi-year subsidy based on the difference between forecasts of
reasonable costs, and the revenues that can reasonably be expected at current tariff levels.
Paying a subsidy on this basis would provide the utility with the confidence that it can pay
necessary expenditures. It would also allow the profitability of the utility (after agreed
subsidy) to be used as an indicator of its efficiency. Funding for such a fixed and explicit
subsidy would be needed. This could be provided by State governments, supported by
bilateral donors with an interest in results-based financing, or by the World Bank loan, or
both.




                                              17
In time, as efficiency improves, costs may reduce, and customers may accept higher tariffs
for better service, removing the need for an operating subsidy.




                                            18
8       Payment and Incentive Structures
For Performance Contracts to work, it will be necessary to incentivize the Contractor, the
Utility Management, and Utility Staff, to make it work. This section outlines first how the
Contractor can be incentivized, and then proposes a way to motivate utility management and
staff.
Incentives for the Professionalization Contractor
The prime incentive for the Contractor will be the fees it receives. The strongest incentive
would therefore seem to be paying the Contractor for achieving the intended results—in this
case, a well performing water utility. The problem is that the Contractor does not manage
the utility, and so is not fully in control of whether the intended results are achieved.
Contractors will therefore not be willing to put their payment at risk, as they will see a strong
probability that despite their best efforts, the staff and management of the utility, or the
political system in which it operates, will prevent the utility from being successfully
professionalized. Contractors will demand that their costs are covered with payments for
doing things that are within their control.
A good way through this puzzle starts by breaking out the chain of causation from the
Contractor inputs, to increased capacity in the utility, and finally to improved services to the
public, as Figure 8.1 illustrates.


Figure 8.1: Causation Chain and Payment Structure




Contractors will need to be paid their costs for preparing the Standard Operating System for
a utility, and for working with each utility to customize they system to the extent necessary,
train the staff, provide advice, and so on. For this work the Contractor can largely be paid on
the basis of implementation milestones achieved—installing a new billing system, or training
staff in NRW management, for example. Some things, such as supply of equipment and
software, might need to be paid at cost, following an open-book competitive procurement
by the utility, while staff time spent on ad hoc advice and hand-holding might be charged per
hour.




                                               19
These payments based on milestones and reasonable costs achieved will incentivize the
Contractor to deliver the inputs required. However, they do not provide a strong financial
incentive to ensure that the systems are adopted by the Utility, that capacity increases, and
that service improves. To provide this incentive, additional performance payments will likely
be needed.
The first performance payments would depend on the Contractor increasing the capacity of
the utility. Increases in capacity can be measured through independent certification of the
utility’s management processes, and of the staff’s skills. Therefore we recommend that the
Contractors be asked to help the utilities to achieve ISO 9000 series certification, or an
equivalent. This independent certification is only granted if the utility has all its processes
documented, and it follows these processes. Achieving certification would therefore be a
good indication that the capacity building has worked.
In similar manners, the Contractor should be required to help utility staff to achieve relevant
professional certification in their areas of work. This staff certification would show that the
training provided has worked, in that the staff members have learned enough to gain
relevant professional qualification.
The last layer of incentive would be for actual service improvements. Here, service targets
should be set using the Government of India benchmarks. If the ULB achieves the service
targets, then the Contractor should be paid a performance incentive. The structure of the
incentives might vary according to the improvement plan chosen. As an example, one way to
structure the incentives would be to pay a bonus for every thousand customers who were
receiving water service 24 hours per day, and had been receiving this level of service for six
continuous months. Another bonus might be paid for every thousand customers receiving
water that was free of bacteriological contamination. Table 8.1 shows the Government of
India minimum performance benchmarks. Payment of the performance bonus could be
based on the utility’s progress toward achieving these benchmarks.


Table 8.1: Government of India Minimum Performance Standards

Indicator                                                                      Benchmark

Coverage of Water Supply connections                                                       100%

Per Capita Supply of Water                                                             135-lpcd

Extent of Non Revenue Water                                                                15%

Extent of Metering                                                                         100%

Continuity of Water supplied                                                          24-Hours

Efficiency in redressal of customer complaints                                             80%

Quality of Water Supplied                                                                  100%

Cost Recovery                                                                              100%

Efficiency in Collection of Water Charges                                                  90%




                                                 20
Sewerage

Coverage of Sewerage Network                                                                        100%

Collection efficiency of Sewerage Network                                                           100%

Adequacy of Sewage Treatment Capacity                                                               100%

Quality of Sewage Treatment                                                                         100%

Extent of Reuse and Recycling of Sewage                                                             20%

Extent of cost recovery in wastewater management                                                    100%

Efficiency in redressal of customer complaints                                                      80%

Efficiency in Collection of Sewage Water Charges                                                    90%

Source: "Service Level Benchmarks." Ministry of Urban Development.
        http://www.urbanindia.nic.in/programme/uwss/slb/slb.htm (accessed April 24, 2011).


Incentives for Management and Staff
Because the efforts of utility managers and staff will be even more important than the efforts
of the Contractor in turning around the utility, they too need to be incentivized. The
suggestion is that managers and staff get performance pay that would be triggered by the
exact same performance indicators as the Contractor is measured against. This will help
ensure that all parties are working toward the exact same end. Figure 8.2 provides an illust-
ration.


Figure 8.2: Meeting Targets Triggers a Performance Bonus


                                                                                    Bonus for
                                                                                      firm
         Targets for
          cashflow
        improvement
                                   ULB
                                             triggers            Fixed
                                  meets                                           Shared between
                                                             performance
                                both sets
                                                                bonus
        Targets for             of targets
      improvement in
        benchmark
                                                                                    Bonus for
         indicators
                                                                                    utility staff
                                                                                        and
                                                                                    managers




Thus for example, when the utility achieves ISO 9000 certification, a certain payment pool
would be triggered. This payment pool would then be shared, in pre-set proportions,
between the Contractor, the utility managers, and the utility staff. Similarly, if, say, 5,000


                                                        21
households had been receiving continuous water supply for six months, this would trigger a
fixed performance bonus. The fixed bonus would then be shared between Contractors,
managers and staff, in the same agreed proportions. Providing managers and staff with
incentives has worked well for public water service providers in Uganda and Indonesia, and
we believe it to be a powerful tool to motivate professionalization and good performance.
NWSC has done this successfully.3
Funding for the incentive payments will need to be found. One good option is that the utility
receives a transitional subsidy to cover the differences between reasonable cost of services,
and socially acceptable tariffs. In this case, the utility, if it is well managed, should be
generating profitable cash flow. A proportion of the improved cash flow could then be used
to fund the incentive payments. That is the approach illustrated in Figure 8.2. Another
approach would be simply for Government or donors to provide the payments directly.




3
    Marin, Philippe, William Muhairwe, Silver Mugisha, and Josses Mugabi. Internal delegation contracts for water in Uganda.
    Washington: PPIAF, 2010. Print.
    Mugisha, Silver, Sanford Berg, and William Muhairwe. Using Internal Incentive Contracts to Improve Water Utility
    Performance. Kampala: National Water and Sewerage Corporation, 2006. Print.



                                                             22
9      Potential Contractors and their Incentives to
       Participate
Crucial to the success of this model will be attracting good quality Professionalization
Contractors. This Section looks at the market of potential Contractors, and examines their
incentives to participate.
Indian conglomerates
We have spoken with the Tata group company JUSCO. We got a clear signal that if the
contract is well designed, JUSCO would be interested in bidding (see Box 6.1). JUSCO is a
company set up by the Tata group to pursue water operations opportunities. The firm
considers the Professionalization Contract model to be closely aligned to their current area
of business, but to potentially allow them to avoid some of the risks that plague the Indian
municipal PPP market in this early stage of its development. The Tata group already runs a
number of utility-related concerns, notably North Delhi Power Ltd, which the group
transformed from a shambolic public entity into a highly professional modern utility within a
few years of taking over management.
Other India conglomerates such as Reliance (which also owns a number of power utilities)
might be interested, but this is less clear, as they have not made the same kind of strategic
commitment to the water sector that Tata has with JUSCO. The Jindal Group is one other
conglomerate that has signaled an interest in the water sector in India, but again one would
need to see how serious this is before knowing whether or not they would bid on such
contracts.
    Box 9.1: JUSCO Feedback on the Model
    Jamshedpur Utilities & Services Company Ltd (JUSCO) is a Tata group company that
    operates water PPP Contracts in Jamshedpur, Haldia, and Mysore. The Tata group is
    credible in utility management. JUSCO would most likely be the Tata company that would
    pursue Professionalization Contract opportunities. We traveled to Kolkata to meet with
    senior JUSCO executives and get their feedback on the professionalization concept.
    JUSCO executives confirmed that the company would be interested in bidding for
    Professionalization Contracts. Among the things JUSCO would want to see in any
    Professionalization Opportunity it bid on are:
     ULB Political support at top level—The opt-in concept makes sense, but we need to
       better develop the reasons why ULBs would opt in
     Employee willingness to change—This should be a criterion for selecting ULBs
     Ensuring that CEO is competent and professional, not politically captured
     Governance of whole system, for example:
       – Independent Directors
       – World Bank and State Government Supervision
       – Joint Monitoring Committee between the CEO and the Contractor
       – Independent certification of payment milestones
       – Independent auditors with appropriate reporting lines
       – Inter-agency coordination on government side
     Procurement—should be limited to shortlist of qualified firms, and there should be
       processes in place to ensure professional award.



                                              23
Indian construction and civil engineering firms
India has a number of large and successful engineering companies, including: Infrastructure
& Projects, Larsen and Toubro, and SPML. We spoke with SPML, a pipe-manufacturing
group that has expanded into infrastructure project delivery and financing. SPML was clear
that its major interest is in large construction projects. The Professionalization Contracts do
not involve major construction, and so would not be aligned with the company’s core
interests. SPML is pursuing PPP projects in the India water sector, in association with a
major international operator.
General lessons that emerged from the discussions are that:
        Large Indian civil contracting firms may not have the skills needed for
         Professionalization Contracting, though they could team with other firms to put
         together a skilled consortium
        To attract a large construction contracting firm to the Professionalization Market
         the firm would have to see a significant pipeline of opportunities at attractive
         margins, or be deciding to diversify into water service management as a strategic
         new business line
        Some firms may seek to win Professionalization Contractors in order to put
         themselves in prime position to secure large construction contracts from the same
         utilities. This could give rise to conflicts of interest, and so the transaction and
         contracts should be designed in a way that stops this from happening.
Management and Engineering Consultancies
The Professionalization Contract is similar to ‘business process re-engineering’ assignments,
and also to ‘program management’ contracts that engineering consultancies often have with
large utilities. International and Indian management consultancies and engineering
consultancies could likely be attracted to this Professionalization Market.
These firms are likely to see the contracts as being of a size and general type that they
normally pursue, making them likely to be interested in bidding. The risk is that these firms
may not bring enough of a utility management mentality to the work. However, some firms
may see this as an opportunity to be paid to develop the capacity to manage water utilities,
which would be ideal.
An exemplar of this type of company would be Net Group, a South African-based utility
consulting firm that has also performed successfully on management contracts.
International water operators
It would be ideal to attract experienced international water operators to the
Professionalization Contract market. These firms include Manila Water, Mea Aqua, Suez
Environment, Veolia Water and Vitens. However, their interest in the contracts cannot be
taken for granted. These water operators may see the Professionalization Contracts as
involving:
        A distraction from, or threat to, their current PPP business models (management
         contracts, leases, concessions etc.)
        Applying their brand name in a situation in which they do not have management
         control, and thus risking considerable reputational damage


                                              24
         Transferring proprietary utility operating systems in a setting in which they cannot
          protect their intellectual property (IP) easily, and in which they may not reap what
          they consider to be an adequate return on the IP transfer.
That said, if the Professionalization Contract program goes ahead, and if the contracts can
be designed so that risks to reputation and intellectual property are kept within reasonable
limits, then our view is that the international water operators are likely to participate. The
smaller ones, such as Manila Water, will see these contracts as offering a way to boost their
skills and credentials. The larger ones, such as Veolia, will be keen to reduce risk to their core
business by reducing the chance that another firm wins the contract, and uses it as an
opportunity to build itself into a competitor. Moreover, if Professionalization Contracts
become more prevalent than traditional PPP contracts, the large operators will want to be
positioned to take advantage of the market, and so have another reason to get in early, once
it is clear that the program is going ahead. Overall, we see the Professionalization
Contracting approach as a new form of contracting for assistance from private firms that
targets a different market segment where traditional models would be inappropriate,
primarily because of the size of the participating ULBs. In India, with 5000 ULBs, only a
relatively small number would warrant traditional PPP approaches. Thus there is a large
number of ULBs where this alternative model could be implemented, without taking away
from traditional PPP models.




                                                25
10     Steps in Developing the Concepts
The best way to pilot the professionalization concept would be as part of a broader program
to reform and upgrade water services in a reform-minded Indian State or States. This section
lists things that need to be done to further develop the concept to the point where it would
be put into practice. Appendix A then pulls these together into an indicative program,
showing how the concept could be piloted in one State.
Among the steps in taking the concept forward would be
        Agreeing on a State or Region in which it could be implemented—There is
         a need to find a reform-minded state that is on-board with the model as described
         in the concept note, and then to identify reform-minded ULBs within that state.
         This should start with marketing the concept to a number of States to find one
         that wishes to commit. That needs to be done early, as the design of the program
         will depend on the specifics of the State or States in which it is implemented. To
         market the concept to States, a ‘Pitch Document’ will be needed. This document
         should describe the concept in a way that speaks to States, explaining how it
         benefits them. The Pitch Document should spell out the ‘size of the prize,’ or the
         specific benefits that could be expected from adopting the model. This should
         include an indicative financial analysis and analysis of risks. Box 10.1 discusses a
         number of possible States and regions
        Identify Precedents—Nothing exactly like the Professionalization Contract has
         been tried before, but in developing the concept we should identify other places
         and sectors in India and internationally where aspects of the model have been
         tried. This will be crucial for building support for the concept. This may need to
         be done early in the process of marketing to States, as a natural question from any
         State Government will be ‘where has this been done before?’
        Carry out a Cost-Benefit and Financial Analysis—It will be necessary to have
         a feasibility study showing in more detail not just what the expected costs of the
         program will be, but also the expected benefits. This study should scope out the
         financial support the project will require. It should also demonstrate the economic
         returns—given the social value of improved service—as well as the eventual
         financial savings
        Carry out a Governance Analysis—Detailed governance analysis would include
         an estimate of the financial value of rents accruing to managers, politicians and
         other stakeholders under the status quo. Adequately compensating the losers
         would then become a key to successfully implementing the model. Other parts of
         the analysis should include the development of governance models that provide
         sufficient independence to allow the utility to work in a professional way, while
         also providing accountability for service provision
        Develop the concept in a more detailed, State-specific way—Once a State
         has been selected and is on board with the model, a more detailed model can be
         developed. This model would include the governance analysis, detailed financial
         analysis, and other aspects such as, state-specific legal analysis.




                                             26
       Box 10.1: Which State or Region to Implement in First
       At the Delhi workshop, participants discussed a number of ideas about which reform-
       minded areas might be suitable to locate the pilot project. These areas include the
       following:
        Maharashtra State—The broader team had carried out an assessment of management
           and technical performance in three ULBs in Maharashtra. Following that, the team met
           with the Permanent Secretary of Water for Maharashtra, and staff from the state
           government and the ULBs visited. The State Government expressed interest in
           applying the professionalization concept, but wanted to understand it better
        Gujarat or West Bengal—Gujarat and West Bengal are (like Maharashtra) more
           advanced than most States in implementing the 73rd and 74th Constitutional
           Amendments, and might be more capable than other states of implementing reforms.
           This would make these states natural candidates within which to find reform-minded
           ULBs and try to implement the model
        Chhattisgarh —This State is reform-minded and moving ahead rapidly, but from a
           low base. It currently has little in the way of water infrastructure and providers. So the
           professionalization concept might seem like a good way to close the gap, and would run
           into less opposition from vested interests than in other States
        Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor Project—This project is a $100 billion
           development of an industrial and commercial zone across six States in northern India,
           focusing on upgraded transport infrastructure.4 The project is a national priority of the
           Government, and if the water professionalization project is associated with the
           Corridor project, there will be particular Government focus on making sure water
           professionalization succeeds
        States where the Public Health Engineering Department is withdrawing from
           the water sector—Public Health Engineering Departments (PHEDs) are State
           Government engineering bodies that typically build water infrastructure. In States
           where these State-level bodies are withdrawing from the water sector as part of
           implementing the 73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendments, there is an opportunity to
           manage the water sector under a new arrangement. These States might welcome the
           professionalization concept as filling an institutional vacuum
        Industrial Growth Centers (IGC)—There are 43 towns in India managed under a
           specific administrative arrangement known as ‘IGC’. The professionalization concept
           might be most feasible in these towns, given that they already have a more professional
           administration. However, the disadvantage of pursuing the professionalization model in
           Industrial Growth Centers is that, because they are not typical towns, the
           demonstration effect of a successful Professionalization Contract would be more
           limited than that for a successful contract in a typical town.




4
    "India proposes USD 9 billion fund for Delhi to Mumbai corridor project." Steel Guru.
    http://www.steelguru.com/indian_news/India_proposes_USD_9_billion_fund_for_Delhi_to_Mumbai_corridor_projec
    t/191363.html (accessed March 23, 2011).



                                                      27
Appendix A: Indicative Plan for a Pilot in One State
This Appendix assumes that a State has decided that it wants to pilot the Professionalization
Contract as part of an integrated approach to improving its water services. It further assumes
that that State has already devolved water service responsibilities to ULBs, and provides
funding from the State budget to ULBs for water services. Maharashtra, Gujarat and West
Bengal are all States that fit this general profile. The key steps involved are described below,
first at the State level, then those involving transaction design and management, and finally
the implementation of the Contracts.
State Level
Actions at the State Level would include the following:
        The State creates a Water Sector Change Management Unit
        This Change Management Unit creates a system for Benchmarking the
         performance of ULBs in water service provision. The Benchmarking would be
         based on the Government of India Benchmarking Guidelines
        The State Government informs ULBs that additional funding will be available for
         those ULBs that are performing well on the Benchmarking indicators, or that
         have a Service Improvement Plan that the Change Management Unit has certified
         as being likely to improve service, and which the ULB is following
        A ‘Professionalization Contract Route’ is developed as a model for Service
         Improvement Plans, and assistance is offered to ULBs that want to go this route.
         (Ideally, other options, such as a PPP Route, would be developed in a similar way,
         so that ULBs have two or three good options to choose between)
        Nine ULBS opt into a Professionalization Contract Route. Ideally the concept
         would be marketed to many towns, creating competition to be among the nine
         selected. No ULB would be pressured into the program, since the reform will
         probably only work with the support of the ULB.
Transaction Design and Management
The State, with the assistance of its development partners, would select a firm to design and
manage the transaction. The transaction strategy would be to bid out three
Professionalization Contracts, each one mandating service provision to three ULBs. The
reason for this is to create competition for future contracts (since there will be three
contractors) and also to test the one-to-many professionalization concept. Key tasks, to be
led by the selected firm, would include:
        Drafting the Professionalization Contracts
        Helping the ULBs to start the process of Governance Reform, such as selecting
         Boards for the to-be-corporatized utilities, and starting stakeholder consultation
        Marketing the transaction to potential Professionalization Contractors
        Preparing the Request for Proposals and running the tender process to select the
         Professionalization Contractors




                                               1
          Helping the ULBs to reach agreement with the winning bidders and assisting a
           smooth start to the work.


Steps in Implementation of the Professionalization Contracts
After this, the contractors would start work. Figure A.1 shows the phases of implementation
of the Professionalization Contract.


Figure A.1: Professionalization Contract Phases of Implementation
                                                                                                    Follow-
                  Tasks                                 Initial phase                                 on
                                                                                                    phase
    Create standard package
    Restructure individual
                                                ULB
    utility
                                                agreement
    Restructuring reccomendations           g


    Implement corporatization

    Develop human resource plan

    Recruitment

    Training

    Retrenchment

    Implement professionalization
    processes

    Human resource and admin                                     Implement   Train   Hand-holding

    Technical (incl. NRW reduction)                              Implement   Train   Hand-holding

    Commerical                                                   Implement   Train   Hand-holding

    Customer service                                             Implement   Train   Hand-holding

    Ongoing support




The Work Plan above assumes that, prior to engagement with the ULB, the Contractor will
develop the “standard utility operating system”. Upon engagement with the ULBs, the
Contractor will recommend how the utility organization should be restructured. The
Contractor will reach agreement with the ULB or Board of the utility on the
recommendations before proceeding to the next phase of implementation. In the next stage,
the Contractor will assist the water provider to corporatize.
The Contractor would develop and help the utility to implement a human resource plan.
This plan would involve matching the existing staff to the new organization structure.
Training needs would be identified, and a training program developed. Gaps in the
organization structure would be filled through recruitment. Some of the existing staff might
not be suitable for any of the positions in the new structure. In this case, they would need to
be retrenched from the utility. Of course this would need to be handled sensitively. For
example, these employees might be transferred to other roles in the ULB.
Once the utility is corporatized and reorganized, the Contactor will implement the
professionalization processes under the “standard utility operating system” by functional
area. This entails putting systems and procedures in place, training staff in the new systems,


                                                 2
and then a “hand-holding" phase in which the Contractor provides support to trained utility
staff as they become familiar with the new systems.
The reform functions undertaken by the Professionalization Contractor would correspond
with the needed reform steps outlined by consultants from the Uganda National Water and
Sewerage Corporation (NWSC) in its review of Maharashtra ULBs. Box A.1 gives an
overview of these recommendations.


    Box A.1: NWSC Recommendations for Improvement
    Consultants from Uganda’s NWSC reviewed ULBs in Maharashtra, determining steps that
    would need to be taken to improve service. This list of steps corresponds to what the
    Professionalization Contractor would need to do. Below is an abbreviated list of suggested
    reform tasks.

     Technical Process Management
      – Design and carry out appropriate change management programs
      – Develop & institutionalize standard operating procedures
      – Instill skills in and adopt a clear performance planning process
      – Develop a Maintenance and Asset Management Policy
     Commercial Process Management
      – Re-orient staff & key stakeholders towards being customer-centric
      – Review the structure by uplifting the profile of the Commercial Function within the
         corporate structure
      – Instill skills in and adopt a clear performance planning process
      – Develop and implement well-customized Billing System
      – Put in place a structure for a water loss reduction unit and develop a proactive
         framework for water loss management
     Financial Process Management
      – Study cost structure with a view of optimizing costs
      – Develop & institutionalize standard operating procedures governing the financial
         operations
     Human Resources (HR)
      – Institute participatory transparent Performance Appraisal System
      – Document the Policies into a Manual to guide HR operations
      – Develop a practice of regularly carrying out Training Needs Assessments
      – Establish a clear occupational health and safety framework
      – Review the institutional setting with a view of ring fencing the operations and
         management of water and sewerage supply.

    Source: SIP Matrix: Towards Best Practices. Uganda National Water and Sewerage Corporation.
    March 2011.




                                                3
